From: Peter Edmundson                            cc     Mr Michael
      Operational Policing Policy Unit                  Mr O’Brien
      Room 527                                          Mr Howarth
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                 Lord Williams
      0171 273 2621                                     Mr Omand
                                                        Ms Weldon
       1 May 1998                                       Mr Middleton
                                                        Mr Boys Smith
                                                        Mr Granatt
                                                        Mr Pugh
                                                        Mr Evans ABCU
                                                        Mr Clifford ABCU
                                                        Ms Clifford CD
                                                        Ms Browne PPTU
                                                        Ms Scott Parly S
                                                        Mr Warner
                                                        Mr Owen
Home Secretary




HILLSBOROUGH: ADJOURNMENT DEBATE ON FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998

I attach an opening speech for you, and a closing speech for Mr Howarth for
next week’s adjournment debate on Hillsborough, together with background
material.

2.      The draft speeches hold the line that you accept the conclusions of
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Report, while seeking to strike a sympathetic and
understanding tone. Your opening speech also refers to the changes to be
made to disciplinary arrangements and the role of coroners in major disaster
inquiries. Given your discussions with the Hillsborough families and
Merseyside MPs in recent months you and Mr Howarth may wish to add a
more personal touch to the speeches.

3.     There is nothing new of substance to say in the speeches and we are
not aware of any additional “new evidence” which might be raised during the
debate. Rather, it may be difficult to prevent the debate covering old ground
including that covered by the original Taylor Inquiry, in addition to the main
purpose of the debate - discussion and detailed comments on Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s Report. The sort of issues which might be raised are:

        whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a Mason

        details of what has and has not been placed in the library of the
        House following your announcement in February



 F;\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
       why the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire received an advanced
       copy of the scrutiny Report

       particular inaccuracies on points of detail in the Report.

4.      On Masonic involvement. I understand that you (Home Secretary)
have had private communications with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about
whether he is a mason following queries raised by the families and others.
We are unaware of the outcome of those communications, but the line we
propose you take is that the question of Masonic involvement is a distraction
as Lord Justice Stuart-Smith Report’s sets out clearly for all to see all the
evidence he has considered, his conclusions, and the reasons for those
conclusions. On placing in the library of the House the evidence considered
by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, we will provide a schedule of what has been
placed in the library of the House (almost everything), what will not be placed
in the library of the House because the authors of the relevant documents
have not given their approval, and those documents where we do not yet
know whether the authors will give their approval. As far as the advanced
copy of the scrutiny Report for the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire is
concerned, you agreed that he should have it as he was the disciplinary
authority referred to in the terms of reference. On points of detail and alleged
inaccuracies in the report it is perhaps inevitable that there will be some. It
would be very surprising, however, if there were any which would call into
question the main findings of the report.

5.     You could cover these issues in your opening speech thus pre-empting
what the Merseyside MPs might say. However, as the debate is the occasion
for the Merseyside MP to respond in detail to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
Report and the Government’s decisions on it, you may prefer not to steal their
thunder leaving Mr Howarth the opportunity to respond in his closing speech.

6.     CD will put forward separate advice on handling.




                                           PETER EDMUNDSON




 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA. DOC
    HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE: FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998
             HOME SECRETARY’S OPENING SPEECH


On 18 February I made a statement to the House on the outcome of Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster and I published his
report.


I explained that, after careful consideration, the Director of Public
Prosecutions, the Attorney General and myself had accepted the conclusions
reached by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that;


          there was no basis for a further public inquiry into the disaster; or


          for a renewed application to quash the verdict of accidental death
          reached at the inquests; or


          grounds for the Director of Public Prosecutions or police disciplinary
          authorities to reconsider decisions taken previously.


The families were understandably disappointed and frustrated at my
announcement. I indicated to the House at the time that I understood the
feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate the issues raised more
fully, once hon. Members had been able to study Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report in detail. I have always been sympathetic to the requests of Merseyside
MPs and others that there should be a debate and I am pleased that time has
now been found. I am grateful to my right hon. Friend the President of the
Council for arranging this.


We all remain united in sympathy for the relatives of those who died at
Hillsborough. I made it known that I am prepared to meet the families’ to
discuss their concerns about the outcome of the scrutiny. Hon. Members will
be aware that I met the families, both immediately before my statement to the



F;\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
House - to inform them of my decision - and at a subsequent meeting in
Southport on 7 March when we discussed many of the issues. I have been in
touch with the Family Support Group about arranging a further meeting in
Liverpool to discuss these issues at greater length. My hon. Friend, [the
Member for Knowsley North and Sefton East] has also been pleased to
discuss various issues on a number of occasions with people in Liverpool and
with many hon. Members present here today.




The Scrutiny


It was the families' belief that a number of issues remained unresolved about
the Hillsborough disaster which was central to my decision to establish an
independent scrutiny. When I took office, I was determined to ensure that any
new evidence should be considered to decide whether it was of significance
to our understanding of the disaster.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal was
eminently qualified to conduct an independent thorough scrutiny of the
evidence. The terms of reference I gave him were very wide and enabled him
to establish conclusively whether any material evidence had been overlooked
and to recommend appropriate action. Let me remind the House of his terms
of reference which were:


  “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
 Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989; which was not available:


 (a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


 (b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the
 purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or




 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
(c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c)
to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
is any other action which should be taken in the public interest."


Let me say at the outset that I stand by my earlier statement to the House on
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's findings. Whatever people think of its conclusions,
there can be no question that this was a very thorough exercise. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s report sets out very clearly all the matters he considered, his
conclusions and the reasons for his conclusions. There may be those who are
tempted now to call the scrutiny just a 'whitewash'. This was not a
'whitewash'. As those who have read the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report
will know, he considered in detail the submissions made to him by those
representing the families, other individuals and official bodies. He considered
allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged
interference with witnesses and witness statements, and concerns about the
use of the 3.15pm cut-off point at the Inquest. He also reviewed the relevant
evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and inquests. I hope the House will
agree that he conducted this work with the utmost integrity and made a
detailed and reasoned report of his conclusions.


 It is inevitable that, over time, following a disaster such as that at Hillsborough
which shocked the nation so much, various matters will come to light which
were not available when the original inquiry took place. It is perhaps also
 inevitable that various theories about what happened on the day will be
 further fuelled by such discoveries. I believe that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
 report answers the principal concerns raised by the families. For example, he



 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
makes clear that the missing video tapes would add nothing material to our
understanding of what went wrong. He points out that blame attaches to the
police because they could see with their own eyes what was happening in the
pens and should have realised that serious overcrowding was occurring.


The tests for any new evidence are whether it is “material" and whether it is of
such significance to justify further action. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s main
conclusion, which I accepted, is that the evidence which was submitted to the
scrutiny does not add anything significant to the evidence available to and
considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests. It is worth reminding
ourselves briefly of those proceedings.




The Taylor Inquiry


Lord Taylor was appointed two days after the Hillsborough disaster to conduct
a public inquiry into its causes and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.


Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings
during May and June 1989 and considered many other statements and over
70 hours of video evidence. In his interim report published in August 1989,
Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number of causes. He did not
attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he
concluded that "The main cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control".




The Inquests


 Inquests were held by the Coroner for South Yorkshire to determine the
 statutory questions as to who each of the deceased was, and when and how



 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
he or she died. In March 1991, after hearing the evidence of around 200
witnesses, the inquest jury returned verdicts of accidental death in respect of
all the victims.




The Criminal and disciplinary investigation


There was also an investigation, conducted by West Midlands Police and
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there
were any grounds for criminal or disciplinary proceedings.


The Director of Public Prosecutions considered the West Midlands report and
took advice from Queen’s Counsel. The DPP’s decision was that no-one
should face prosecution as a result of the events that day. The Police
Complaints Authority, though, decided that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges of neglect of
duty. In November 1990, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired from the
force on the grounds of ill health before disciplinary proceedings could be
completed. Under police regulations, a discipline hearing cannot proceed
when a police officer retires. The Police Complaints Authority subsequently
decided to withdraw the charge against Superintendent Murray because it
would have been unfair to pursue what in effect was a joint charge, in the
absence of the more senior officer. (I will turn in a moment to the changes to
the police disciplinary system which we will be making).




Lord Justice Stuart -Smith's conclusions


 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he accepts the conclusion
 reached by Lord Taylor's inquiry that the main cause of the disaster was the
failure of police control. He himself condemned what he described as Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C.



 F;\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PE1080MA.DOC
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined allegations of missing or suppressed
video evidence of the disaster. He concluded that there was no new video
evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor inquiry and the other
authorities investigating the disaster.


The use of the 3.15pm cut-off time has long been a matter of controversy to
the families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no grounds to conclude that the
conduct of the inquests was flawed. He says that the cut-off point did not limit
the inquiry undertaken by the inquest and it was not suggested by the coroner
that all those who died did so before 3.15pm. The inquest jury heard evidence
about those who died after arrival at hospital and of those who were treated
and recovered. It was only in relation to how and by what means the
deceased came to their deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Evidence
that some people died after 3.15 would not, therefore, effect the outcome of
the inquest.


In his report, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals with allegations about
statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers which were subsequently
amended on the advice of solicitors to the force before being submitted to the
Taylor Inquiry. He reports that the amendments in almost all cases were
confined to comment or opinion. In a very few cases, which he refers to in his
report, what was excluded was either factual or comment in which factual
matters were implicit. He says that ‘it would have been preferable' for those
matters not to have been excluded but he is satisfied that Lord Taylor's
inquiry was not in any way inhibited or impeded by what happened.


The original police statements, together with the amended versions submitted
to the Taylor inquiry, have been placed in the Library of the House. I am also
placing in the Library other evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
which is not already in the public domain, save where there may be overriding
 reasons for doing otherwise. Copies of the police statements have also been



 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
sent to the Hillsborough families Support Group as requested by my hon.
friend, the Member for Liverpool Walton.




New Police Discipline procedures


As I said in my statement to the House on 18 February, I fully understand the
public disquiet that those who have been criticised by the inquiries into this
disaster have not been prosecuted or disciplined in respect of their actions. It
is not possible, however, to turn the clock back and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
is satisfied that there is no new evidence which he considered which should
be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
Authority. I firmly believe, though, that there is a compelling case in the light
of Hillsborough and other cases for reform of the police disciplinary system.


In January the Home Affairs Committee published its report into police
disciplinary and complaints procedures. The report recommended changes in
a number of key areas and I announced to the House in March that I was
taking steps to implement most of its recommendations.


I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be
changed from the criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible
for officers to face both criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I
have also accepted the HAC's recommendation that we should implement a
system of 'fast track’ dismissal for use in the most serious cases.


 In the light of the Hillsborough disaster, I have been particularly concerned to
 address the serious defect in the present practice which allows a police officer
 to retire on medical grounds before disciplinary hearings can be completed.
 This was quite rightly an issue of the greatest frustration to the families of the
 Hillsborough victims.




 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
The procedures will be strengthened so that where accused officers claim
they are unable, through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters
can be decided in their absence, with appropriate safeguards. I am also
concerned that the existing regulations should be rigorously applied so that
any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed before any
application for early retirement can be considered.


These, and other changes, will come into force in April 1999.




Inquests procedures


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report also underlined the need to make
improvements to the inquest system. In the case of Hillsborough, it was
clearly unsatisfactory that the families suffered additional distress as a result
of the inquest proceedings and the jury's verdicts of accidental death when
the causes of the disaster had already been established by the Taylor inquiry
and the DPP had announced that there would be not be any prosecutions.


I have made clear that the inquest system, in its present form, is unsuitable
for dealing with disasters such as Hillsborough. The Home Office Working
Group on Disasters and Inquests, which reported in March 1997,
recommended that the role of the inquest should be limited where a public
 inquiry has already been held.


A comprehensive public inquiry which also addressed the questions before an
 inquest would relieve the coroner of the need to resume the formal inquest.
 The changes recommended by the Home Office Working Party point the right
 way forward and the Government will look for a suitable legislative opportunity
 to amend the Coroner's Act 1988.




 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
Conclusion


Madam Speaker, ninety-six people lost their lives as a result of the disaster at
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. The lives of many others were and continue to
be profoundly affected by the events that day. One cannot begin to
understand the anguish felt by the families who lost their loved ones in such
tragic circumstances, but we have shared their determination to establish, to
the fullest extent possible, how and why their relatives died. The causes of
the disaster were clearly identified by Lord Taylor in his 1989 report. It was
right to consider whether there was any subsequent information which cast
doubt on earlier decisions and I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has, after rigorous examination, reached the correct conclusions.


I have taken a very close personal interest in this case from the start. I
believe I was right to establish the scrutiny. My only regret is that the families
have not, for their own reasons which I well understand, felt able to accept its
conclusions. I do hope, however, that, in time, they may be able to view the
report in a more positive light.




 F:\OPPU\CRIME\SHORTSUB\PEIO8OMA.DOC
HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT DEBATE : FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998
                       MR HOWARTH’S CLOSING SPEECH




Madam Speaker, I am grateful for the opportunity to close what has been a significant
and useful debate on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster.
The families and friends of the ninety-six Liverpool fans who died at Hillsborough
have suffered immeasurably. We have heard hon. Members from Merseyside and
elsewhere speak, with a feeling that I know is shared across the country, of the need to
ensure that nothing has been left undone in the investigation of this tragedy and the
quest for the truth.


I, along with other hon. Members from Merseyside, have closely followed the
families’ campaign for justice since the day of the disaster. In office, my Rt. hon.
friend, the Home Secretary and I were determined to do all that we could to establish
whether new evidence was available that would cast new light on the events at
Hillsborough.


The Home Secretary gave Lord Justice Stuart-Smith wide terms of reference to carry
out his scrutiny and to recommend any action which the public interest required. He
has considered in great detail all the evidence put before him. That included all the
relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and inquests. He has looked
equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by individuals and official
bodies, including those representing the families of those who died and others who
have acted in support of them.


He has produced a thorough and detailed report which not only deals with each of the
submissions made to him but, crucially, confirms the conclusion reached by the
earlier Taylor inquiry that the main cause of the disaster was the loss of control by the
police.
Police discipline


One of the issues which has caused the greatest frustration to the families is that
nobody has been held to account for what happened at Hillsborough. As Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report:


"I understand the dismay that they [the families] have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing their job


The Police Complaints Authority directed that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the
senior police officer in charge, should be charged with a disciplinary offence of
neglect of duty but he retired on ill-health grounds before proceedings could be
completed. As the rules currently stand, disciplinary charges cannot be pursued
against a retired police officer.


The Home Secretary has made it clear that the introduction of new police discipline
procedures is a priority, but new rules cannot be applied retrospectively. The
Government has accepted the recommendations on police discipline o f the recent
Home Affairs Committee report. The procedures will be strengthened so that in future
where accused officers claim they are unable, through ill health, to appear at
disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in their absence, with appropriate
safeguards. The Home Secretary has also made it clear that the existing regulations
 should be rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be
completed before any application for early retirement can be considered.


 The inquests


 The other principal issue of concern has been the conduct of the Coroner’s inquest and
 the verdict of accidental death reached by the inquest jury. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 dealt with these issues in great detail in his report but he found no grounds for
recommending an application to the High Court to hold a fresh inquest or to quash the
original verdict.


He concluded that it would be impractical and undesirable, given the length of time
which has passed, to hold fresh inquests. This is a view which counsel for the families
recognised in his submission to the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also said that
the effect of quashing the verdict without substituting any other verdict would be the
same as if the jury had returned an open verdict, and that would only be appropriate
where there was insufficient evidence to record any other possible outcome. In
practice, there were only two possible verdicts, unlawful killing or accidental death.


The main lesson here is that the inquest procedure is not a satisfactory procedure for
dealing with cases arising from major disasters where there has already been a
thorough public inquiry. The Home Office Working Party on disasters and inquests
recommended in its report, published in March 1997, that the law should be changed
so that an inquest is only resumed after a public inquiry where the coroner decides
there is some exceptional reason for doing so. The Home Secretary has made it clear
that new procedures will be introduced so that, in any future case, the relatives of the
deceased will be spared the additional distress and anguish of these proceedings.


Conclusion


With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that, over time, new information may
come to light which has not been aired publicly before. This does not necessarily
mean that the outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different. What
 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider was not just whether the information was
 new, but whether it was of such significance as to justify a new inquiry.


 Taking these matters into consideration, the overall conclusion that Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith reached was that the evidence that was submitted to him did not add
 anything significant to the evidence available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or the other
 investigations into the disaster.
Let me remind hon. Members that the Taylor inquiry correctly identified the causes of
the disaster and made wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and safety
at sports events. Those have had a profound and positive effect on both crowd safety
at football grounds and on the policing of football matches.


The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the main share of responsibility for
the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
criticised by Lord Taylor and they have accepted responsibility by contributing sums
of money to the compensation settlements.


I fully understand that those who still live with the pain of losing their loved ones at
Hillsborough will feel let down by the outcome of this scrutiny. As my Rt. hon.
Friend, the Home Secretary explained in his statement to the House on 18 February
[in reply to a Question from the Rt. hon. Gentleman, the member for North West
Cambridge], while we do not believe there is a case for re-opening a further full
public inquiry, the coroner’s inquest, or disciplinary matters against the police, the
feelings of the families will live with them forever, and in that sense we accept that
whatever the conclusions of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report and our decisions on it,
the matter is not closed. But I do sincerely hope that they will accept that we have
done all that we undertook to do when we came into office. I very much regret that
they have been unable to accept the outcome of the scrutiny.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : INDEX OF BRIEFING

Chronology of events

GENERAL ISSUES

1. Wasn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

2. Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

3. What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

4. Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the start?

5. Is Lord Justice Stuart Smith a Mason ?

6. Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

7. Why is Hillsborough different to the sinking of the Derbyshire where the Deputy Prime
   Minister has announced the re-opening of the inquiry?

8. Why was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire given the report before it was published?

9. Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

10. Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

11.Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
   comes to light?


   VIDEO EVIDENCE

12.What about the alleged any new videotape evidence?

13. What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

14.What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?


   THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

15.Doesn’t the evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards undermine the 3.15
   pm cut-off point?

 16.Shouldn’t the inquest verdict be quashed if it is accepted that the police caused the disaster?


 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
17.Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

18.How can the Coroner’s 3.15 pm cut-off point be justified?

19.Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy of the
   emergency care provided to the victims?

20. What did the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

  Inquests and disasters general

21.Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

22.What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

23.What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of the
   Hillsborough disaster?


   INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

24.What about the allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing statements about
   the disaster?


   SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

25.How can it be right for statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers to be altered
   before being submitted as evidence?


   THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’ QUESTIONS

26.What about the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama “Hillsborough”?


   DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

27 .Has the Home Secretary published all the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

2 8.Will The Home Secretary publish appendix 9 of the scrutiny?


   WIDER ISSUES

   POLICE DISCIPLINE


 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
29.What changes are you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health
   retirement?

30. What other changes to police discipline do you propose?

   COMPENSATION

31.What changes to the civil law on compensation have been proposed by the Law
   Commission?

32.How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions




 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY

15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the deceased and
when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk prejudicing police
inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174 witnesses at a
public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their supervision) by
West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating to the
incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief Supt.
Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no longer
subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been dropped
because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the absence of the more
senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard promised to
consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.

 18 February 1998:     Home Secretary’s publishes scrutiny report.


 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FOR THE STATEMENT

GENERAL

1. Wasn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive report sets
out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his conclusions, with which I
agree.

It is, of course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there can be
no justification for calling it a whitewash.


2. Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration of the causes
of the disaster or the consideration of criminal or other proceedings. He was also able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he was able to carry out a thorough scrutiny of all the evidence which was
submitted by the families and others.

3. What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the evidence from
the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many of the families of the
victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He also
had meetings with a number of other people who contacted him or who he felt could help him
with his scrutiny.

A list of those whom LJ Stuart-Smith met or received representations from is set out in
Appendix 1 of his report.

4. Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he made off-
the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.




F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
5. Is Lord Justice Stuart-Smith a Mason?

The disclosure of whether or not Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a member of the Freemasons is
entirely a matter for him but I am entirely satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart Smith has
conducted his scrutiny with the utmost integrity. His report clearly sets out what evidence he
considered, his conclusions and the reasons for those conclusions.

If required

I recently announced the Government’s response to the Home Affairs Select Committee
report, “Freemasonry in the Police and the Judiciary”. I announced that all new
appointments to the judiciary, the police, the legally qualified staff of the Crown Prosecution
Service, probation and prison services will have to declare their membership of the
Freemasons as a condition of their service. Any later admission to the Freemasons after
taking up post will also be declarable. In addition, I have now written to the United Grand
Lodge, requesting their members who are already working in these professions to join a
voluntary register. Failure on the part of those already within these professions to return
information would not, at this stage, be a breach of conditions of employment, and nil returns
would be shown as such on the register.

6. Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time to time
which has not been aired publicly before.

What the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was new,
but also whether it was credible and of such significance that it would justify a new inquiry,
or some other action. This is what LJ Stuart-Smith has now reported on.

7. Why is Hillsborough different to the sinking of the Derbyshire where the Deputy Prime
Minister has announced the re-opening of the inquiry?

Under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995, the Secretary of State is required to reopen a formal
inquiry if new and important evidence which could not be produced at the original inquiry has
been discovered. The Deputy Prime Minister announced the re-opening of the formal inquiry
into the sinking of the Derbyshire following a survey of the wreck which provided 'new and
important evidence’ about how the ship was lost. It is now for the formal inquiry to come to a
conclusion about why she foundered.

At Hillsborough, the disaster was the subject of an immediate and thorough public inquiry by
Lord Taylor which clearly identified the causes of the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny established that the evidence submitted to him did not add anything significant to the
evidence available to and considered by the earlier Taylor Inquiry.




 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
8. Why was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire given the report before it was
published?

The Chief Constable is mentioned in the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny as the disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore one of the
parties to whom the report is directed.

It was entirely proper that the Chief Constable should have been given the opportunity to
consider the report once it was submitted by LJ Stuart-Smith.

9. Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

West Midlands Police submitted a full report on their investigation of the Hillsborough
disaster to the DPP. The DPP announced in September 1990 that no-one would be
prosecuted.

The DPP took advice from two experienced Queen’s Counsel [one being the present Lord
Williams] and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to bring charges against either
Ch. Supt. Duckenfield or Supt Murray.

This was a decision for the then DPP on the evidence available. LJ Stuart-Smith has found no
grounds to recommend that the DPP should reconsider this decision.

10. Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. It would be inappropriate for me to speculate.

If pressed

If there is a private prosecution, the CPS could consider whether to intervene. The options
available to the CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it; or to take it over and
discontinue it.

If the CPS decided not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.

11. Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further
evidence comes to light?

 It is very difficult to imagine what material new evidence could emerge after the exhaustive
 inquiries which have already taken place and the length of time which has elapsed.

 I cannot rule out the possibility that new evidence will come to light, in which case I will
 consider it, but I am strongly of the view that we have investigated the material events at
 Hillsborough as far as it is possible to do so.


 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered which added
anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the
Inquests.

VIDEO EVIDENCE

12. What about the alleged new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He concluded that there is no
new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner or the
other authorities investigating the disaster.

He established that the 'missing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is taken from
copies of the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes were made available
to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal representatives at the Inquest.

13. What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft of two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s Control
Room on the day of the disaster, was investigated by the West Midlands Police. They are
still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures from the club’s CCTV
cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not contain any significant material.

14. What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?

LJ Stuart Smith has considered the evidence of the technician (Mr Houldsworth) responsible
for the club and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police officers at the Inquest.

He concluded that there is no evidence of the police blaming a faulty camera for their failure
to establish overcrowding.

In his report, LJ Stuart-Smith states 'The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is
new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to submission 5.
[That is to say that Mr Houldsworth could see from monitoring the police cameras that the
central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of extra spectators through Gate C would
create a dangerous situation.] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith continues 'For the reasons I have
given I am unable to accept that his recollection of events is now accurate. Even if it was
correct, it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply have been
the evidence of one more person who thought that the central pens were full at 14.52.’

THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

 15. Doesn’t the evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards undermine
 the 3.15 pm cut-off point?

 Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in Appendix 5). His
 evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to that (CHAPTER 3 ,
 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
parag raph    21). Mr Edwards also gave a statement at the time (Chapter 3, paragraph 34).
His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith add little of substance to his
previous account (CHAPTER 3, p a r a g r a p h 40). Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that Mr
Edwards’ criticisms of the ambulance service are misplaced ( C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 100).

16. Shouldn’t the inquest verdict be quashed if it is accepted that the police caused the
disaster?

That is a matter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 of the Coroners Act
1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to hold a fresh inquest and
to quash the original verdict. LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis to impugn the accidental death
verdict or for the Attorney-General to exercise his powers.

Counsel for the Family Support Group stated '... it is accepted, eight years and a half years
after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests to be
convened.’ It was argued, though, that the Courts should be invited to quash the verdict of
accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect of quashing the verdict without
substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict
and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record any other suggested
conclusion. In practice, he says, there were two alternative verdicts - unlawful killing or
accidental death.

17. Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An accidental
death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the inquest verdict does
not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise might be available. (As the
Taylor report made clear, the main cause of the disaster was the failure of control by the
South Yorkshire Police.)

18. How can the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point be justified?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use of the cut-off point. It was never
suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm or that the medical
evidence was to this effect. (CHAPTER 3 , p a r a g r a p h 12). The jury heard evidence about
people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or who regained consciousness after
resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and recovered (C h a p t e r 3 p a r a g r a p h s 58, 59
a n d 6 0 ). Evidence that some people died after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome

of the inquest.

 As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional Court in
 1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

 The use of the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration of how the victims
 died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all those who died had
 suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause of death. The use of the cut-off
 point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered reasonable.
 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
19. Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose of an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when and
where he or she came to their death. The response of the emergency services to the disaster
was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that report.

The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively. In addition to oral written evidence from many
supporters and police officers, and many written statements, Taylor took oral evidence from:
four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy chief ambulance officer from South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) who was in charge at the ground; two other
SYMAS officers who were at the ground; two senior ambulance officers from headquarters
control; five fire brigade officers; and five doctors (CHAPTER 3, p a r a g r a p h s 79 - 84).

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence of lack of care on the part o f the
emergency or medical services and that a further investigation of this aspect of the disaster
would be of little purpose.

20. What did the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr Stefan
Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any substance to
criticisms about the conduct of the Inquest or to suggestions of bias on the part of the
Coroner.


TNOUESTS AND DISASTERS

21. Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an overlap
between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a public
inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report provided the fullest possible
examination of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.

22. What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after the
inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable legislative
opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends to pursue the matter
when such an opportunity arises.

 It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it appropriate
 to do so.
 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
23. What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to resume
the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional reason for doing
so. The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

24. What about the allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing statements
about the disaster?

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West Midlands
Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He interviewed three
witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable) and Paul Taylor but
concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

25. How can it be right for statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers to be
altered before being submitted as evidence?

A number of statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from the
force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was brought to his
attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure was legitimate and that
it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquest or the conclusions
of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events of 15 April 1989, the police officers present at Hillsborough
were required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’ statements were
subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they were in a suitable form
for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were made on
the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove comment, hearsay or
inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of a similar
nature, without reference to the solicitors.


 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does not
criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he believes it would
have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made, because what was removed
was either factual or comment where factual matters were implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ Stuart-
Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or other
proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’ QUESTIONS

26. What about the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?

LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each of the ten questions in appendix 10 of his report, either by
direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main conclusion of
the Taylor Inquiry about the failure of police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

27. Has the Home Secretary published all the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

In my statement to the House on 18 February I said I would publish as much of the evidence
considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.

Much of the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result o f the
Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. Copies of the police statements, both in their original and
amended form, have been placed in the Library of the House. I am also placing in the Library
copies of material which is not already publicly available save where there is good reason for
doing otherwise.

We are still in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to material
which they supplied being placed in the library.

28. Will you publish appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number o f families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent evidence of
the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases in appendix 9 of his
report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of evidence.

 Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I decided that it would
 be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the families concerned direct
 and not include them in the published report.
 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
The families have since indicated that they are content for appendix 9 to be published and,
subject to ensuring that all are so content, I will place a copy in the Library of the House.


WIDER ISSUES

29. What changes are you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-
health retirement?

I intend to strengthen the procedures so that where accused officers claim they are unable,
through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in their absence,
with appropriate safeguards. I am also concerned that the existing regulations should be
rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed before
any application for early retirement can be considered.

30. What other changes to police discipline do you propose?

I announced to the House in March that I was taking steps to implement most of the
recommendations of the Home Affairs Committee’s report into police disciplinary and
complaints procedures.

I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be changed from the
criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible for officers to face both criminal
and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's recommendation
that we should implement a system of'fast track’ dismissal for use in the most serious cases.

31. What changes to the civil law on compensation have been proposed by the Law
Commission?

Under present law a person who suffers a recognisable psychiatric illness as a result of another’s
death, injury or impediment cannot recover damages for negligence unless they satisfy three
main requirements:

        that he or she had a close tie of love and affection with the person;

        that he or she was close to the accident in time and space; and

        that he or she directly perceived the accident rather than for example hearing about it
        from a third person.

 Some of the relatives of those who died at Hillsborough saw the disaster unfold on television.
 They were close to the disaster but did not perceive it with their unaided senses and were unable
 to claim for their consequential psychiatric illness.

 The Law Commission’s report 'Liability for Psychiatric Illness’ has proposed removing some
 of the restrictions under the present law. The requirement for a close tie to the person concerned
 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
would be retained, but restrictions based on closeness to the accident and direct perception of it
would be removed.




32. How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for any hurt
or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a decision for the
individuals concerned and the courts.




 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
BACKGROUND


The Tavlor Inquiry

•. The terms o f reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to
   make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.

•. 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

•. 71 hours of film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the
       BBC.

   Interim Report

•. The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
      stadium on the day of the disaster.

•. The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match arrangements,
      such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield Wednesday’s
      arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It also considered the
      build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of the terraces.

•. Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts, events
      in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for example
      tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency services.

•. A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

   - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
   - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
   - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
   - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
   - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
   - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
   - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

•. On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main reason for
      the disaster was the failure of police control.

 •. The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and statements
       attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.




 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised in the
    Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
    recommendations being made in respect of eight of them.

In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he considered
    to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could be safely used in
    the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to be carried out with
    immediate effect.

Final Report

The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It concentrated on
   the lessons to be leamt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of measures to improve
   safety at sports grounds.

The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment of all
   seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of the top
   divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of spikes and
   overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of spectators to
  be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety Certificate. There
  was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should be reviewed.

The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club and the
   police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control, with
   particular reference to the filling of each pen.

 There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the police and
    the responsibilities of senior officers.

 The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
    facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
    report.

 The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord Justice
    Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or towards the
    pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and going on to the
    pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.      Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21 days
before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build up
outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the previous
year?

3.      Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have
been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans
safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen
minutes before kick-off?

5.     Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.     Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him that
fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order for it to be
opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10 foot
spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch too
small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to help - until
3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?

 10.    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?




 F :\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SPEECH\MP-0550.DOC
