INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                             W UU /Ui      01-273 2577/3602/2370


Chris Bryer Esq
Yorkshire Television Ltd
The Television Centre
LEEDS
LS3 1JS
                                           Date
                                             5 September 1989




Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
22 August about use by you of BBC material shown to his Inquiry.

Lord Justice Taylor would have no objection in principle to the
BBC material shown to his Inquiry being broadcast. But, of
course, footage remains the property of the BBC. The rules which
were applied during the course of the Inquiry would therefore
apply further, and Lord Justice Taylor would therefore expect you
to make a formal approach to the BBC for permission to use their
material. That is the extent of any direction which Lord Justice
Taylor has issued: he has made no direction in the context of
issues of public interest. His concern was that film being shown
to his Inquiry should be made available to all those parties
represented at the Inquiry who might have an interest in it. But
any further use of the material was subject to clearance by the
BBC as indicated above.

You will be aware that further enquiries into matters arising
from the events at Hillsborough on 15 April are continuing.
These include investigation by West Midlands Police into the
question whether any criminal offences were committed on that
day. They also include investigations for the benefit of the
forthcoming inquest by HM Coroner. I would therefore suggest
that if you have it mind to make use of any particular footage,
that is assuming that the BBC were to let you use it, you should
consult the West Midlands Police to avoid any danger of
prejudicing their current eft forthcoming inquiries.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr Mervyn Jones, Assistant
Chief Constable (Operations), West Midlands Police.

                                             5'^a CcxvL,



                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
 INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH        T he Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
 STADIUM DISASTER                               *
                                       SO Queen Anne s Gate
                                       London SW1H9AT
                                       01-2732577/3602/2370




 Chris Bryer Esq
 Yorkshire Television Ltd
 The Television Centre
 LEEDS
 LS3 1JS                               D;
                                        ft) A u g u s t 1 9 8 9




 Dear Mr Bryer
  I am writing to thank you for your letter of 17
   ugust to Lord Justice Taylor and to apologise
m for the fact that you have not received an
  earlier reply. Lord Justice Taylor is out of
  the office at present, but I shall ensure that
  your letter is drawn to his attention on his
  return.
                                 Y ours s i n c e r e l y




                                 JONATHAN SWEET
                                 Hillsborough Inquiry
  'vuW—      «



      I
  22 ^




         August 17 1989
                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                               YORKSHIRE
          The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor                                                                       TELEVISION
          Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
          The Home Office
          50 Queen Anne's Gate
          London SW1H 9AT


          Dear Sir Peter

         We are writing to you at the suggestion of Mr Mervyn Jones,
         Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) with the West Midlands
         Police.

         As we believe you are aware, Mr Jones is helping us prepare a
         documentary on the inquiry. We expect to be able to provide the
         ITV network with a powerful and informative 90 minute programme
         following your final report.

         However, we do foresee one particular difficulty, on which we
         seek your guidance.

         We would like to include BBC footage which has been used by your
         inquiry. In telling the story of the inquiry, we think it will be
         hard to do it justice without at least some of that material.

         Before approaching the BBC about this, we thought we should
         establish whether you have any view about the use of this footage
         by ITV.

         We are aware that ITV news programmes have used excerpts from the
         compilation tape, and we are told that this followed a direction
         from yourself because of the issues of public interest involved.
         We would be very grateful for your guidance on whether you have
         in fact issued any direction and, if so, whether it would apply
         to our programme.

         Yours faithfully



           (A    m     \       % r^ \ ^                      '




         Chris Bryer
         Roger Finnigan
         Producers
         Documentaries




                                           Yorkshire Television Limited
The Television Centre, Leeds LS3 1JS. Telephone 0532 438283. Telex 557232. Fax 0532 445107. Cables Yorkstel Leeds
                           Registered No. 899713 E ngland R egistered O ffice T h e Television C entre Leeds
     o o

tS   CD
     rrj
     *«C
           FAX           MESSAGE



From :     . .      H i ..                          ................                 .
                                                                                     (^ £ .....---


           .X ^asi^z.. mcpijx^.............. ......................


To     :   . ^ C X , . . . i y . . . t t a W ^ . . s f e f V S » ........................................




Date       .J ^ ...S 2ptorc4^                       .......1“^ .



No of Pages




Additional Info :            .. t V ..                                                f ? v ..
                                                               ip JL .. .< ^ gu±7IJ u ^.
                                                     Lo_..                v t . .tc2i
                                           -.   ..'3 u s t e ls ^ ..'7&
