                                     SHErFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                             SAFETY OF SPCF.TS GROUNDS ADVISORY GROUP


       NOTES OF A MEETING HELD ON:   Wednesday, 23rd March 1988AT: 10.00         A.M. /iBcMyc



       ATTENDANCE:   D. 0. Grimshaw, T. D. 0. Sykes (C.F.S.); D. Moore and B. Platts (H.C.S.);
                     Superintendent Stuart, Inspector Soul, Sergeant Goddard (S.Y.P.);
                     A. Butler, M. Harvey (Building SurveyorsTT~®^**W'“ Bownes.




ITEM                             DESCRIPTION                               ACTION TO BE TAKEN
NUmtsA
           S.W.F.C. - Building Surveyor's memorandum of 2.2.88

           The Building Surveyor's representative outlined the
           memorandum and the circumstances which gave rise to it.
            uperintendent Stuart indicated that the gangway problem
                                                                                     Cc
           had been discussed with Sheffield Wednesday who were
           going to take measures with their Stewards in an attempt
           to resolve it.      As far as the turnstile, ^uejsjbion_was
           concerned, a patterrT'fias"He'veloped of pepjgle arriving
           somg l5 m i n s ■ before th§ sta^.t of t £ e ,gam,e         -
           gain admission.      This trend may be due to the banning of
          -aTcoTiol at sports grounds which could lead to people
           going elsewhere for refreshment prior to the football
           match.   As the available turnstiles operated quite
           effectively for the majority of the time, and that the
           late arrival problem could perhaps only be dealt with by
           education of spectators.




           Owlerton - General Principles

           Discussion took place about the south and east terraces
           which Eastwoods in their original report had recommended

C-         be closed.  There was no disagreement with the idea of
           closing the south terrace (which is in a very poor
           condition), but whether or not there should be
           maintained along the front of the terrace a public
           walkway so that complete public access could be allowed
           around the perimeter of the stadium was not finalised.
           It was mentioned, that the Company planned in due course
           perhaps to re—site the speedway pit on the site of the
           old south terrace




            The Capacity of Owlerton Sports Stadium
                         ■            ■

            There was a fairly lengthy discussion about capacity
            principally revolving around Eastwoods' original capacity
            estimate of 6,781 people.   There was also discussion
            about controlling the access, of. spectators to particular
            areas or zones of the stadium by various means.    It was
            recognised that such area control would be difficult as
            the stadium is not at the moment physically split into
            different zones or sections. As the stadium at the
            moment requires considerable works .to. be undertaken to
            brino it uo tc reasonable standards,- it was felt, that
      a low capacity figure should be set at the moment and
      that as improvements are completed perhaps this figure
      could be reviewed.  A capacity figure of 4,000 spectators
      was, therefore, recommended and it was felt that the
      Company would have no significant objections to this
      figure.




      Owlerton Sports Stadium - List of Requirements

      There was a detailed discussion on the draft List of
      Requirements which was circulated to the Group.  Many
      points were made which were noted at the time. Some
      detailed comments were made as follows

      Requirement 4.7

    ^fclhe exit referred to should be brought up to standard
       within six months; the stock car paddock lighting should
       be included as a requirement perhaps at 7.33; a general
       requirement as to electrical safety should be included
       perhaps at 1.10; there should also be a general
       requirement to maintain a reasonable level of lighting
       throughout the areas of the stadium to which the public
       has access, perhaps at 1.11;

       Requirement 1.7 (Stewarding)

       This should be extended to encompass an agreed level
       o£ Stewarding.

       Time Limits

       Time limits for the completion of works listed was
       discussed and recommendations for individual items
       varied from immediate action required to twelve months.    H.A.L.D. to re-draft the

C                                                                 List of Requirements
                                                                  incorporating time limit
                                                                  etc.




       Owlerton Sports Stadium - Safety Management Plan,   etc.

       Unfortunately, time ran out before this matter could be
       discussed but H.C.S. agreed to circulate copies of the
       plan for discussion.                                       H.C.S. to produce copies
                                                                  of the plan.




       2^/ ijn
