                                          H erries Road,

NORTHE
 HOSPITA
                          ■ RAL
                          ST
                                          Sheffield S5 7A U




Our Ref:   JW/LG


12th September,    1997


M r . C . F . Bone,
Secretary to the Scrutiny,
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1160,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,                 I,
SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr. Bo:

Thank you for your letter of the 10th September,              1997.

I enclose a copy of my reply to Dr. Walker.   I have also been in
touch with him by telephone and have advised him that I do not
think it would be appropriate for him to have photocopies of all
the records but I would like to assist in certainly identifying
those patients whom we may have treated.    Dr. Walker is coming
to look at some records with me later in September.

I do admit I am somewhat mystified regarding any "new evidence".
We have established the fact that at least two of the victims
were "alive" in terms of having output from the heart for
sometime after the disaster both these patients were treated in
intensive care.   One died shortly after and one was declared
"brain dead" some three days later.

However if one defines life as having a functioning brain, it is
quite clear that none of the victims treated through the Northern
General Hospital who subsequently died showed any signs of any
brain function. These facts have been known to everyone involved
in the initial investigation and indeed the public domain, having
been published by myself and others in the British Medical
Journal.

My understanding was that the Coroner found that all the patients
who had died had received their fatal injuries before 3.15. From
my own understanding of the situation, this was an entirely
reasonable conclusion.     The fatal injury was one of crush
asphyxia.   I do not believe the Coroner determined that all
deaths occurred before 3.15.




                   A NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE TRUST HOSPITAL
                                                                      ( .
LJ
M r . C . F . Bone        - 2 -               12th September, 1997


The victims were unable to <jer oxygen into the lung.  This meant
a gradual drop in the level of oxygen in the blood.    This would
have starved all tissues of oxygen.      The brain is especially
sensitive to lack of oxygen where the heart muscles can be
relatively resistant and also it is more likely that heart
muscles can recover from a period of lack of oxygen and the brain
cannot.

This concept is exemplified by the two cases mentioned above and
also to some extent by the tragic case of Tony Bland. He reached
hospital in a deeply unconcious state but his heart was still
beating.

I would like to reiterate my previous letter that I would be
willing to help the Scrutiny in any way possible. You probably
access to the statement that I made at the time tJaat I could
provide a further copy if you wish.

I have asked that copies of the notes that you have requested be
sent to you.  I am due to meet with Ed Walker later in September
in trying to identify the notes of any other patients that he
might have treated.

I would be happy to provide the Scrutiny with details of the
resuscitation efforts at the hospital, both in general terms or
specific to any individual patient, or indeed to assist in any
other way.

Yours since



JIM WARDROPE
Consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine
