                                              INDEX



Section No,                   Content                                Page Nos.


       1)     Our meeting Liverpool - 7th October 1997                     3-6

      2)      Response to your letter of 21st November                     6-9

      3)      Review / inaccuracies of body files                          9-20

      4)      Sarah in Gymnasium ??                                        20

       5)     Video tapes / Evidence /Equipment                            20-22

      6)      Police Discipline and Conduct                                22-25

       7)     Peter Wright - Resignation Comments Complaints               25-26

       8)     Sir John “Jack” Laydon                                       26

       9)     Taylor Report                                                26-27

       10)    Dr Usher & his “withdrawn” Report                            27

       11)    Coroners Conduct / Impartiality / Capability.                27-28

       12)    Disaster Plan, Medical Inadequacies and Doctors Comments     29-31




                                                                                 Page 2 of 31
1.0   O ur Meeting - Liverpool 7th October 1997

I note and endorse the transcript with a few additions/ corrections: -

       a)     I confirm that we believe that the Coronal system (typing error p8 line2) is totally
               inappropriate for dealing with major disasters. The whole process is in urgent need of
               overhaul and the gap between “accidental death” and “unlawful killing” verdicts is
               too wide.
               Even Dr. Popper referred to the problems in his summing up!

       b)     You have now seen and interviewed Paul Taylor and I trust you found him to be as
              honest as we have. His account has not fundamentally changed throughout the years.
               Specific answers to your questions and comments are in section 2 later.

        c)    I would state categorically that I did not kick any body, especially ambulanceman
               Tony Edwards and I believe that the “threat” to me and the encouragement being
               given to Tony Edwards to prefer charges was again a deliberate act of coercion.

               I have met Tony and I know that has been London to see you. I trust you found him
               to be an important and worthwhile witness to many of the events associated with the
               disaster and your work. I was wary of him at first in case he was a case of “sour
               grapes” or looking for compensation and/or a way out of the ambulance service. But
               as with Paul Taylor he has kept to his story and as I have got to know him better my
               confidence and belief in him has grown.

        d)     The hostile tone of the various references to me in police officers statements
               (especially evident in the second versions produced some months later!) and the
               regular reference to my “verbal abuse” underlines what I now believe was a
               deliberate strategy to counter my adverse comments and police complaints.

        e)     We were always led to believe there were no medical notes relating to Victoria, but
               now we are told they do exist, albeit in limited form. You have already been alerted
               to the fact that access to them was denied when Ann Adlington, with written
               authority from us, tried to see them. Why?

        f)     I repeat my view that the Phillips Report is a disgrace, and a waste of police resource
                and of tax payers money.

                I cannot comment on the officers experience and must accept it as fact, but that a
                senior officer should put his name to such a biassed report - obviously aimed at re­
                writing Taylor, is concerning. Phillips states “On 20th October 19891 was asked to
                consider documentary material emanating from the Inquiry conducted by Lord
                Justice Taylor” He does not say who commissioned the project but it is a
                remarkable co-incidence that it was just after the Taylor Interim report was
                published, presumably to attempt to redress the balance.

                I am aware of your position regarding Taylor and therefore it serves no purpose to
                dwell on the Phillips report or to give detailed responses. It is however yet another
                indicator of the police position, of their strategy, and of the tremendous effort and
                police resources that were being expended in an attempt to deflect the criticism.
                Are these the actions of an unbiassed, truth seeking organisation??
g)   I would reinforce my comments regarding the two things I can never forgive the
     police for>

             a)     They totally misread the situation and their response was geared to a
                    pitch invasion despite there being many, many signals to the contrary.
                    Anyone who had ever attended a football match could see distress not
                    disturbance.

             b)     The rescue effort was too little, too late.

i)   We discussed confusion in the statements and I made the observation that the
     opportunity for confusion with Sarah and Victoria was limited. Only seven females
     died, Sarah and Vicki were the only female teenagers, and they themselves were
     distinctive - Sarah tall and slim with shoulder length fair hair and Vicki average
     height and build with long black hair.

j)   I can advise that PC Marshall does not appear to have given evidence to Taylor or
      the inquest. I reject most of Marshall’s “evidence” and remain doubtful at his
      involvement. (See 3 later)

k)   I stressed the overwhelming view I now hold of the evidence gathering and recording
      exercise is that the numbers and frequency of error or omissions is such that it defies
      normal chance. I concluded that we suspect an orchestrated attempt to keep things
      from us. It may also explain the reluctance to release statements and other
      information to us!

1)   Page 19- line 20 refers to Dr Russia, this should read Dr Usher and I have
      commented on that report later (see section 10) I and many members of the group
      remain intrigued by the lengths taken to recover copies of it. Could it be that it
      illustrated a predisposition towards blaming latecomers and alcohol long before the
      inquests heard the evidence? Why was it withdrawn??

m)   We proceeded to discuss the difference of crush and traumatic asphyxia and I tried to
     illustrate the difference as we saw it. The transcript shows that I did not do that very
     well. Neither did I make clear my other point relating to the effect that the exact
     position one stood on the terrace had.

     What I was trying to say was that a more plausible scenario for what happened on
     the terraces was an ever increasing crush, probably in waves, building over several
     minutes and culminating in a final traumatic crush when the barrier snapped and a
     tide of people involuntarily washed down the terraces crushing those at the front
     and/or who went down in front of the human tidal wave.
                       *
     Even then macro climates existed and the exact position became important. A good
     example of this is_____________ . One minute she was stood next to her brother and
     his girlfriend Tracy Cox, the next she was on the perimeter adjacent to gate 3 and
     both Richard and Tracey died in the crush.

     The position effect was accepted by the police and indeed was cited in their skeleton
     argument used in the appeal process (see doc 1 p4 attached)


                                                                                Page 4 of 31
     The key point being that prompt action could have saved lives. There was/ is
     evidence that irreversible damage does not occur under intermittent crush conditions.
     That and the location effect increases the prospect and timescale for at least some
     people to have survived.

     It can be argued that the culpability of the police rises proportionate to the time of
     failure or delay in a remedy / rescue being mounted. Once again we see the
     importance of what the police could see by eye and/or video and I respectfully submit
     that this is another reason why they have gone to such lengths to pretend the
     equipment was faulty.

      A sudden change of conditions on the terrace, brought on by drunks breaking down
     gates and charging in, incapable of being seen because the equipment was faulty, is a
     great excuse - if you can make your story stick!!

     That plus the “sudden death” theory which was proliferated did allow families to
     think their loved ones only suffered for a short period of time. It could be called an
     act of “caring”- but it also deflects the spotlight, the guilt, and is extremely
     convenient to the police “defence”.

     Please remember I was there, I know what I saw, what I felt - believe me it was
     obvious and preventable!!!!

n)   At p21 lines 30+ of the transcript I referred to my letter of the 24th August 1990 to
     Dr Popper registering our concern at the inquest proceedings. It and his reply are
     attached as doc 2 & 3.

o)   At p22 line 10 on I referred to Peter Robinson’s statement and his contribution to the
     CCTV debate. I repeat that Mr. Robinson has been Secretary / Chief Executive of
     major football clubs for many years and he has been involved in countless discussions
     and actions involving CCTV. He is very experienced and easily qualifies as an expert
     witness. I would quote his closing words...

     “Finally, I observed the location o f the closed circuit television cameras which
     should have enabled Police Officers to observe closely the packing o f the area and
     any discomfort which spectators might experience”

     His statement is attached at doc 4.

p)   We had a further discussion on the failings of the current Coronal System and
     discussed the report of the Home Office Disaster and Inquests Working Group report
     and proposals. Comments are later at section 11.


q)   At p25 line22 I elaborated on the incident when Chief Constable Richard Wells broke
     his word to me. Again the transcript is unclear so for the record I would like to
     repeat the circumstances. When the announcement about Duckenfield’s “retirement
     on ill-heath grounds” was made I telephoned Richard Wells ( in confidence and as I
     had done on many other occasions) and he told me that he had been given no
     alternative “as an employer acting on medical advice” but to retire Duckenfield.


                                                                               Page 5 of 31
      r)     He gave me his word that he would not allow it to affect the circumstances
             surrounding Murray’s discipline and as we all know now that was not to be the case.
             I again phoned Wells and reminded him of his solemn commitment to me earlier. His
             filibuster, excuses and attempt at justification caused the telephone call to become
             heated and I told Wells he was a “lying bastard” aiid hung up. I should not have
             used that language but the sentiment stands and sadly, to me he cannot claim to be a
             man of his word. Another example of why I have lost faith in the establishment.

      s)     I then made some comments about the Football Supporters solicitor Peter Jackson’s
              correspondence with Dr Popper. I have included those documents at doc 5 & 6 and
              will comment further under section 11

      t)     We concluded with Jenni asking you again whether you would look at the question
             of what the police were aware of in respect of the pens. You responded that the
             video evidence was:-

              “probabfy the most important aspect o f the Scrutiny”

             My statement of 5th March 1997 contained basic comments on this very important
             aspect and I can ask no more than you review it again. Additional observations have
             led me to develop some of these points later at Section 5 -Video Tapes etc.

             May I respectfully suggest that if there is any doubt in your mind as to the
             capabilities of the CCTV system you return to the stadium and carry out some
             practical tests for yourself ( if indeed you have not already done so!). As far as I am
             aware the basic system remains unchanged and I am sure Roger Houldsworth would
             be more than willing to demonstrate its capabilities to you in person.


2.0   Response to your letter of the 21st November

             I would respond as follows to the points made in your letter - using the same
             numbering system; -

       1)    there was no paragraph one.

       2)    I appreciate that Paul Taylor did not mention the police officer when giving his
              evidence to the inquest but please note that he was under duress and had already
             been threatened with “perjury” by McCrombie.

             For our part we had been led to believe, again via McCrombie of the West Midlands
             Police that Paul Taylor was “not a reliable witness” and may not even have been with
             Victoria. Remember also that the initial contact with us was by a telephone call
             from his social worker who explained his deep shock etc. He was traumatised by the
             events, had major guilt problems and was unable to work, all of which made our
             acceptance of the initial story so understandable -especially when you consider the
             state of mind we were in.

              We first met Paul personally in July/ August of 1989 when he approached us after a
              meeting with lawyers in Liverpool. He gave us a perfect description of Victoria and I
              passed this information onto our lawyers and Det. Sgt. McCrombie.
This can be seen at doc 7/1 which I wrote to Fraser on 13th November 1990 and
appears to be the earliest written proof I have so far found.

At doc 13 1 attach a number of pages from chapter five of “Beyond Disaster” a
report partially funded by the Home Office Emergency Planning Division and
produced by Phil Scraton and Howard Davis. I am not sure whether you may have
already seen it but I would draw your attention to the many references to Paul
Taylor. It illustrates his state of mind and the dramatic effect that events had upon
him and his family. I assure you I was not aware of the interview he gave to Edge
Hill researchers until a copy of the report came into our hands, but I would draw
your attention to perhaps the most telling quotation (doc 13/17 ) -

“I don’t want you to go to prison and leave me and Michael”. So when (her)
parents got in touch again, I said it was a mistake, and I don’t think they was very
happy.

Is there any wonder we let matters rest and swallowed the story we were being told!

I attach at doc 8 a letter to Fraser dated 15 March 1990 where in para 5 on page two
I refer to “conflicting evidence” regarding Vicki prior to her coming onto the pitch.
This relates to Paul Taylor but does not mention him by name.

Doc 15 shows the “Questions and matters arising from the summaries” which we
asked Fraser to clarify at the mini-inquest relating to Victoria. You will observe that
in the main they relate to the medical / post mortem evidence, but Q1 to DS Me
Combie (doc 15/2) asked for his opinion, based on the statements he had seen,
whether Victoria had received resuscitation attempts at the earliest practical time.

Upon checking the transcripts that question was never answered. It was not put by
Fraser in the way I had requested, and events became interested in time rather than
the core of the question. McCombie referred to (see inquest transcript pi 1 D - note
error in attributing this to Insp. Layton) the statement of PC McGuiness and that he
was the first officer involved with Victoria. The Coroner stated that there was
nothing in the statements and went on to suggest that Insp. Layton could answer the
time issue later

Both Jenni and I recall being aware that a policeman may have been involved but
were not clear who it was. There was an element of it possibly being PC McGuiness
and/or others and that is why I was asking for formal statements.

I would remind you that at the time many people, including medics, policemen etc.
were unidentified and statements were not being released due to the DPP procedures.
We were also in a non-controversial phase with the Coroner’s procedures and as far
as I am aware nobody was allowed to ask such questions.

I attach as doc 9 a copy of our request for Taylor’s statement and Mervyn Jones’s
refusal. Docs 10 & 11 show this state of affairs continued until well into 1992, and
as you are well aware, it was only in recent weeks that we have seen many of the
statements. Indeed, we believe that had it not been for the scrutiny we may never
have seen any of them.
I will deal with my concerns about PC Marshall’s evidence under section 3 but again
would remind you that his evidence was summarised at the mini-inquests by the
Coroner/ West Midlands Police. I had no sight of his or other statements and had
to rely on what I was being told. I was is shock myself and hardly in the right frame
of mind to argue, especially as I felt I had been “mauled” at the Taylor Inquiry where
my memory was challenged by nine barristers attacking me - albeit in sympathetic
mode.
Please note my letter of the 13th November 1990 (docs 7/2) and of the 15th March
 1990 (doc 8/2) refer to Marshall and to the conflicting “evidence”

I accept that draft summaries were circulated prior to the mini-inquests and I attach
as doc 12 Fraser’s letter of the 28|h March and the summaries we received. Again I
must stress that no police witnesses were being called and we were not being allowed
statements.
I could hardly raise or challenge Marshall on the summary information I had to hand
and as I said above I was beginning to doubt my own memory. I am sure on several
occasions I raised my doubts with lawyers and/or West Midlands officers but I
cannot find documentary proof of that.

I repeat the comments above and remind you that we were in a non-controversial
straight-jacket with only the barest of “information dissemination” exercises taking
place. We were advised “the real action will take place at the full Inquests - once the
DPP and other matters had been attended to.”

I attach as doc 14 Fraser’s letter of 9th March 1990 to us regarding the resumption of
the inquests, the procedures to be applied and the very tight rules regarding
disclosure of statements and/ or other information. It clearly shows the mode of the
exercise and the intention of the Coroner at that time.

Please remember also that Jenni and I were still in deep shock from losing our only
children and I was still having nightmares from having to leave Sarah behind when
the ambulance drove off. We were hardly in “analytical” mood and were soft targets
only too willing to believe what McCrombie and co. told us. After all they were our
“friends”

I did not formally raise my concerns about Marshall with the Coroner at the mini­
inquests. I had/ have absolutely no recollection of him on the day and hence was
unsure about him. I told the West Midland officers and my lawyers of these concerns
but was persuaded that he existed and had been involved. No police officers were
called as witnesses because of the DPP and the Police Federation had advised its
members not to make or release statements.

Again I must repeat my earlier comments. No statements were forthcoming and we
had been persuaded to accept that Paul Taylor may have been mistaken and or
confused and we did not learn until much later that he had been threatened with
“perjury” charges and that was why he did not bring it up. We came to realise what
had really happened only when it was too late. Both Jenni and I are convinced that he
is telling the truth and are angry that he was pressured into “errors of omission”.

Paul has remained resolute through the years, we have got to know him a little better
and he has recovered greatly from his ordeal even though he still carries some guilt.
               It would be easier for us to accept the status quo and disbelieve him or accept he was
               mistaken. The fact that we cannot choose the easier option is a measure of out faith
               in Paul Taylor and his version of events.

               For the avoidance of doubt we would state that we have not chosen to accept his
               evidence “now that it suits us”



3.0 Review of Body files and inaccuracies

As I stated under 1.0 (a) above there are many inaccuracies and omissions in Sarah and Victoria’s
body files. Many are non-consequential in respect of any potential effect on verdicts but the numbers
of errors cause one to beg the question of how thorough the evidence gathering and recording was.

I am aware of how difficult the task was and do not underestimate it, but I cannot accept your view
that
               “a thorough job has been done”

Perhaps more importantly, there are errors of fact, and the ones I have found in Sarah and Victoria’s
files are included.

It is not my intention or expectation that you should respond/ comment on individual points that I
am recording here. My purpose is to place them on record and to illustrate why I hold the views that
I have chronicled and put to you. Some I believe are worthy of investigation and/or action by you
but I accept that is entirely a matter for you. The least I would ask is that you give due regard to
them when making your overall judgements.

Before proceeding I would like to repeat the comment I made under (li) above that the opportunity
for confusion with Sarah and Victoria was limited. Only seven females died, Sarah and Vicki were
the only female teenagers, and they themselves were distinctive - Sarah tall and slim with shoulder
length fair hair and Vicki average height and build with long black hair.


3.1 Victoria’s File.

        1)     no summary was included. I understand that this reflects a change of policy on
               release of information but as already indicated, we had a copy from the civil
               proceedings.

       2)     pages number 117 - 126 are missing. What is on them and why have they been
               excluded?

       3)     Paul Taylor does not get a mention and none of his statements are included. You are
               aware of my comments and they need not be repeated here.

       4)     PC 1927 Steven Taylor was involved with Victoria / myself at the plaster room at the
               Northern General. His undated statement was not in Victoria’s file, it came to my
               attention via Phillip Hammond Jnr’s file. Was it excluded because of the controversy
               regarding the mix-up over Victoria’s identification?


                                                                                        Page 9 of 31
I attach the statement as doc 16 and draw attention to doc 16/4 where for the
record:-

i)     I did not tell him “that his two daughters had been killed” - at the time I did
       not know Sarah’s fate

ii)    Victoria did not “fit the description” - 1 had given him that of Sarah

iii)   “the state of his daughters body” was a red herring-1 had already been with
       Victoria as you are aware.

Another statement (dated 3/5/89 and attached as doc 17) omits the whole reference
to Victoria / myself and hence was quite correctly not included. But what is the date
of the one above, why the different statements and why is there no cross reference!!

In similar vein I draw your attention to statements of PC 2662 Andrew James Sheil
which was also not in the file. He was with PC Taylor, also made two statements,
one undated and in the one dated 4/7/89 makes reference to Victoria “     at the
mortuary of the Northern General Hospital, one of these eleven was a female ”
(See doc 18/6-7 ) These statements can be found in the Hammond / Horrocks files
and are attached as docs 18 & 19 for ease of reference.

                 apparently assisted me when placing Victoria in the ambulance but
again no statement was included. It came to my attention from the Thomas Anthony
Howard file in hand written form ( dated 9/1/90 and attached as doc 20) and this was
incorporated into a formal statement by PS 6818 J Killock.(doc 21) This is undated
but also includes a mention of myself. Why was he not included or mentioned in the
summaries?

               [was a mortuary technician involved with Victoria at the Northern
General and yet again his statement (undated but taken by PS Julie Appleton) was
omitted. It is attached as doc 22 and there are two clear references to HICKS girls.
Why were we never told of him by Julie Appleton (our liason officer!) And why was
he omitted from the summaries. Again, I can only assume it was because of the
controversy over the identification of Victoria but it may be related to his adverse
comments about Police Officers assigned to accompany bodies.

Dr Wardrope’s statement of the 6/6/89 (taken by Julie Appleton and attached as doc
23) was not included and despite him admitting at doc 23/3 “our documentation o f
the earlier treatment o f many o f the patients is not satisfactory” for reasons of
excessive work load he goes on to state at doc 23/4 para 20 - “Victoria Hicks.
There is definite hospital and post mortem evidence that Miss Hicks received
intensive resuscitation efforts      ”

This statement is witnessed by Julie Appleton (doc 23/7) and she and McCrombie
were our liaison officers yet we were never told of it. Worse still Jenni and I were
subjected to a lot of anguish over “the needle marks” for a great deal of time (at least
6th June 89 until 24th April 90 at mini-inquests) when Appleton (and probably
McCrombie!) were in a position to formally clear up what we always suspected - that
they were related to the resuscitation attempts.
We had discussed it with lawyers and the police officers on many occasions and our
ongoing concern is documented by our first question to Dr Denmark at the mini­
inquest (doc 15/1) We find it incredulous that the matter was left unanswered so
long - with its sinister overtone niggling away at Jenni and I, when our liaison
officers from West Midlands Police knew the truth.

Attached as doc 24/1 is another statement by Dr Wardrope (similar but different, is
undated, and not “signed” by anyone) which again was not in Victoria’s file and we
were not aware of it. It was in Steven O’Neils file and at doc 24/6 he clearly states -
“ I recall I was in the control room when one woman arrived trying to fin d her
husband and daughter. I recall speaking to her and telling her that her husband
had survived but that her daughter was dead. ” It is a matter of record that
Victoria was the only female fatality at the Northern General and it is clear these
remarks were referring to Jenni.

I attach as doc 25/1 PC McGuiness’s statement of the 8/5/89 which is in the body file
( I had never seen prior to the Scrutiny) and would make a couple of comments, even
though some of these are corrected in the statement of 6/7/89

        a)     at doc 25/2 he refers to a young girl in a white top being carried to the
               rear of the stand. Both Sarah and Vicki had white tee-shirts on and
               were “young girls” could he be confused or was one of the other girl
               Sarah?

        b)     at the foot of 25/2 he states “....I assisted officers to pull a second
               girl onto the pitch in front o f the stand As officers dealt with her I
               ran to the police room and from the gym area. I took an oxygen
               cylinder and mask I brought this back to the girl and attempted to
               resuscitate her with it....” There are no references to Paul Taylor of
                                     | (not even aS anonymous fans!) I was present
               when PC McGuiness returned with the oxygen bottle and clearly
               remember there was no tubing or mask attached to the bottle.

        c)      at 25/3 he states “ I desperately continued mouth to mouth as we
                travelled to the hospital.. ” Again this is incorrect, I clearly
                remember him standing in the rear of the ambulance still clutching the
                oxygen bottle for most if not all of the journey. It was Tony Edwards
                and myself attending to Victoria. The document is standard police
                computer format but “witness to signature” is given as P J
                McGuiness.

Attached as doc 26 is a similar but undated statement which was also in the body file.
At 26/2 he refers to fire officers assisting and mouth to mouth being administered
throughout the journey but does not say by who. Again he refers to the mask and
resuscitation attempt. It is my belief that this was his original statement and it was
embellished as it became doc 25.

Doc 27 also comes from the body file on Victoria and is McGuiness’s statement of
6/7/89 which as I stated earlier goes some way to correct the earlier statements.
There are still problems however; -

       a)     At 27/1 he refers to Vicki being at the bottom of the pile trapped
              under an alive man who could not move. This is totally contrary with
              Paul Taylor’s account. Dr Denmark’s pathological evidence to the
              mini-inquest (p 3) seems to fit Taylor’s account better.

       b)     On the next page (27/2) McGuiness corrects the comments about
              resuscitating Victoria but then comments “I remember doing
              something with the oxygen bottle on the ground to a girl I believe
              this may have been her sister, Sarah Hicks’’’ I repeat my comments
               above regarding the bottle having no means of dispensing oxygen and
              hence the officer could have helped no-one with it. He also brought it
               into the ambulance.

       c)     It was my belief that McGuiness arrived back with the oxygen bottle
               very shortly before the ambulance arrived but apparently visual
               evidence has shown him that is not the case. (Doc 27/2) I have not
               seen that visual material but must assume that it is correct.

I am not attempting to diminish the officers contribution neither do we wish to
rescind the commendation made. My purpose is to correct for the record the
mistakes and to highlight the bias towards reporting police efforts and not fans, both
within police statements and especially in the summaries.
Victoria’s summary (doc 12/6) illustrates this well - officers efforts at para 10
whereas I am mentioned, almost as an afterthought, in para 11.

It should also be noted that McGuiness makes no reference in any statement to PC
Marshall.

Paul Winston Turner’s evidence is corroborated with video/ photographs that prove
he carried Victoria onto the pitch. For the record the comments on pages 58 & 59 of
Victoria’s file do not appear to relate to Sarah because she did not have long black
hair and her face was not covered as she was carried to the gym. I presume that PC
Watson and WPC Kelly, the officers dealing with the visual evidence, showed him
the photographs NGN1/62 and LPE4/25 ( DC’s Maddox & Greaves etc. with
hoarding) when he made his later statement.

I have already stated my amazement at doc 28, PC 2818 Marshall’s undated and
probable initial statement. I repeat I have no recollection of him on the pitch, in the
ambulance or at the hospital and PC McGuiness makes no mention of him either.

It is my opinion that his statement is more fairy tale than fact and the presentation is a
disgrace. I am tempted to dismiss it but shall, as with the others, attempt to “put the
record straight” and/or comment as appropriate.

a)     doc 28/1 he claims “I was offered £50, the notes being pushed towards me”
       Even 12-14 year olds are not daft enough to offer a police officer a cash
       bribe in broad daylight, with many other officers and cameras present. If they
       were, Marshall and/or other officers should have done something about it.
at 28/2 he refers to a “second access tunnel into the stand” when there is
only one.

 he states at 28/3 “ I was sickened, having to walk over the bodies o f fans
 those alive and dead but knew I had to fo r the sake o f others who had
fallen to the floor. For what seemed an age I worked at the back o f the net
ferrying the bodies to the fence which a short time earlier I had assisted to
 tearfrom the frame. ” I believe the video shows bodies only being removed
 via the gates and not through the fence (or a section of fence) If he had
 walked over the bodies he would have had the pile between him and the gate
 so would have had to keep re-crossing them an impossible task carrying
 others.

 at 28/4 he states “ I helped an officer lift a young girl out o f the pile o f
bodies. We walked to the fence with her and Ijum ped onto the perimeter,
carrying her in my arms towards an ambulance. ” Victoria was carried out
of pen 2 by Paul Turner and others, having been passed over the radial fence
Sarah was recorded as carried by DC’s Maddox and Greaves. After I joined
them both girls were on the pitch for some time before the ambulance even
made an appearance.

again at 28/4 he continues “After leaving her on the grass fo r a short while,
a further officer approached me carrying an oxygen bottle, he said, come
on do you know first aid., we can save this one.. ” We know Victoria was
attended to by Dr Hutson initially (photographic evidence) myself and a St
John’s first aider (verified by Firemen \                        |, and Dr
Hutson’s statements) and others, including Dr Flenley. It is strange that I
remember them but not Marshall.

Also he said “a further officer” which means he cannot claim he helped
McGuiness remove Victoria, and we know that McGuiness does not mention
him in his initial statements.

he continues “ I carried the girl to the rear o f an open ambulance, placing
her on the seats. Almost immediately two others were placed in the van,
one a youth being pu t on its floor. The ambulance then shut its doors and
we set o ff at speed to the N. G.H. Throughout the journey we attempted to
revive the girl using chest and heart massage, the mask o f the oxygen
being placed intermittently over her mouth as we tried to pump air into her
body. The girl was Victoria Hicks. Herfather was trying mouth to mouth
after I had cleared vomitfrom her mouth. The second girl in the
ambulance was her older sister. Upon arrival at the N. G.H. I carried the
body o f the girl into the hospital and placed her on a wooden bench, the
only free furniture. In turn I then carried the youth, my strength seemed
that o f ten... ” In response I must say he is badly mistaken, and that is being
charitable! Firstly, I and someone in civilian clothing put Vicki into the
ambulance, I cannot recall whether it was with help from         _______ 3r
not, and we put her on the right hand stretcher cot the wrong way round -i.e.
with her head to the rear of the vehicle. I remember that clearly and believe
that was why we could not use the ambulance oxygen.
              I have already said that the bottle McGuiness brought did not have a mask.
             We did continue mouth to mouth but I recall that was myself and Tony
             Edwards. I had already sucked vomit from Vicki’s mouth on the pitch (why I
             had the taste problem for six months) and as we all know there was no
             second girl in the ambulance.

              Upon arrival at the Northern General we carried Vicki in on the cot /
             stretcher and this is supported by              ]statement (page 97 o f the body
             file)           and I recovered the cots and returned to the vehicle”. The
             carrying of the youth / strength of ten statement also is incredible - did
             everyone at casualty receiving stand around waiting for Marshall to return to
             carry the youth. I think not!

             I have already commented upon his remarks about my verbal abuse and need
             not repeat them - 1 think they were as embellished as the rest of the
             statement.
             Finally, at the foot of the page he claims “ On returning to Hillsborough I
             walked onto the pitch which was now a mass o f bodies, Police and people
             alike. It was then that all I could do was try to calm people down who were
             being hysterical” he does not say how or when he travelled back to the
             ground but once again everyone seems to have stood around awaiting his
             return. I trust you will now understand my cynical approach to this officer.

17)   Attached at doc 29/1 is the later statement (dated 10/7/89) which again corrects
      some of the errors highlighted above. I remain unconvinced of Marshall’s
      involvement and reject his account/s including the comments about verbal abuse.

18)   Fireman                          appears confused at page 73 (his page four) in that
      he describes a girl aged 14-15 years old, blonde shoulder length hair but goes on to
      say that she is placed in an ambulance. Other than the hair which fits Sarah it appears
      he is referring to Victoria.

19)   He corrects this anomaly in his later statement (pages 77 & 78 of the body file)

20)   I would draw your attention to the final paragraph of             statement where he
      is commenting on whether the victims he worked on rnd been drinking. His response
      infers he was being asked the same questions than indicates the police desire to shift
      the blame.

21)                               at page 83 claims that he believes two girls were placed in
      the ambulance which is of course incorrect. He appears to be also confused between
      Sarah (he describes mousey coloured shoulder length hair) and Victoria, who he
      identifies from photographs in his later statement (page 87) Both were wearing
      white tee-shirts and white bra’s and in photograph NGN1/62 ( Sarah being carried on
      the hoarding) you can see her shirt is still tucked into her jeans. I conclude therefore
      that           ^ assisted Victoria rather than Sarah, but there were several “moves
      around” and it is possible he attended both.

22)   Micheal Alexander Hutson was the Doctor seen attending to Victoria on photograph
      NGN/2 and I have identified him near Dr Colin Flenley on the compilation video and
      I would confirm that he is the man I have referred to as being in “the duck sweater”.

                                                                               Page 14 of 31
He confirms my being there at the time he was and I draw your attention to his
comments on page 90 of the body file. “I imagine that the apparent lack o f success
in promoting spontaneous cardiac activity or respiration was due to too lengthy a
delay between cessation o f these vital body functions and the commencement o f
resuscitation. This is exactly the point we were making when attempting to account
for the seven minutes that Victoria may have been left - without the vital, possibly life
saving attention.

__________ was the driver of the SYMAS ambulance that Tony Edwards attended
and which took Victoria to the Northern General. I draw attention to his
confirmation (page 97) of Tony assisting a young girl of 14 -15 (Victoria ) and that
he and Tony “recovered the cots” after we were delivered to the Northern General -
contrary to Marshall statement.

Tony Edwards initial statement is attached as doc 30 and although undated his
subsequent statement (doc 31) refers to it being made on 7th May 1989. I feel sure
you will have seen it, but I would comment as follows; -

a)     at 30/3 he refers to being prevented from travelling down to the pitch by a
        Policemen.

b)     at doc 30/4 he refers to being in front of goal when the kicking incident
        occurred and reinforces this at the foot of the page when he says “ I looked
       fo r my driver and he had driven over to the other side o f the goal towards
        the com erfla g ”. This in my view infers that Edwards was to the northern
        side /in front of the goal when the kicking incident took place whereas the
        ambulance (and hence I) was to the south of the goal near to the touchline.

c)     The girl he refers to appears to be Victoria and he confirms she was placed on
       the right hand side. He does say that there were two policemen in the
        ambulance and two spectators one of whom was me who was holding the
       head of the girl. He goes on to say “ I tended to the girl and showed how to
        do mouth to mouth resuscitation while the spectator (me) did cardiac
        compressions. Note that there is no reference to Marshall/ a police officer
        attending to Victoria, totally in keeping with my recollection of events.

d)     He says at para 9 (doc 30/5 & 6) “We took the three bodies into casualty
       and I assisted the doctorfo r a few minutes. We then loaded trolleys back
       on to the ambulance. ” Again no mention of Marshall and confirmation that
       we had used the ambulance trolleys.

Doc 31 is the subsequent statement made to Inspector Layton on 25/10/89 and
appears to be a follow up to the story of the kicking incident. I recall having
discussed the matter with Sgt McCrombie and having denied any knowledge of it to
him. I do not think I ever discussed it with Layton and have no idea why he should
have discussed it with Tony Edwards. Is it possible that contradictory visual evidence
had been uncovered or was it a senior officer dealing with a potentially serious
complaint.

Doctor John Sinclair Calder was the SHO at the Northern General and his statement,
made to Sgt Julie Appleton on 16/10/89 is attached as doc 32. At doc 32/2 he gives
              a detailed account o f treating Victoria. He names her and gives detail of the
              treatment - including fitting an intravenous line into her arm and administering
              adrenalin. I would comment as follows:-

              a)     I am flattered that he thought I was young, I was 43 at the time.

              b)     I was not wearing a Liverpool shirt but I did have my scarf with me.

              c)     Note he mentions a supporter (me) an ambulanceman (Tony Edwards) and/or
                     a policeman (PC McGuiness) Again no mention of Marshall.

              d)     It is clear where the “needle marks” came from and although the West
                      Midlands Police (Julie Appleton) had this further confirmation we were not
                      told. I can do no more than repeat my comments under (8) above regarding
                      the pain this caused us.

       27)                                    Statement of the 26/7/89 (again to Julie Appleton)
              basically confirms Dr Calder’s statement and need not be included. Note that on page
              2 (page 115 of file) she confirms Vicki accompanied by myself and a policeman or
              ambulanceman. This adds further doubt about Marshalls involvement!!

       28)    Dr Janet Mary Doore’s statements merely confirm known facts. My concern on
              timings in the statement of 26/7/89 are corrected in supplementary’s.

       29)    WPC 3038 Janet Mary Cruttenden statements are straightforward but raise two
              questions. Firstly why did Prof. Usher pronounce Vicki dead when Dr Doore (and
              probably Dr Calder ) had already done so and why was the Sudden Death Report not
              completed by the hospital as they were the ones with first hand knowledge.

       30)                                 statements are noted and I recall the mix-up on
               identification being addressed by the Coroner. I note however the pages numbered
               130 a, b, & c. in the body file is a statement made to Sgt McCombie dated the 3rd
               April 1990 - nearly a year after the event. The recall of the detail is remarkable after
               such a long time and I think a great deal of “leading the witness” must have been
               involved in its production.


3.2 Sarah’s File

Many of the comments made under the review of Victoria’s file quite naturally apply to Sarah and it
is not my intention to repeat them unless there is a specific need.

       1)     there are no summaries.

       2)     I attach as doc 33 correspondence relating to and a statement from a fan called Tony
              Bambrook. I was sent a copy in December 89 and passed it through to Doug Fraser
               in February 1990. The statement is numbered S350 and the pages are sequentially
               numbered. It is stamped with a West Midlands Police Stamp on doc 33/4 which
               clearly indicates it was “in the system”. It is not in the file and Bambrook is not
               mentioned in the summaries etc. At doc 33/10 he talks about being passed Sarah
               from pen 4 and placing her on the pitch etc. He mentions a fireman, myself and relays

                                                                                         Page 16 of 31
a conflicting set of events to that in the summaries. Presumably he was eliminated as
a reliable witness? Again I would have thought something should be in the file.


On the photographs NGN 1/62 & LPE 4/25 a man in plain clothes called S. Mitton
has been identified and arrowed. This shows some discussion between him and the
police has taken place and I assume he has given a statement/s. There is nothing at all
in the bodyfile and he does not get mentioned in the summaries.

Doc 34/1 is the 30/4/89 statement of Paul McCafferey and I draw your attention to
doc34/5 where he states “ I carried out the body o f a girl that was lying ju st to the
left o f where I had been. I carried her out with a policeman to behind us where
there was more space. On seeing a photograph the next day or Monday, I
recognised the girl I carried with the policeman as bang a girl called Sarah
Hicks. ” I would remind you that initially PC McGuiness talked of carrying a girl to
the rear of the stand. (See 10a above and doc 25/1) and it is my belief that he
probably carried Sarah with McCaffrey. I appreciate that both changed their stories
later but I propose that their first statements, made with fresh recollections, were
probably correct.

If correct then it raises the issue of when / where Sarah first received proper medical
attention. I have not seen the statement of Inspector Sykes so cannot properly assess
the probabilities. Did she receive mouth to mouth behind the stand and did the
unknown ambulance woman correctly diagnose death or otherwise.

Another possibility is that she was merely carried to the rear of the pen area and
received little or no attention until some time later when she was on the pitch.

I have no doubt McCaffrey was involved with Sarah and will follow this matter up by
attempting to contact him and obtaining Insp. Sykes statement if possible.

At doc 35/3 we see McCaffrey changes events to "... when a male police officer
who I cannot identify came over to help me, together we carried her out through
the perimeter gate and onto the pitch by the track...” I can only assume that follow
up visits “persuaded” Paul to change his statement. What the reason or stimuli was I
do not know at this time.

What is clear is that once again differing statements exist and the balance between
fans efforts and police officers is “adjusted” in the presentation of the summary. I
refer you to doc 36 which is an extract of McCombie’s verbal presentation of the
summary to the mini inquest where at C-D he talks about McCaffrey and states “
Once he was in a position to do so Mr. McCaffrey began to assist people out o f the
enclosure. He says he saw a girl he now knows to be Sarah lying in pen 3 on her
back.
Sarah was carried out o f the enclosure by Police Constable Alan Marshall via a
hole in the perimeter fence..... ”

Note that McCaffrey’s involvement in carrying Sarah is not mentioned either verbally
or in the written summary (doc 12/13) I have already aired my views on PC Marshall
and his role and do not intend to repeat them, but even if he was involved with Sarah
the presentation of the facts is not balanced.
DC 218 James Russell Greaves of Lincoln statement is self explanatory and is
supported by visual evidence. In addition to some specifics about Sarah I would like
to draw your attention to a couple of other comments: -

a)     At doc 37/2 he states that when they sat down at 1.50 pm “...I noticed
       straight away that the centre section o f the terracing behind the goal at the
       Leppings Lane end was very fu ll ” He adds later at 37/3 that the centre
       section was “getting more and more crowded”

b)     At doc 37/3 he relates how they saw police officers climb a wall and bang on
       the window of the police box and shout to the officers inside. (See also DC
       Maddox comment at doc 38/3)

c)     at doc 37/6 Greaves relates his involvement with a young girl and there are a
        couple of small points of identification that appear confusing. He talks of a
        15-16 year old with shoulder length brown hair, which fits Victoria better
       than Sarah. Again at 37/8 he states that from press photographs he believes
        the girl he assisted was Victoria Hicks.

d)     The photographs however prove that Greaves was involved with carrying
       Sarah to the gym. We did in fact “swap around” somewhat on the pitch and
       it is possible that he was involved /remembers Victoria from then. The body
       file is however inaccurate.

e)     again at doc 37/6 he refers to a 45 year old who told them he was a doctor.
        This is believed to be Colin Flenley but he did not look 45 years old and did
        not as I understand it go to the gym with them. It is possible that Dr Hutson
        featured in this error.

f)     Another concern expressed at the mini- inquest via a question to Sgt.
       McCombie (doc 15/3) was that an unidentified member of a medical team had
       told the officers that Sarah was dead and beyond help. We still do not know
       who that person was, their qualifications and / or their fitness to make such a
       pronouncement.

g)     We now know from this officers statement that Sarah was left outside the
       gym and may even have been left unattended. Again the summary does not
       reflect any of this accurately.

h)     I know you are not re-running Taylor or wishing further comments from
        individuals but I would ask that you read Greaves (and Maddox) statements (
        docs 37 & 38) as I feel they, as both fans and serving police officers, make
        many unbiased observations on control, facilities, inadequacies and peculiar
        events as to justify the few additional minutes required. As far as I am aware
        neither were called to give evidence to either Taylor or the Inquest which I
        believe was a pity.

DC 96 Fredrick Maddox statement is attached as doc 38 and it again is self
explanatory and repeats/ corroborates that of Greaves above. Again for the record I
      highlight some errors within it:-

      a)     again the description of the girl was more akin to Victoria especially as he
             states she was “14 -15 with brown hair (long)”

      b)     He describes the “medic” as “ 40 - 45years old with grey hair and wearing
             a grey jacket ” Which is not Colin Flenley’s description and he was not
             wearing a jacket. As I stated above Colin also did not go with them to gym so
             there must be some doubt as to who accompanied them, I was 43,
             somewhat grey haired and I was wearing a grey leather jacket so again it is
             possible that confused things. It is also possible that Dr Hutson, who was
             wearing a sweater not a jacket, may be the person referred to.

      c)     at doc 38/7 & 8 Maddox gives a differing account of what the unidentified
             medic did at the gymnasium. He states “ Sometime later, a medic came with
             an oxygen cylinder and ventilator. He gave her a little oxygen and checked
             her eyes with a torch and told us we were wasting our time, go andfind
             someone else you can help. ” Once again I highlight this to illustrate the
              errors or shortcomings in the summaries and in the evidence gathering
             process. Such a widely differing account from two police officers / friends
             warranted further investigation and eventual resolution.

              This variance in reported events has become more important in the light of
              matters outlined in section 4 below.

9)    I note the statement of Andrew Kenneth Lawson and feel that there are minor errors
      but none worthy of addressing here.

10)   Dr Colin Flenley statement likewise.

11)   Attached as doc 39 is the statement of PC 86 Steven Paul Mounsey who states at
      doc 39/1 “ Once inside I saw a large number o f bodies, male, female, young and
      old, laid out I immediately went to the body o f a young girlfem ale who I now
      know was that o f Sarah Louise HICKS. Ife lt fo r any sign o f life butfound none,
      however, the body was still quite warm ” The summary at section 14 (doc 12/15)
      merely states that PC Mounsey assumed responsibility for the body of Sarah. It does
      not mention his comment regarding the body temperature!!! This was a concern
      to Jenni and I and we raised the question at the mini-inquest following Jenni’s
      experience when identifying the girls that evening. We wondered then whether it was
      a signal that she may not have been dead as long as suggested. Had we known the
      content of the officers statement we would have been more robust in checking this
      out. Please note section 4 below.

12)   I note the statement of Dr Bull dated 5/5/89 and his comment on page 2 of his
      statement (p 103 of bodyfile) “Iperform ed a normal examination on each body
      and pronounced life extinct in turn. ” I have seen the temporary mortuary footage
      and would make the point that Dr Bull appears to be making a brief almost fleeting
      examination. It hardly inspires confidence in the result.

13)   I have commented in Victoria’s review about                        n need not repeat
      that here.

                                                                              Page 19 of 31
4.0 Sarah in the Gymnasium ??

Included with the tapes obtained from Yorkshire Television was about 8 minutes of hand held
footage shot in the temporary mortuary. I recently re-examined this footage and much to my alarm
observed what I consider is Sarah receiving attention in the gymnasium. I cannot recognise any of
the individuals.

I have shown the section of tape to Jenni Hicks and she feels equally strongly that the person is
Sarah. The patient is wearing a white top, light blue denim jeans with turn-ups and a leather belt.
The face is obscured by the attendants but the hips and general form appear female. Jenni and I feel
very strongly that it is Sarah.

There are several important points attached to this observation:-

        1)     The recovery position is normally only used by First Aiders for the “recovery” of
               people who are breathing. ( See doc 40 - page 43 of St. Johns Amb. Manual)

       2)     mouth to mouth resuscitation cannot be carried out with the patient in this position.

       3)     what is the time

       4)     who are the individuals attending to Sarah

       5)     what happened before, during and after this sequence.

I have copied the section of tape and included some slow motion footage using the Jog and Shuttle
facility on my video. I would ask for your comments and that you seek assistance from South
Yorkshire Police in establishing the truth of this matter. Have any of the people been identified
and / or has the patient been found to have lived or died. Was it Sarah or someone else. Etc.etc.

Naturally, we will attempt to resolve this ourselves and I intend to seek a better copy of the video,
but would ask you to record our view and for any assistance you can give.

Naturally, there are serious repercussions if this is shown to be Sarah.

5.0 Video Tapes. Evidence and Equipment

Since making my statement to you dated 5th March 1997, more details have come to my attention
and despite the possibility that others may have made them I would like to pass them to you:-

               a)      At Taylor P63d Bichard says that the zoom facility on camera 2 (colour
                       camera on South Stand) was not good enough to see whether or not people
                       were being crushed along the perimeter fence of pens 3 & 4.

               b)      He then admits it enables you to see the fence but not to get a close up.

               c)      At the Inquest (ref P77b) he says of camera 2 “I f you were to take pictures
                       o f people below the camera in the uncovered seating area, you would get
                       identification because they are so close to the camera, but once you get to
                       the South stand area, Leppings lane, the magnification available on that
                       zoom was insufficient to create identification”
               d)      He admits to the inquest at p77f that it can give you “a reasonable view o f
                       pens 3 & 4" -contrary to what he told Taylor.

               e)      At Inquest p79c he says “when the colour camera came into use the tape
                       had expired and later states that “it was after 3.00pm when the colour
                       camera 2 was retrained on the terraces

               f)      Again at the Inquest p93 A Bichard describes the camera as “inadequate”

I have copied a small extract of Tape P6 part 3 (police video ex YTV) onto the latter half of the
attached video. I believe that some of this footage is on the compilation tape but it was not clear that
it came from police cameras. Despite the poor quality (copies of copies of copies) you can see that
contrary to Bichard’s evidence:-

                1)     Camera 2 is being used and is being panned and zoomed - hence Bichard is
                       using it.

               2)      It trains on pen 5 at 14.58.56 and the camera is at least part zoomed in onto
                       the terraces and it is clear that there is a lot of room.

                3)     He opens out the shot (lower zoom) and pans to the comer between the
                       South Stand and Lepping lane terrace.

                4)     The camera is seen to be capable of identification at the fence. You can
                       clearly see Chief Inspector McRobbie (blazer & grey slacks) the pony tail of
                       the WPC on the gate and the faces of the fans and St Johns staff sitting near
                       the comer/ Grate 1.

                5)      The fact that we can see the tape proves it had not expired - even thought it
                        does however run out at approximately 15.04.09

                6)      Clearly the camera was trained on the terraces before 3.00 pm.

                7)      The camera “parks” with a wide angle (low zoom) shot covering the goal
                        area but as the rest of the sequence and the above comments show it could
                        easily have been zoomed onto pens 3 & 4 if the police had wanted / thought
                        to do so.


It is clear therefore that the evidence given by Bischard to the Inquest was at least inaccurate and
almost certainly would have mis-lead the jury

I am not an expert in CCTV but as I stressed I am very knowledgeable, I am an engineer, technically
qualified, and ran a major security company with hundreds of installations for several years. In fact I
would class myself well above the legal yardstick “of the average person” in respect of CCTV
systems.
I remain firmly of the opinion that the system was working, that the police could see the terraces
well, and that the Inquest jury were shown non-representative samples of video tape and were
misled by the evidence of the police officers. I agree that they should, indeed could, have seen with
the naked eye, but the CCTV was designed to remove any doubt. Indeed I am sure that many
prosecutions have hinged upon its evidential quality images over the years.

                                                                                         Page 21 of 31
Simply put, the Inquest jury were deliberately misled at worst or not helped at best.

 It should have been clear to Inspector Layton and the other West Midlands Video Officers that key
cameras and equipment were working, that additional and better quality video existed and why did
they not speak up when the jury asked. They were acting in the role of Coroners officers and
whether Dr Popper was privy to this knowledge or not you must judge.

In my opinion the video evidence was presented to Taylor and, but more importantly, to the Inquest
jury in a manner deliberately calculated to reduce the degree of recklessness of the police actions.

It is a absolute disgrace and a real matter of public concern that South Yorkshire Police have over
several years tried to fool us and the public with a number of variants of the story of faulty cameras,
then monitors, then interference from outside broadcasts and missing and/or meaningless tapes.

How many times have you sat in court and heard the police present to you and the jury examples of
the villain changing his story as a means of discrediting him. I think South Yorkshire Police can
have absolutely no credibility when measured by this method.


6.0 Police Discipline & Conduct

I have included a number of documents that relate to the very important “public interest” issue of
police discipline. In addition you will see a number of documents that show some of the key
complaints that I and others made in the months after the disaster. These have been included to
ensure you have an understanding of the background and the actual process and result.

I am conscious that a picture may emerge that I am a trouble maker who has gone out of his way to
“hound” the police and I have therefor included some of the correspondence related to
commendations and the acceptance of informal resolution of some of the complaints. I would assure
you that at all time I have tried to act responsibly and have been as fair as possible.

It is very much a matter of regret that at times a tough line has had to be taken in response to the
arrogant attitude and intransigence adopted by South Yorkshire Police. I have many years senior
management experience and have controlled both large and small workforces. Never have I seen
such examples of resistance to facing responsibility. No one likes criticism but face it one must,
especially when at fault. The Police Authority, Chief Constable (both of them) and the senior
officers have all behaved in a manner that is appalling. Taylor commented that they were defensive
and evasive witnesses and in para 285 stated

        “It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions the South Yorkshire
        Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect atfau lt in what occurred ”

and he concluded the same paragraph

        “Such an unrealistic approach gives cause fo r anxiety as to whether lessons have been
        learnt It would have been more seemly and encouraging fo r the future if responsibility
        had been fa ced ”

It is my experience that nothing has changed since Lord Taylor wrote those words. The culture and
hence the practises remain flawed and continue to cause anxiety. The lessons have not been learned
despite Richard Wells appointment or his proclamations that they have.
Let me give some examples: -

      6.1) June 1989 - Pep. Chief Constable Peter Hayes

      In June 1989 DCC Hayes told a press conference that “no further action” was required in
      respect of Chief Supt. Duckenfield. I complained that this pronouncement was improper
      and premature as Lord Justice Taylor was sitting and the West Midlands Police were
      supposedly investigating both internally and for the DPP. (doc 41/1-5) At the time DCC
      Peter Hayes was responsible for discipline within SYP.. Peter Wright wrote to me and said
      that my complaint against Hayes was also a complaint against Duckenfield and that he had
      recorded it. (Doc 41/6) Please bear in mind that Duckenfield had just admitted lying to
      Graham Kelly and others regarding the opening of Gate ‘C \

      In August 1989 the SY Police Authority accepted that what Hayes had said was not what he
      meant and that no further action would be taken, (doc 41/9)

      I submit that the complaint was valid and the real intent of DCC Hayes became clear later
      when the Police Complaints Authority had to force SYP to prefer charges against
      Duckenfield and Murray. (See next item) At the least DCC Hayes should have received a
      reprimand but the Police Authority chose the soft option. That may have been because civil
      and /or criminal action was pending but that is not acceptable.

       6.2) August 1989- October 1991 Chief Supt. Duckenfield & others

       As I stated above the complaint against Hayes constituted a complaint against Duckenfield.
       In respect of this I met with Captain Noel Taylor and ACC Cooper at Northampton Police
       HQ on the 24th August 1989. That meeting led to my formal complaint against the five senior
       officers in charge on the day. (doc 42/2-4) Matters proceeded normally until April 1991
       when I was alerted “by a reliable source” that Richard Wells had recommended no action
       against his officers and that plans were underway to “slide Duckenfield away gracefully”
       I wrote to the Police Complaints authority on 8/4/89 (doc 42/6)with a copy to Wells seeking
       clarification of the situation. The response was brief but reassuring (doc 42/7) On the 23rd
       April 19911 wrote to the PCA again quoting the specific charges under Statutory Instrument
       518-Police ( Discipline) Regulations 1985 that I felt Duckenfield was guilty of.

       On the 11th July 19911 received a letter from Brig. Pownall at the PCA advising that they
        “have used their statutory powers to direct that disciplinary charges be preferred against
       two officers. ” (doc 42/10) On the 25th September 19911 received formal notification that
       the PCA had concluded that no action should be taken against Supt.’s Greenwood or
       Marshall and gave their reasons. Pownall reaffirmed that the Authority had directed charges
       be brought against Duckenfield and Murray and that the tribunal arrangements were a matter
       for the SY Police. He expressed his concern that no hearing arrangements had been set and
       that he had spoken to the Asst Chief Constable and asked him to fix a date and make all
       possible progress in the meantime. (Doc 42/11-13)

       When nothing had happened a month later I wrote an “open letter” (doc 42/14-16) to
       Richard Wells and the PCA asking for action and flagged the approach of Duckenfield’s 90
       day qualification for sickness retirement. On the 29th October Wells announced that he was
       retiring Duckenfield on ill health grounds.(doc 42/17) I issued our response also via a press
       release. (Doc 42/18 & 19)


                                                                                     Page 23 of 31
As you are aware from (lq) earlier I was given an assurance by Wells that charges against
Murray would still be expedited - he later broke that promise.

I submit that this shameless and arrogant manipulation of the rules is typical of South
Yorkshire Police. It is made worse when the Chief Constable breaks his word. No wonder he
has failed to bring about the culture change. It is quite clear that there was never any serious
intent at SYP to discipline Duckenfield and Murray. Even when the PCA directed them to
do so they merely delayed things until the 90 day rule applied. In business or politics a senior
person proven a liar would be dismissed immediately. Little wonder the practise (and the
Chief Constables who allow i t ) provokes such anger and bitterness - and the police service’s
reputation continues to slide.

It is a national problem to which I was first alerted by the PCA 1988 Annual report
(doc43/l) and the retirement comments of Sir Cecil Clothier. Jack Straw, supported by the
other MP’s present in the house when the scrutiny was announced, indicated concern that
new rules were needed but added that the current ones were not being applied properly. I
wholeheartedly agree and these are perfect examples.

It is a disgrace that is unjust and badly in need of correction. It is bad enough to upset and
anger an academic or reformer. Imagine how I, and many of the families feel when it is more
personal than just another unsavoury statistic. Be it administrative convenience, cowardice
or politically motivated it is you personally that is let down, you are the one mocked, your
kin’s memory besmirched. The longer the arrogance and unseemly behaviour continues the
more it breeds utter contempt.

I very much hope that your advice to Mr Straw includes commentary and sweeping action to
bring about change in the police disciplinary system. From the victims perspective (and the
PCA’s) it currently is a sick joke, especially at senior officer level.

6.3 - Commendations etc.

I said earlier that I wanted an opportunity to illustrate that I have also commended Police
Officers and I attach a small selection to illustrate this ( doc 44/1-8) You are aware from our
Liverpool meeting that sadly, I now feel I must withdraw the one relating to Sgt’s
McCrombie and Appleton

I praised Supt Nesbitt who in my opinion was the first police commander to bring any
organisation to the rescue attempts and I publically recognised Richard Wells for being the
first senior member of the South Yorkshire Police to actually say “sorry”.

I don’t know if Mr Bone knows this from first hand, but I have even suffered the wrath of a
couple of Dunblane families when I commented on a radio programme that the senior officer
who had renewed the gun licences “had done the decent thing” in resigning forthwith. I
stand by that comment and despite his dreadful and sadly fatal mistake I think that his act of
resigning is to his credit.

It is a telling fact that no South Yorkshire Police officer has lost “a days wage” over
Hillsborough. Something somewhere must be wrong.




                                                                                 Page 24 of 31
7.0 Peter W right - Resignation Comments Complaints

I have separated Peter Wright, the Chief Constable at the time of the disaster, to enable clarification
of the background to his “offer” of resignation, his eventual resignation and our complaints
regarding his prejudicial remarks to be discussed together. Again these are matters of Public
Interest relating to police behaviour and discipline.

Wright said on the 21st April 1989 that he would accept full responsibility for the action of his
officers and then when Taylor’s damning report was published in August he “offered” to resign. We
were tipped off about the Special meeting of the SYPA and that a deal had possibly been done
between Wright and the late Sir Jack Laydon -Chairman of the SYPA and who incidentally was a
director of Municipal and Mutual Insurance Co. I asked for permission to address the meeting even
if I was not allowed to attend it all. That was refused by Mr. Johnston -Clerk & Financial Officer. I
then wrote my letter of the 14th August (doc 45/1-2) and asked that it be distributed prior to the
meeting.

The offer of resignation was refused as expected. (Docs 43-45)

Again I emphasise the blatant disregard for the public interest, especially in the aftermath of Taylor’s
report which so roundly condemned South Yorkshire Police. As I stated before the boss in politics
or business bears the corporate responsibility and if Wright had any honour he would have resigned
forthwith not merely “offered” to in the knowledge it would be refused. Once again an illustration of
the culture of the Police Authority and of course its local police service.

At the beginning of February !990 the actual resignation of Peter wright was announced and we
welcomed it in my press release of the 5th February 1990. (Doc 46/1-2). Later that day we became
aware of remarks Wright had made during press conferences and interviews. These were in our view
extremely prejudicial to a fair inquest and indicated that the Coroner would right the wrong that
Taylor had done. The Sheffield Star (and many of the nationals) did major features on the story (
docs 46/3 and 46/4) and it would be incredulous to believe that the Jurors did not see it or were not
influenced

Apart from the prejudicial aspect it seemed clear to us that Popper and Wright had been in
discussions regarding the conduct and the content of the soon to be resumed Inquests. We
appreciated that they would work closely together on the normal coronal business associated with
South Yorkshire but these comments indicated something much more than that.

I tried to do things properly ( yet again!) and I lodged a complaint on the 7th February 1990 (doc
46/5-6) with a copy to Dr Popper for “his information.” We were not the only ones outraged by it,
a great deal of ill feeling was created nationally and many people including local politicians added
their dissent.

The due process was gone through and once again the Police Authority concluded, based upon the
report of a fellow Chief Constable, that Wright had “not committed, any criminal or disciplinary
offence”

I would ask that you read the articles as if you were a member of the local public in Sheffield who
was a regular reader of the popular local newspaper. Do you think it would have any influence
upon you, prejudice your opinions. The jurors all came from Sheffield.
Both of us are well aware of how the press can take a chance remark and blow it out of proportion.
But these remarks were made and repeated in formal interviews in a structured PR exercise with
press officers present etc. etc.

I submit that these remarks were deliberately made to be prejudicial, insensitive and once again
illustrate the culture and attitude of the SY Police. Even after claiming he accepted Taylor, both in
the “offered” resignation interviews and in these ones, Wright goes on to claim that “the Coroner
would put it right!”

That hardly sounds like acceptance of the Taylor criticism or that the lessons have been learned


8.0 Sir John “Jack” Laydon

I commented in our meeting that the Municipal and Mutual Insurance were the major insurer
involved with the disaster and you appeared a little doubtful. I am advised that they did insure
South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield City Council, and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. It is
therefore a matter of public interest that the late Sir Jack Laydon was also a director of that
insurance company.

It is my belief that many of the actions relating to police culpability, discipline etc. were improperly
influenced by this connection. Sir Jack was a powerful local figure, Chairman of the Police
Authority, Association of Metropolitan Authorities, Leader of Rotherham Council etc. etc. - and an
ex-miner who was “not one to be messed with”

In 1988, prior to the disaster, Sir Jack was reminded by legal staff of Rotherham Council that he
should not get involved in matters relating to the MMI without declaring an interest. (See doc 47/1
& 2) As far as I am aware Sir Jack did not declare this interest or modify his role in any way
throughout the proceedings post Hillsborough and that was wrong.

Even if no illegal act was committed then morally and ethically it was very wrong. It is also
unreasonable to even suggest that it failed to influence the decision making and management
processes.


9.0 Taylor Report

I have stated publically many times and have said directly to you that in the round Taylor did a first
class job under extremely trying circumstances. There are matters with which I would disagree, but
generally I feel he got it right.

I am also well aware of your position visa via Taylor and his findings.

I do think however that some matters fell at the boundary, even outside his terms of reference and
were therefore not fully dealt with. I do not intend to reiterate them here, especially as we have
highlighted them to you in group submissions.

It would be wrong however to believe that the aftermath has been looked at in depth by Taylor or
indeed anyone else. Taylor was charged with examining the causes and Popper concentrated on re­
running Taylor and then cut off at 3 .15 pm.
I attach as doc 50/1 chapter 21 of the Taylor Interim Report and draw your attention to para 301.
I agree fully with his comment:- “It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were” and with “the time when police rescue began ” (with emphasis on
delayed response)
but disagree strongly with the supposition “....it is improbable that quicker recourse to the
emergency services would have saved more lives.

It is my view, especially with what I have learned since the disaster, that some lives could and should
have been saved.

Section 12 later gives many examples of shortcomings in procedures and equipment that were
perhaps not known to Taylor.

10.0    Dr Usher and “Withdrawn” Report

Again for the record I have enclosed a copy of our copy of the report Usher produced and which
was the subject of a major exercise to recover it. ( doc 49) I commented under 1,0a above about
our intrigue as to why it warranted such a fuss, a factor in our decision to make sure we kept a
copy.

If one examines the whole thing, it is clear that it is approaching the “analysis” with a strong and
pre-determined objective. No self respecting scientist or statistician would put their name to
“research” of this type. One is supposed to do the work, get the results, analyse them
dispassionately and then draw your conclusions. I respectfully submit that this piece of work
reversed that process and is unsound.

I was advised in the very early days after the disaster that it is normal to carry out Methanol tests as
a broadly based test for substance or solvent abuse. Ethanol based tests were used after
Hillsborough and these I am advised are more specifically aimed at alcohol detection. This indicates
what the purpose was - not normal procedures but a “check for drink”

I do not intend to dwell on the blood alcohol subject and actually hold the view that the tactic was
counter-productive. What I am trying to illustrate is the attitude and bias that was clearly in the
minds of those driving the “investigation”.

Finally, I would like to draw your attention to doc 49/27 which is page 44 of the coroners summing
up to the jury. I have tried to relate it to what Usher actually reported on page 7 of his report (doc
49/7) without success.

 It is my view that Popper’s summary was confusing at best and in fact he was guilty of misleading
the jury at this point.


11.0 Coroners Conduct / Impartiality / Capability

Again I will be brief as you are already aware of our position on Dr Poppers conduct and our
concerns from group submissions. I did promise some documents relating to this and they are
attached as doc 48. They supplement documents 5-12 already referred to above

Doc 48/1-2 is my letter to Popper dated 24th August 1990 and placed on the record our concerns
with the Inquest procedures. In particular the way the “non-controversial” mini inquests were later

                                                                                         Page 27 of 31
converted to adversarial bt the Coroner without a proper chance of redress by us. It recorded our
concerns at the accuracy of the summaries ( a point I trust I have adequately demonstrated above)
and the selective evidence presentation.

Doc 48/3-10 are included to illustrate to you how we were duped into allowing the proceedings to
go on without full information disclosure, how our lawyers and ourselves sought such information
and were denied it “because of the DPP” etc.

I submit that the Coroner set out to re-write Taylor, was preoccupied with drink, and was far from
impartial. He mis-managed the conduct of the procedures and did less than Taylor in twice the time.
It is clear to me that he was “out of his depth” and not up to the task he undertook - especially when
he used the procedures to try and re-write the findings of an Inquiry conducted extremely
professionally by more capable people.

This is apparently true with most cases involving multiple death disaster, and I know from my
discussions with other disaster groups that this a widely held viewpoint. The Coroner is effectively
able to do what he likes and the deceased’s relatives views and moral rights are ignored or worse
still over-ridden, especially by strong minded Coroners,

I have seen the report of the Home Office - Disasters and Inquests Working Group and are therefore
aware that these procedures are under review. We do not agree with all of the detail especially with
the proposed range of verdicts but concur with the spirit of reform. You indicated a similar view and
that you “ might add a bit of weight to that.”

I submit to you that the Coroner failed, for a number of reasons, to impartially and properly conduct
the inquest procedures and that the verdict of accidental death is thus unsound and should be
quashed.


12.0   Disaster Plan. Medical Inadequacies and Doctors Comments

I attach as docs 50/2-9 eight pages of comment and quotations from specialists, doctors, medics, fire
fighters and fellow professionals in the emergency services who had first hand knowledge and
involvement with the disaster. This summary clearly shows that many features of the enactment and
implementation of the disaster plan and the immediate rescue response was flawed, fatally so.

Many of the points have been made to you already, either directly or by way of transcripts,
statements etc. and I see no purpose in commenting on them individually here.

This list was compiled purely from the material that has been handled through our office in recent
weeks and is clearly not as exhaustive as it could be. Many body files have not been sought and
hundreds possibly thousands more statements remain undisclosed. Extrapolating these results
would clearly produce a very thick file indeed.

I respectfully submit that even this summary is compelling evidence that lives could and should have
been saved.




                                                                                       Page 28 of 31
