                                            iy^''C>oi>E>fiRC>-
                                                2 5 APR ig|g




   1 0 , D o w n in g S t r e e t ,
        HITEHALL       S.W. 1


Please see amended
name in para. 2




With the Private Secretary's

        Compliments

                                      i■I
Andrew Turnbull                       jj
                                                  CONFIDENTIAL ^       ^          .
                                                                       tyU CrcuLOk.

                                                                       ftVYaJtca
                                                                       ft\c, CVxVoA-
                                                                    PfVr- C t\o rtajrtu -
                                           lO D O W N IN G S T R E E T ^ ' ^ 3 * SrfuH*.
                                               LONDON SW1A2AA                  G ^ d l£ o ir & ^ ®   1989
    From the Principal Private Secretary                           ,         21 A p r i l 1 9 8 9    / H- /
                                                                           TTS«~-, (Y\©v$e/r
                                                                           fA r-. G v lb ^ jrt’
                                                                           W<" U lW le ^
                                                                                  Uc dLUN0Voy\,
                                      FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

          Following Questions yesterday it was put to the Prime
*    Minister that the Government needed to have an answer if it
     were asked what it would do should, unexpectedly, Lord
     Justice Taylor take a different view on membership cards
     from Mr. Justice Popplewell.  It was argued that the
     Government needed to be able to demonstrate that proceeding
     with the Bill did not put the Government past the point of
     no return on the membership scheme.

          The answer might be that the Government would certainly
     have to give Lord Justice Taylor's views serious
     consideration; indeed there would be a presumption that it
     would not proceed in the face of such advice.  If it decided
     not to proceed the Government could decide not to lay the
     Order approving the scheme.

          The difficulty would be that the Bill requires the
     Football Membership Authority to draw up a scheme and it
     could be left in the position of still being required to do
     this even though the Government had stated that it was not
     proceeding. Would it be possible to add to the Bill the
     provision that the Football Membership Authority would
     prepare a scheme "if so directed by the Secretary of State"?

          All this may be hypothetical (more likely than a firm
     recommendation against membership cards would be a set of
     conditions that had to be satisfied) but it nonetheless
     seems worth preparing an answer to such a question.

              I would be grateful for advice on this point.

          I       am copying this letter to Roger Bright (Department of
     the Environment), Colin Walters (Home Office), Steven
     Catling (Lord President's Office), Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy
     Seal's Office) and Murdo Maclean (Chief Whip's Office).

                                                         Y ew ,


                                                         (ANDREW TURNBULL)


     Philip Stamp, Esq.,
     Office of the Minister for Sport.
                               CONFIDENTIAL
      / " h i >**»£.                                               S H-^   u^r€L^€l‘-Sfc.   Q5£ J . ' 2 5 APR
                 5428                                                                                m.n
                                                            i) :




                    m                                              To
                            announced as candidates, together wifi the number of staff in each agency or
                            prospective agency.
                    87                             , Govan): To ask
                            are the rights of access to centrally and
                            was adopted; and what is the statutory basis upon which an adopted person am
                            seek and obtain information about birt t
                    88 Mr Jin Sfflars (Glasgow, Govan): To
                        Commonwealth Affairs, what is the legal bam of the pewm under which
                        European Community member states requite nationals Irem other European
                        Community states to produce a valid p issport before permitting entry; and how
                                                                 tg e European Act.
                        this practice will be affected by the Sing
                    89 MrTomPeitdiy(StalybridgeandHyde): ro ask the Secretary of State tor the Home
                        Department, whidh local education authorities have successfully applied for
                        funding under section 11 of the Local Covemment Act 1966 for new youth work
                        posts in the last five years, specifying fo - each authority the year in which section
                        11 funding was approved.
                    90 Mr Dafydd Wigley (Caernarfon): To as) the Secretary of State f or Education and
                        Science, on what date his Department a|fc
                                                              liked for a copy of the independent inquiry
                        report into Beaumont College; on what <ate that report was received; and if he will
                        make a statement
                       91 Mrs Ann Taylor (Dewsbuiy): To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security, how
                           manywomen who were in receipt ofwid< wed mothere allowance before September
                           1988 would have received a full widows >ension if the qualifying age had not been
                           raised by five years.
                       92 Mrs Gillian Shephard (South West Norf<<jlk): To ask the Secretary of State for
                           Wales, what is the definition of a small school for the purposes of Welsh Office
                           Circular 36/88.
                       93 Mrs Ann Taylor (Dewsbury): To ask the ! iecretary of State for Social Security, how
                           many widows suffered a lowering of then income as a result ofthe qualiying age for
                           widows pension being raised by five yea: s in September 1988.
                       94 Mr Bruce George (Walsall South): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
         f'                Department, if he has had discussions with the West Midlands Police over the
                           percentage of the costs of the inquiry being undertaken by its officers into the
                           Hillsborough disaster to be borne by central ftmdmg.
                       95 Mr Brace George (Walsall South): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
          ■ft-             Department, if he can estimate the number of police officers’ to be involved within
                           the West Midlands Police into the Hillsborough inquiry.
                       96 Jo Richardson (Barking): To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science,
                            what representations he has received on 1
•f-                         the proposed loans scheme, too up loans ori
                            entering higher education; and whel I e wifl make a statement.
                       97    Richardson (Barking): To ask the Seer tary of State for the Home Department,
                            what guidelines are issued to medical pm titioneiswithreganf to pregnant women
                            and qualification criteria for a postal vot
                                                                   SSter c a p y 2 l
                                                  Fg                                                     APR 1989
No. 93              Notices of Questions: 26th April 1989                        5519

   14 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   W Home Department, what plans he has 10 improve electoral registration in
       Kensington and Chelsea, Manchester, Li’nferpool, Bristol and Rochester upon
       Medway.
   15 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   W Home Department, if he will list the perceAtage change in the numbers on local
       government electoral registers between 19 58 and 1989 in: (a) Kensington and
       Chelsea, (b) Manchester, (c) Liverpool, (d) Bristol and Rochester upon Medway;
       and if he will make a statement.
   16 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   W Home Department, what discussions he has had with the Football Supporters
       Association since the Hillsborough tragedy; and if he will make a statement.
   17 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
   W Scotland, if he will list the percentage chang e in the numbers on local government
       electoral registers between 1987 and 1989 it : (a) Edinburgh City and (b) Glasgow
       City; and if he will make a statement.
   18 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
   W Scotland, if he will list the percentage chai ijtge in the numbers on parliamentary
       elcetoral registers between 1987 and 1989 ijn Aberdeen, Dundee, Edinburgh and
       Glasgow; and if he will make a statement.
   19 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
   W Scotland, what plans he has to improve elcetroral registration in Aberdeen,
       Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow.
   20 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   W Environment, what discussions he has ield with the Football Supporters
       Association since the Hillsborough tragedy and if he will make a statement.
   21 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
   W Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, whit reports he has received from Her
       Majesty’s Ambassador to the People’s Rej ublic of China on recent student and
       workers unrest; and if he will make a stater utent.
    22 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
    W Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, w tat representations he has received
        concerning the application by the Palesti le Liberation Organisation for their
        observer status at the World Health Crganisation to be turned into full
        membership; and if he will make a statemei t.
    23 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
    W Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Whatl representations he has received from
                                                    1V^/4WV1AVMMV«U UV          - — ------------------

        Amnesty International concerning the deat i penalty overseas; and if he will make
        a statement.
    24 Mr Harry Barnes (Derbyshire North East): To ask the Secretary of State for
    W Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, what representations he has received
        concerning Turkey’s entry to the EEC; and if he will make a statement.
