                                             12



                                                                                                l& u . $*-)

            MR. COLLINS:              Sir, I wonder if I could help about
      P.C. Houson, b e c a u s e the p r o b l e m was that when we wanted
      to call him we learnt t h a t he was ill and unable to attend
      and I t h i n k we did not k n o w when he was likely to be better
      and t h e r e f o r e I d e c i d e d to leave it open for the moment to
      see w h e t h e r we w ould be in a p o s i t i o n to call him because
      his e v i d e n c e about the gate was in c o n t r a d i c t i o n to that
      of - I think it was - P.C. Il l i n g w o r t h who dealt with
      Gate 4.

                 LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:          He did.

                MR. COLLINS:        And in those c i r c u m s t a n c e s I was
      e f f e c t i v e l y hanging on and it is p o s sible we might be
      able to call him in due c o u r s e if it is c onsidered important.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:            Can I leave it to you to raise
      the m a t t e r again, e i t h e r by calling him or telling me that
      he cannot be called and we can look at the s t atement or
      not.

           MR. COLLINS:   That is p r e c i s e l y what I was proposing
      to do and I am sorry I did not make it clear at an earlier
      stage.

                 LORD JUSTICE         TAYLOR:        Thank you.            Yes?

                              CHIEF    I N S P E C T O R M c R O B B I E , called

     /,        MR. PHILLIPS:   Sir, in the case of this w i t n e s s I
          really only intend to d eal with the ma t t e r w hich appears
          at the foot of page 9 of his statement.

                                   Examined       by MR.     PHILLIPS:

Q.        You are C h i e f I n s p e c t o r McRobbie,        is that right?
          A.   That is correct, sir.

Q. And you were present, I think, on the occasion of                                     this
   match' but in p lain c l o t h e s . A. Yes, sir.

Q.        Were you w e a r i n g a b l a z e r and l i g h t - c o l o u r e d      flannel
          trousers?      A.      That is correct.

Q.        And I think you w ere t h e r e really to observe how things were
          c o ndu c t e d ; is that so ? A.That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.        You had r e c e n t l y bee n p o s t e d to F D i v i s i o n as a Chief
          I nspector.        A.     That is correct.

Q.        You s p e n t a lot of t i m e in dif f e r e n t parts of the ground
          and r ound about o u t s i d e , did  you not?        A.  P r i o r to the
          game I did, sir, yes.

Q.        And t here c ame a time,            I think, when you were in the
          C o n t r o l Room i t s e l f ?    A.   Yes, sir.
                                                        419
                                       13

                                                                   MR. McROBBIE


Q.     Towards 3 o ' c l o c k ? A. Yes, I was in before that but
       that is correct, I was in the Cont r o l Room prior to
       3 o'clock.

Q.     I want you to c o n c e n t r a t e   your mind, if you will, on the
       time about 3 o ' c l o c k w h e n    the game was about to get under
       way.    A.  Yes.

Q. You were able to see out of the Cont r o l                  Room windows,       were
   you?    A.  That is c o r r e c t , sir, yes.

Q. Were you able to see across to the terraces, the Leppings
   Lane terraces?   A.   Yes, indeed.   I had a clear view.

Q. Were you standing at the front of the Control Box then
       or were you --- ?         A.    There were people in front of me.
       I was s t a n d i n g in the C o n t r o l Box - the centre of the
       Cont r o l Box - with the o p e r a t o r s in front of me but I was
       st a n d i n g at the side and c ould see over their heads quite
       clearly.

Q. What is it that you s a w ?                      A.      What h a p p e n e d there was
      that one of the p e r i m e t e r gates was opened.                        I believe it
      was Pen 3.         I am not t h a t f a m i l i a r with the ground so you
      must excuse me on that.                     And pe o p l e began coming out on
      to the p e r i m e t e r track and they were m o v i n g towards the
      Cont r o l Box where in the                pen or area, if I may call            it
      a pen, under the C o n t r o l             Box there was plenty of space.
      This was evident.               A c c e s s into and out of this area
      through the p e r i m e t e r f ence is by a steel gate.                       There
   /. was  a Police lady on the steel gate where there was access
  '     into space.           The fans w e r e co m i n g out of the gate in the
      pen you have d e s c r i b e d and were moving towards her and
      then, s e e m i n g l y , s i t t i n g d own on the track as if they were
      going to tfatch the f o o t b a l l .                I sensed that this Police
      lady had not opened the g ate or sensed that that she should
      open the gate to really a l l e v i a t e the pressure within the
      cent r a l pens and to            d i s t r i b u t e the fans into the area
      where there was, in fact, s pace                       for them to be accommodated.

Q.               L O F D J U S T I C E TAYLOR: Do I gather you say you were
       s t a n d i n g an the steps of the box?        A. No, I     was inside
       the C o n t r o l Room l o o k i n g out of the window., sir.

(J.—          MR. PHILLIPS:         Did      you l eave the Control Box then?
       A.     Yes.

Q. Did you do so of your o w n a c c o r d or following instru c t i o n s ?
   A.        It was a s i m u l t a n e o u s act, I w ould say.    I sensed
   that the Po l i c e lady p r o b a b l y did not have a radio because
   it is not usual;              it is u s u a l l y radio issues are down to
   s u p e r v i s o r y Officers, so she w o u l d not be able to be
   c o m m u n i c a t e d w ith and sh e was on her own down there, so
   I v o l u n t e e r e d to go at t h e same time as Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d
   said, "Go and assist thfit P o l i c e lady and open the gate
   and a s s i s t the fans wh o are" on the per i m e t e r track into
   the a rea w here t here is s p a c e " and that is what I did,
       sir.                                      420
                                      14


                                                               MR. McROBBIE


Q.   This is C o n s t a b l e R i c h a r d s o n , in fact, the P o l i c e w o m a n
     that you are s p e a k i n g o f ---             A.     I will accept what you
     say.   I do not know.                 I can d e s c r i b e her as the Police
     lady with b lond hair.

Q.   That is right.          Were t h e r e other Offic e r s by the other
     gates on the p e r i m e t e r t r a c k at this time?      A.      Yes,
     indeed.       By the c e n t r a l pens, yes, but towards the Control
     Box there was just this y o u n g lady manning the gate in
     her pr o p e r position.          T h e r e was no other Police Officers
     round her and so really 1 went down to tell her to open
     the gate b e c a u s e 1 did not think that c o m m u n i c a t i o n had
     been passed to her, to a l l o w these people who were coming
     on to the p e r i m e t e r t r a c k to gain access into where there
     was space.

Q.   She said, you see, in evi d e n c e , that you did not in fact
     speak to her at all but she opened the gate of her own
     accord when she saw t h e s e pe o p l e approaching.               Are you
     sure about t h a t ?              A.    I am absol u t e l y sure.  The
     d i f f i c u l t y p e r h a p s she m a y have had is know i n g me.   As
     you have r i g h t l y said, I am new to the D i v i s i o n and I
     was in p lain c l o t h e s so I w ould not be readily i d e n t i f i a b l e
     as a Police Officer, a l t h o u g h I did rush down and say, "Open
     that gate and let the fans in.                    I am a Police O f f icer."
     Now, in the hea t of the m o m e n t t h a t may have been lost
     on her, sir.




                                                    /But at all e v e n t s    she....




                                                121
                             15

                                    MR. MCROBBIE


Q. But at all events she did open the gate? - A. Absolutely
   yes.

Q. Very rapidly? - A. Yes.

Q. And fans started to move into Pen 1? - A. Yes. By this
   time they were coming out of the area in the central pen
   and moving towards there but then stopping and sitting
   on the edge.

Q. Did these people look to be in distress? - A. At the time
   it was quite clear that they had come through a difficult
   area where there had been a pressure to get through the
   gate and people were milling through. This is the perception
   I had. They were not in a difficult state but they were
   quite clearly agitated. Now for whatever reason they were
   reluctant to want to go where they were being directed and
   obviously now I can understand that quite clearly.

Q. Were they coming out of both Pen 3 and Pen 4 or just one
   of them? - A. I can't say sir. All I could see I was
   between Pen 2 and Pen 3. I never went beyond that so I
   can't see beyond that because of the milling people.

Q. It was said that you in fact were stood on the touchline
   or just On the pitch ushering the people along towards
   Gate 1. Is that right? - A. Yes, I was on the perimeter
   track but it was very clear that more and more people
   were coming through on to the perimeter track and were
   converging in an area behind the goal and coming on to
 / the grass. People had begun to flow away and in fact
   the Policewoman was directing them into the space which
   was the intention of me leaving the Control Room.
   Because o£-"the sheer volume of numbers of people coming
   out of that central pen I then went behind and positioned
   myself on the goal-line in between the hoardings to prevent
   encroachment on to the playing area basically.

Q. Was the game still in progress then? - A. Indeed sir, yes.

         MR. PHILLIPS:   Thank you very much.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. HYTKER:

Q. Mr. McRobbie, I would like you just to answer some questions
   in relation to a little earlier time.

         We know something like 4-5 minutes elapsed between
   Mr. Marshall first of all asking for the gates to be opened
   and the gates being ordered to be opened.

         What I v/ould like to do is see if you can add to our
   store of knowledge as to what was happening in the Control
   Room in that period of 4-5‘minutes.

                                  422
                                    MR. MCROBBIE


        You have there Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray,
  Mr. Duckenfield in overall charge, Mr. Murray the Commander
  in the ground? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. What discussion or conversation passed between Mr. Duckenfield
   and Mr. Murray during that period which considered the advisa­
   bility of acceding to Mr. Marshall*s request? - A. Forgive
   me sir, your 45 minutes, can you give me a starting time.
   I mean we have just been at 3 o'clock. Are you saying 2.15?

Q. Sorry, 4-5, not 45? - A. I beg your pardon.

Q. We know that Mr. Marshall first requested the gates to be
   opened at 2.47? - A. That is correct.

Q. He then raade a further request and then yet another? - A. Yes.

Q. Then on the third request everyone agrees with your recollection,
   that Mr. Duckenfield as it were said aloud: "Well if people
   are going to be killed outside we had better open the gates"?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. What I want to know is in your statement you make the comment:
   "Mr. Duckenfield was deeply considering Mr. Marshall's
   request"? - A. Absolutely.

Q. what I want to know is what conversation took place or what
     discussion took place between Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield
     or anybody else, as to the issues involved, the advisability
  ,, of acceding to or rejecting Mr. Marshall's unusual request?
 /■' - a. Yes, I take the point you are making. I think in
     fairness to this scenario I must take you back a little
     further than the time you are mentioning there when I think
     you will^ind I no doubt sowed a seed when I was watching
     a monitor which gave a visual display of Gate C, as I
     believe it is, whoil could see people climbing over the
     wall and it was my perception that that gate that was visible
     on the monitor had been forced. I in fact said: "The gate
     has been forced" because prior to that there had been
     requests or we had information rather than requests, that
     there was a tremendous pressure outside Leppings Lane and
     there was a request for the gates to be opened.

         It was at that stage that I was looking on the monitor
   because you can't see the area direct from where I was
   positioned and I alerted the Control Room staff saying that
   the gates had been forced. That was my perception because
   I saw this influx of people coming through that gate; then
   I saw a Police horse position itself across the gate which
   allowed the gate to be reclosed and stopped that flow of
   people. That would be round about the tine that you are
   asking me to consider and I think it is important that I
   bring that forward, so the gates had in fact been opened
   and fans had come in. That was simultaneously or as near
   abouts as when Superintendent Marshall was making his

                                 423
                               17

                                         MR. MCROBBIE


        requests for the gates to be opened.

              I have seen since, and I am really speaking from ray
        recollection, but 1 have seen since that there was in fact
        I believe something like a five minute gap between the
        gates being opened again. In reality by being present
        in that Control Room really I must tell the Inquiry that
        people who weren't in that situation can ever understand
        the enormity of that situation. There was a request being
        made for something that was totally out of strategy of the
        Police controlling the fans at that game, so it was a
        very grave decision and that is why I said in my impression
        Hr. Duckenfield was very deeply considering‘dare, or should
        I make this decision" which is so far outside the bounds of
        the normal policing arrangements for control of the
        supporters.

              There was a period of time when I think: "Has that
        influx of supporters through that gate alleviated the
        pressure which was being described by communication into
        the Control Room?” Again ---

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I think the only question was
        whether there v/as any conversation that you can recall,
        may be you can't, I don't know, but at the moment you
        are telling us what you conceive to have been the thinking.

q   .       MR. HYTNER: Mr. McRobbie, I don't want you to feel
      that there is any trap in my question. - A. I am not
    v thinking that.

Q. Can I make it clear what the thrust of the question is
   so that you don't fear a trap.
                y
              If somebody is asked for a decision, a Comnanding
        Officer, and there is silence for five minutes and then
        the answer is given, there are two distinct possibilities..
        One is that the Commanding Officer has been dithering for
        five minutes, the other is that he has been deeply considering
        all the issues. Do you follow? - A. Yes.

Q. Now if there is silence people have got to draw a conclusion,
   but if during that five minutes he is considering orderly
   and considering with somebody else and seeking advice and
   there is an exchange of views, we need to know. Was there
   any exchange of views? Was there any discussion other than
   Mr. Murray’s question right at the end: "Mr. Duckenfield,
   are you going to open the gates?" Was there anything that
   you can recall that v/as actually said? - A. I felt it
   necessary to sort of paint the picture, forgive me my Lord,
   but you are talking about "dithering". There v/as a con­
   sidered deep thinking consideration.

              Now Mr. Murray and Mr. Duckenfield were speaking,
        but as to the contents of what they were saying I cannot
        say. There was conversation aiwiithe decision was being
                            18

                                      MR. MCROBBIE


     discussed and really what I have said in there that there was
     a further request from Mr. Marshall about: "If you don't
     open the gates then we are going to have injuries or loss
     of life or death” or something of that nature, and that
     took out all the other considerations from any discussion,
     the previous reasons why the decision had been refused,
     about the segregation, the control, once people started
     talking about the enormity and the seriousness of the
     situation outside and what I was going to say, my Lord,
     was one could not see the actual gate from the camera
     view. All you got was a host of people. You could not
     see into the gates because of the wall by the turnstiles,
     so when that information was passed then the enormity
     of the situation became evident and that is when Hr. Murray
     said: "Well are we going to open the gates?" because there
     had been discussion, I am sorry I can't tell you the content
     of that discussion, and at which stage Mr. Duckenfield said:
     "Well this is the situation, we must open the gates".

Q. Is it that you cannot remember or that you could not hear what
   was being said between them? - A. There v/as so much activity,
    it was just not a quiet Control Room v/here one could over­
    hear a conversation. There was the Tannoy working; there
   was the cheering of the crowd; there was the Radio Operator
   working and there was Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray talking,
    so within all 'that there.was conversation but I cannot tell
   you the content and it would be wrong of me to try.


 i
                   Cross-Examined
                       _
                                  by
                                   - MR. JACKSON:
 i



Q. Mr. McRobbie, I take it before when you went as an observer,
   you had a brief look at the order of the day? - A. That is
   correct $ilr, yes.

Q. You probably would not need to know. One of the fundamental
   matters the Police have to concern themselves with is pre­
   venting people encroaching on the playing pitch? - A. Well
   indeed, yes.

Q. If I can take you moments forward from the matters you have
   discussed and answered questions about already.

           You saw the concertina gates open, the middle of page 9
     sir of his statement, and you say this in your statement and
     I remind you:

           "I became aware of a perimeter track gate
           being opened and people being let onto the
           track out of the pen behind the goal and
           ushered and pointed in the direction of the
           part where there was still plenty of space."

     A. Yes sir.


                                   425
                            19

                                      MR. MCROBBIE



Q. Mr. McRobbie, that is a very very important paragraph.
   First of all do you remember making the statement con­
   taining in it that paragraph? - A. I do indeed, yes sir.

Q. Was it as you remembered? - A. We are talking about people
   being let out of the central area behind the goals, ushered
   to a direction in front of the Control Box where there was
   space.

Q. Yes, now Mr. McRobbie, that means, does it not, that
   everything you knew about policing made it quite obvious
   to you in the Control Room that this was not a pitch
   invasion, this was a crowd safety manoeuvre undertaken
   by Police Officers? - A. Yes, I would agree with that.

Q. Did you communicate your impression to anyone in the
   Control Room? Mr. McRobbie, this is not a game, let me
   explain the position: every single Police Officer has
   come along here to say that doing their very best they
   did not realise that it was not public order it was public
   safety, until very many many minutes after it appears now
   you did realise the true position? - A. I don't think I
   have ever suggested, or I hope I have not suggested, that
   it was anything other than that sir.

Q. No, you haven't.but everyone else has? - A. Oh I am sorry,
    I beg your pardon. We11 obviously I have not heard what
    others have said. My impression that that gate was
    opened to relieve the pressure to allow people to cone
  t to an area where there was space. I think that is what
 • I have said.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE'TAYLOR: At what stage did that
     impressiori form itself? - A. When people were coming out,
     the game had started and people were coming out on to
     the perimeter track.

Q. Yes, but were you still in the Control Roon or had you
   gone down to the corner or what? - A. Ho, I was in the
   Control Room at this time, sir.

Q.         MR. JACKSON: Mr. McRobbie, did you feel it part
     of your duty to communicate your opinion to your colleagues
     in the Control Room? - A. I think by the fact that I v/as
     going out to open the gate and as I said it was simultaneous
     that we felt the Police lady on the gate did not know what
     action was expected of her, that the people around me in
     the Control Room formed the same opinion but I did not
     communicate that to them.

Q. Did you assume, quite naturally, that those others in the
   Control Room who were looking would have formed the same
   view that you formed? - A. Yes.

           MR. JACKSOU:   Thank you, Mr. McRobbie.

                                     426
                             20


                                      frlR. MCROBBIE


                 Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIP5TIS:

Q. Mr. McRobbie, do you have your statement in front of you?
   - A. I have a copy.

Q. When was the statement made? - A. I don't know when it is
   dated. What it is, it is a transcript of a handwritten
   note which I made following the events, sir, which obviously
   recoUects thoughts and feelings and this sort of thing.

Q. Would you   turn to page 5 pleased‘"At the bottom of page 5
   you refer   to an incident which drew the attention of -the
   Assistant   Chief Constable (Operations) . Is that Mr'. Jackson?
   - A. That   is correct sir, yes.

Q. You say:

         "Police Constable Bichard operated the camera
         and I watched him to be able to zoom onto
         him which I thought was a super facility for
         spotting troublemakers in the crowd."

   A. That is correct, sir.

Q. No difficulty with the picture at all? - A. Well when you
   say "no difficulty"- it-certainly brought this person
   closer to us than I think it would have been possible
   for a Police Officer to select the correct person
   that Control were identifying without any problem.

Q'; That is the whole purpose of it, isn't it? - A. I would
    think so sir, yes.

Q. Page 7 oiKyour statement please, Mr. McRobbie. Four lines
   from the bottom you refer to the first request from
   Superintendent Marshall. You say:

         "The gates we re not authorised to be opened
         by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield at this
         time."

   A. That is correct.

Q. What did he say? - A. He said basically he could not open
   the gates because they would lose the control of who
   was admitted because it was an all ticket game; that they
   would lose the control which would transfer problems
   inside if people were carrying weapons or things that
   they should not have been carrying basically.




                            /Q. You recall him saying
                                     427
                           21



                                             MR. MCROBBIE

Q. You recall him saying that, do you? - A . I do, indeed.

Q. To whom did he say it? - A. When I say it was to whom - it
   was a discussion with crowd Commander Mr. Murray.

Q. And having said that did he then respond through the radio
   operator to the request from Superintendent Marshall? - A.
   I am not sure, sir. I honestly could not say.

Q. I did not catch that. I am sorry. - A. I do not know if
   that message was transmitted or not, sir. I am sorry.

Q. Page 8 of your statement, please, Mr. McRobbie,half-way
   down, you refer to the next request from Superintendent
   Marshall, request the gates to be opened. You say in
   your statement, "This is a general request." Why did
   you write that? - A. Because he said the gates, you know,
   open the gates. It was not open Gate whatever. It was
   open the gates.

Q. You describe the discussion between Mr. Duckenfield and
   Mr. Murray about whether or not the gates should be opened
   after the third request from Superintendent Marshall. Was
   the discussion about gates in general? - A. Indeed.

0.. Or one gate in -particular.? “A. No, all the gates at. .the■
    Leppings Lane end.     . . .

Q. You recall those words, do you, Mr. McRobbie? - A. I
   suppose the reverse is true, sir. There was never any
 / discussion about any particular gate.   It was the gates.

Q.    Did you take part in that discussion?- A. Not an active
     part, no^,-sir, but I was present when it took place.

Q.   What does that mean? - A. Well, I was    present when it was
     there. I was not consulted.

Q. Did you take part? Did you offer any advice ? - A. Not
   at that stage, sir, no.

Q. Having heard Mr. Duckenfield when the first request was
   made refer to the difficulties^that would occur if the
   gates were open did you think it might be pertinent to
   offer some advice as to what might be done to make sure
   that the fans inside once the gates were opened were
   channelled into some direction? - A. Again you must for­
   give me for - with, sort of, having only taken part - you
   have heard at the outset that I was a new member to the
   Division and really I was surrounded by professional
   people who do this day in and day out and it was no part
   of mine as a person there as an observer to start telling
   these professional people what they should and should not
   do, sir.

Q. So you did not say anything? - A. No, sir.
                                   428
                              22


                                                    MR. MCROBBIE


Q.   Did you think   it? - A. No.

Q.   You did not. - A. I was watching the action taking place
     rather than consciously thinking well, I should do this,
     I would have done that.

Q.    And did any of the other professional people who do this
     dayin and day out surrounding Mr. Duckenfield offer any
     opinion at all as to what might be done as regards the
     inside of the ground if the gate were to be opened? - A.
     Not that I am aware of, sir, no.

          MR. KALLIPETIS:     Thank you.

                 Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Q.Chief Inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was
   that which was showing the scene on.the terraces, was it?
   - A. It was able to pick out someone directly under the
   control box, yes, but I do not know where the camera is
   sited. I am sorry.

Q.   You are quite sure that v/as the camera that was being used,
     the one that shows the scene on the terraces? -A. I cannot
     speak about a camera. All I can say is on the monitor, a
     person was' able to be enlarged.
Q. You might be able to help us if you can remember by
   chance whether it was black and white or colour. - A.
 t It was black and white.

Q. Black and white. Thank you very much. You realised that
   Police were attempting to relieve pressure in the central
   pens? -    Yes.

Q. When you were still in the control box? - A. Yes. That
   became evident when people came on to the pitch. That
   was the first indication that I had. When people came
   on to the pitch that is what I thought they were doing.

Q. And you left the control box to sort out the position
   generally? - A. No, that is wrong.

Q. Sorry. - A. I left the control box to have an access gate
   opened or an entrance gate opened to allow people back
   into an area ....

Q. I can cut you short. You were solely concerned to draw
   the attention of the Policewoman who you thought had not
   appreciated what v/as going on?-A. My intention was to go
   down, get that gate open, allow people to through there
   and return to the control box.

Q. Can you remember how you got there, Chief Inspector? - A.


                                    429
                            23


                                               MR. MCROBBIE

     Yes. I went down the steps by the control box and then
     was able to walk down the uncovered seating and climb
     over the wall where that gate is.

Q. Yes. So you came down “ .if we could just, with Mr. Poole's
   help - you came down beside ____ - A. Yes.

Q. Just outside __     - A. That is correct.

Q.   And    I expect youhave seen   yourself on the video. - A.
     Indeed.

Q. And     we see you    standing in    the corner beside    the Policelady
   for some tine. - A. Trying to get the people to go through,
   that is correct, sir.

Q. Yes. Again, I an not being offensive but there was quite a
   forceful confrontation between you and sone of the people
   who were sitting on the ground at that stage? - A. They
   were wanting to sit on the ground to watch the gane.

Q. I am not criticising you, Inspector. - A. And all I was
   doing was try and encourage them to go. When you say
   "forceful" ___

Q. Well, there was_ physical pushing and shoving and I think
   the Policewoman thinks a bit of bad language but nothing
   very extreme? - A. I think that is quite understandable.

Q. Perfectly. But what I wanted your help with is the time.
  / 1 think I an right in saying that the tine on the video -
    and I will be corrected if I am wrong and we can look
    at it possibly over the short ,adjournment - is 2.59 when
    you got dojm there? - A. I am sorry, sir. As for timings
    I recall £he video being around about 3 o'clock time.

Q. I may be wrong and I am. taking it gently and forgive me
   if I an, but can you help by reference to the gane,Chief
   Inspector? Are you sure that the gane had started as
   you were standing       - A. No. I an sorry. I probably
   should clarify. The players were on the pitch but
   whether the gane had started that was a different
   matter. I could not tell you anything at all about
   that game.

Q. But whatever the precise time on the video which we can
   check __ - A. Yes.

Q          it is clear, is it not, that you appreciated that
     there v/as pressure trouble in the centre pens when you
     left the Police box sone time before 3 o'clock? - A.
     Whatever time the people began.coming on to that pitch
     v/as the time I realised, yes, some help was needed
     down there to get that gate open.

Q. And you are saying that, the very first moment that you

                                     430
                             24

                                                      MR. MCROBBIE


    saw people coming.out of those pens you appreciated that
    it was a pressure problem? -A. I suppose that would be
    correct. I saw people coming out of the pens and being
    directed into the areas I have described. It was at
    that stage that I realised, yes, there is help needed
    to get that gate open so what you are saying is in fact
    correct.

Q. You have told us with great loyalty about the momentous
   decision that was being considered by the senior Officers
   in your presence. Did it occur to you when you first saw
   that evidence of pressure in the pens that this was,
   indeed, one of the consequences of that momentous decision
   that had been taken? - A. Not at all, sir.   Not at that
   time, I an afraid.

Q. It did not occur to you that what you had seen in the in­
   flood of fans might have caused the pressure that was now
   having to be relieved? - A. At that time it did not occur
   to me, no.

Q. So be it. And finally, Chief Inspector, as we see on the
     video, after you had helped to assist people into pen 1
     you walked to the centre pens in order to see how serious
     the situation was for yourself?.- A. Well, I would not
     describe it like that.  I walked to the centre! pens
     because more and more people were spilling on to the
     perimeter track and were encroaching on to the playing
     area and I went, as I said, to position myself by the
   t goal line by some advertising hoardings just to prevent
  ' people who were of necessity coming out of that gate
     coming encroaching on the playing areas.

Q. We see yoil' climb over the hoarding right up to the fence.
   Have you not seen yourself? You walk from the perimeter
   track, you step over the hoarding and you go right up to
   the fence, I think. Did you not do that?- A. I may well
   have done, sir. I cannot recall doing that as a conscious
   act.

Q. Taking it from the last stage backwards then, there came
   a stage at which you realised that something very serious
   was wrong because we see you come back over the hoarding
   and run away from the goal towards the camera? - A. That
   is absolutely correct. What prompted that was Superintendent
   Greenwood being on top of the fence waving his arms towards
   the control room.

Q. I was going to ask you.        Was that you seeing Mr.Greenwood___
   - A. Yes.

Q        obviously in an urgent s t a t e ----   A. Yes.

Q        or you seeing something going on in the pens that
    distressed or concerned you? “A. No, it was - I did not
                                       43!
                             25


                                                      MR. MCROBBIE

      see anything in the pens other than it being very full,
      obviously. It was the actions of Superintendent Greenwood
      waving to the control room that made me act in the way I
      did to try and ....

Q. In that event I won't press you.      Thank you.

                  Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD;

Q. Mr. McRobbie, you had gone to the control box in order to
   learn. Is that right? - A. That was the intention, sir,
   yes.
Q.And you took no part in the. business that was being done
   in there that day? -A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Did the events that occurred and the victims and the deaths
   that you observed, did they have an effect upon you? -A.
   Well, in fairness, sir, I did not see any of the injured
   or dead.
Q. You did not see any injured or any dead. What time did
   you remain there until? -A. Again, as to time I could not
   say. It would have been about 3.20 or something when I
   left the ground. As. I say, most of that time I had not
   been in the position, ..as has been described. When I
   left having seen Mr. Greenwood's attempt to, what I thought
   was to get the attention of the control room I then continued
   with that run where I met Superintendent Murray who was on
   his way in the opposite direction to try and stop the game.
 f-

      Mr. Murray was coming down from the control box and you
      encountered him .... - A. And. I v/as going up and then we ran
      together down to get the linesman's attention to the
      referee which I believe is the practice. Once the game had
      in fact been stopped I then returned to the control room,
      so I never returned to the perimeter fence, so in that
      case I did not see the things you are describing.

Q. This is right. You did not observe a single casualty
   yourself that day? -A. There were people laying on the
   pitch but I was not aware of the problem in my mind at
   that time.

Q. You were not aware of the problem. What do you mean
   by that? - A. Well, you said dead or injured people.
   There were people on the pitch. Now, whether they were
   dead or injured or just laying down getting their breath
   back or just sitting down I cannot say, but I was not
   aware consciously that that person is dead, that person
   is seriously injured. That is what I am trying to
   communicate to you.

Q. I ask you about that because some importance may be attached
   to part of your evidence.  So do you mean this. At tne time

                                     432
                            26


                                                     MR. MCROBBIE

     you made your statement you were not really aware of what
     had happened or the extent of it? -A. I was aware of vrtiat
     had happened and the extent of it by the time I made the
     statement. At the time I was on the playing area until
     I got back to the control room or the control box I was
     not aware that people were seriously injured.

Q. Whilst you were in the control box looking down there was
   the point where the camera which zoomed in on someone - the
   individual that that camera zoomed in on was right in the
   area immediately below the control box? - A. That is right,
   sir, sir.

Q. This was in an area where there v/as not much congestion?
   - A. Absolutely, yes.

Q. So there was little difficulty in the camera picking him
   out? -A. In fact that person was able to jig around and,
   you know, move around quite freely.

Q. Yes. And he v/as fully observed? - A. Well, it meant
   stepping forward and looking out of the window in the
   control box basically, sir.

Q.      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Can you just help us a moment?
   Will you look at the. model, over, there. We have got a-
   camera just to the right -of the word "Stand" in South
   Stand" which can point towards the terracing and I think
   there is one also on the scoreboard which can look along
   the terracing which we are told was not in as good order
 \ as it might have been.   Are you able to say which camera,
   you think it v/as that picked up and zoomed in on this man
   under the control box? - A. I cannot, sir, no. It would
   be speculation.   I do not know the position of these. I
   am sorryT

Q.       MR. WOODWARD:    There is a difference in height, is
     not there, between the west end of the South Stand and the
     area where the man v/as? - A. Yes, that is correct.

0.. And the South Stand camera I think v/as in colour but the
    camera you saw was black and white, was it?- A. Yes, it
    v/as certainly a black and white monitor that I was looking
    at.

Q.And that accordingly seemed to be likely to be the camera
   on the scoreboard? -A. I would have thought so from the
   definition but, as I say, I would not ....

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    When you say "the definition"
     v/as it good definition? - A. It was quite reasonable, sir,
     yes.

Q.       MR. WOODWARD:And the individual was not many feet,
     away from it? - A. That is right. He was right under the


                                   433
                          27


                                                    MR. MCROBBIE

   position we were occupying.

Q. Of course when one zooms the camera in it depends on how
   far away that which is being zoomed in on is and what its
   contest is? - A. I would agree.




            / ’




                                 / Q, From the position



                                  434
                                              Mr. McROBBIE

Q. From the position that you were in in the control room,
   could you see to the centre pens of the West Terraces?
   A. Yes, you could see in there, sir.

Q. As you were up there just looking and learning, up to the
   point when you saw people coming out, had you any concern
   or anxiety about what you observed?   A. Again I hadn't,
   sir, no, because it is normal that people of choice would
   wish, if they are going to stand, to stand behind the
   goal.
Q. The reasoning is probably not important. A. It wasn't
   a concern.   There were people there and that would be
   the natural place that one would expect to fill up first.

Q. And were they moving about in waves, surging and swaying
   as you would expect?   A. Indeed, sir, yes.

Q. Jumping up and down?   A. Well, yes, they were.

Q. Did they appear to you to be in any form of distress?
   A. Not that I observed, sir.

Q. There was nothing abnormal which you observed about them?
   A. It was just a normal football crowd, sir.

Q. In the statement that you made - and perhaps you would look
   at page 9 of it, officer - you say that on the monitor you
    saw the concertina gates open and fans come flooding in.
   ,"The game started when I looked back on to the playing
  'area.     Do you see that, in the middle of page 9? A. Yes,
    I do.

Q. The play w£s at the Penis tone Road end?    A. Yes.

Q. You have a firm recollection of that?      A. Yes, indeed.

Q   It would seem, accordingly, that when you became aware
    of something happening on the perimeter track, the game
    had already started?   A. Yes.

Q. And what you were concerned with and what caused you to go
   down was the fact that, rightly or wrongly, you perceived
   that the gate to which those people were heading had not
   been opened?    A. That's right.

Q. And you went to give what assistance you could?       A. Yes.

Q. Of course, at that time there would be no reason for you
   to know why those individuals had necessarily come from
   wherever they had come?   A. No particular reason, no.
   I just thought it was to relieve the pressure, you know.
   It was quite full and there was space in the pens that I
   have described, so it was a question of transference of
   spectators.
       0


Q. Did the fact that fans might tj|gtr^ansferred or moved from
                           29


                                            Mr. McROBBIE

    one section to another cause you any surprise?  A. Not
    particularly, no, sir. I have known it happen before -
    not at that ground but in other events.

Q. So when you are talking about the fans moving from one
   part to another, that is not because of some observed
   concern by you; it is simply an observation that they
   were not able to get to their destination?    A. Well,
   quite clearly pen 3 was full and pen 2, as I believe it
   is, had got space, so it seemed a natural thing that
   people could move into that area.

Q. It seemed perfectly natural to you?    A. Yes.

Q   Whilst the play was down at the Penistone Road end, that
    was when I think Mr. Beardsley almost scored a goal and
    hit the cross-bar?   A. I couldn't tell you, sir.

Q. You are not aware of that?    A. I am not aware.

Q. During the time of the play, had you noticed any surging
   and moving in the crowd in the Terraces?   A. I wasn't
   particularly watching that area in that respect. As I say,
   I saw that there were people coming on to the track, so I
   was looking on the track rather than into the Pens.

Q. So what happened in Pens 3 and 4 was not observed by you,
   nor is. it related to any movement in the crowd?  A. No.

Q. You just do not know?    A. That's correct, yes, sir.

Q/‘ If the play was down at the Penistone Road end, it would
    seem that the game had been going for a little while. Are
   you able to say how long?    A. As I say, sir, other than
    that brief glimpse, I couldn't tell you anything much
    abouy tfiat game at all, I'm sorry.

Q. May I try and press you a little? Are we talking of
   minutes or just after the .whistle?   A. I'm sorry, but
   all I can tell you is that apparently the game stopped
   at six-minutes-past-three. Actions prior to that had
   been to usher people through, to run to Mr. Murray, to
   run to the linesmen, to go on to the pitch.

Q. If one looks at the photographs, for example - and would
   you have a look at the composite bundle, Bundle 2, at
   DB1714 --    A. I'm sorry, sir.

Q. It is timed at 3 o'clock. The corrected time is 3 o'clock.
   There is   already a gate open there? A. Bear,with me,
   sir.Could you repeat the number?

Q. DB1714.    A.   I think I've got the wrong one.

Q. Bundle 2, the composite Bundle, the fourth photograph in
   the bundle. Do you have that?     A. Yes, sir.

                                    436
                               30



                                               Mr. McROBBIE

Q. PR17A is, again, 1502 corrected. Did you see anything
   like that   fromyour position up in the control room, or
   not?   A.    No,sir.

Q. But your clear recollection as to your timing is that
   your concern, your involvement with the fans was at a
   time whenyou believed play to be down at the Penistone
   Road end?     A.That's my recollection, sir, yes.

        Mr. WOODWARD:    Thank you.

                 Re-examined by Mr. PHILLIPS:

Q. Mr. McRobbie, we have seen the video and compiled a
   chronology of the times taken from the video recording.
   Can I just tell you what these are in relation to the
   particular event that you have talked about? Sir, this
   is the bottom of page 3 of the chronology.   At 2.59,
   youths on the track go towards Pen 1?   A. Yes.

Q. At 2.59.31, kick-off;   3 o'clock, the gate is seen to
   be open at Pen 1 and the policewoman is showing the
   youths in, and by then there was a steady stream of
   people on the track.   Now, does that fit in with your
   recollection, obviously not to the second —    A. No,
   obviously not, sir, but I wouldn't disagree with that.

        Mr. PHILLIPS:        Thank you very much.

 I                      BY   LORDJUSTICE TAYLOR

Q. Just one thing:   You have said that as soon as you saw
   people coming out on to the track and being ushered down
   the track towards the corner, you realised that it was a
   question of overcrowding?   A. That was my impression,
   sir.

Q. Yes. In your statement at page 10 - have you got that?
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. A couple of times you talk of a "public order situation".
   This is two-thirds of the way down. Admittedly this is
   after Superintendent Greenwood was running towards the
   referee. You put it all in the present tense, this part
   of your statement:   "I think it is a public order
   situation,   I ran on to the playing area..." and so on?
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. And then at the bottom of the page, "There is nothing I
   can usefully do in a public order context, so I decide
   to return to the police control point."   Can you just
   help about that?   What converted it from people coming
   out and overcrowding to being a public order situation?
   A. I think that's police jargon, sir, on my part. I was
                                    437
                           31



                                             Mr. McROBBIE

  putting "public order" there as order that needed to be
  restored, rather than rioting or anything like that. It
  was a question of an overspill that was encroaching on to
  the pitch that needed uniformed officers to control.

Q. You are not, by saying that, going back on what you said
   before about why they had come out in the first place?
   A. Oh, absolutely not, sir, no.

Q. And, in fairness to you, lest anyone else should think
   otherwise, you went back to the control room and eventually
   went back to Hammerton Road where you put on a uniform and
   took part in organising the support?   A. That's correct,
   sir.
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you.

        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Police Constable Rook, please.

        Mr . WOODWARD: I am sorry, I am not quite sure which
   list this officer's name appears on for today's hearing.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I think he might have been
   listed before..

        Hr. GOLDSACK: I think he was probably on yesterday's
   list, if not the day before that!

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think that is right.

        Mr. GOLDSACK: It is a short statement, sir. He is
   the gentleman who was in the Force Operations Room.

        Mr.^OODWARD: Lest I was losing track, I wanted to
   know which list this witness was on so as to try and
   anticipate who was next going to be called.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Well, perhaps you could help
   Mr. Woodward, Mr. Goldsack. I think I have had this
   witness's statement for a couple of days. He was not
   reached yesterday and he is being reached today. Now,
   can you .just help Mr. Woodward and others by saying what
   the running order is going to be after this?

        Mr. GOLDSACK: That is the end of the police officers
  •for the time being, sir.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And we then move on to the
   Fire Brigade?

        Mr. GOLDSACK: We then move to the Fire Brigade,
   and the order in which we propose to call the Fire
   Officers is in the printed order, starting with Fire
   Control Officer S.E. Davies, then Mr. Swain, Mr. Fletcher,
   Mr. Hornsby and Mr. Housley.’

                                438
                             32



                                               Mr. McROBBIE

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: That will take us to the mid-day
     adjournment and you can tell Mr. Woodward about anything
     after that.

           Mr. GOLDSACK: When it comes to the turnstile operators
     and stewards, we may have to interpose some stewards who
     have come from Liverpool.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Perhaps you can deal with that
     immediately after the mid-day adjournment.

          Mr. GOLDSACK:   Yes, sir.

                      KENNETH ROOK. Called
                    Examined by Mr. GOLDSACK:

Q. Mr. Rook, on the 15th April of this year, you were
   stationed in the Force Operations Room at Headquarters?
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Just after 3 o'clock, were you told to make contact with
   the Ambulance Service Control Room?   A. I was, sir.

Q. By whom were you told to make that contact? A. The
   request was made by Chief Inspector Edmondson.

Q. Some people are having difficulty hearing you, Mr. Rook.
     Can you speak close to the microphone, please? A. Yes,
  /. sir.
Q. We have a copy of a transcript of the conversations you
   had between 1507 and the following few minutes with the
   Ambulance1
            ’ Service. What I want to ask you about is this,
   Mr. Rook: You told the Ambulance Service at about 1507
   that there had been a lot of pushing and shoving at
   Hillsborough, and within a minute or so you were saying,
   "Pushing and shoving. I understand one of the gates ...
   They've collapsed the gates"?   A. Yes, sir.

Q. From where did you get that information? A. That information
   was gleaned from the general public conversation within
   the Operations Room.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You are not speaking very
     audibly, I'm sorry.   Was gleaned from general conversation
     in .. .?    A. Within the Operations Room, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

Q.        Mr. GOLDSACK:   Can you tell us who was in the Operations
     Room at this time?    A. Do you want the full list of the
     operators, sir?


                                  439
                          33



                                               Mr. McROBBIE

Q. Who was within earshot of you?   A. There would be Chief
   Inspector Edmondson, Inspector Jackson, Sergeant Harrison
   and the other operators in the room. There would be
   about ten or twelve of them.

Q. Did you personally have any contact with anyone at
   Hillsborough?   A. No, sir.

Q. So you were only relaying- what you had been told by
   somebody else?   A. I was only relaying, sir, what I
   had heard. At the time I heard that information, I was
   actually speaking to the Ambulance Service.

Q. Do you know from which individual you gleaned that
   information?   A. No, sir. As I say, I was actually
   talking, I was in conversation with the Ambulance Control
   Room and I just heard it whilst I was within the
   conversation.

Q. Do you know which of your colleagues     in that room was
   in direct contact with Hillsborough?       A. In the room
   where I was, sir, there was actually     no-one in direct
   conversation with Hillsborough. The      Force Incident Room
   was set up in a room adjacent to the     Force Operations
   Room.

Q. I am not sure I have got that. The information that you
    received in the room where you were came from another
    room in the same building, did it?   A. If I can explain,
    sir, from where I was in the Force Operations Room, to
  / the right-hand side there is a door in between and that
    was where the Incident Room was set up which was
    controlling the match, and officers had come out of the
    Incident^oom into the Operations Room, and that must
    have been where I got the information from.

Q. So the room next to you is in contact with Hillsborough?
   A.' That's right, sir.

Q. And an officer came from that room through to you, requesting
   ambulances?   A. That's right, sir, yes.




                                      /Q.   Did you hear that
                               44 0
 CHIEF INSPECTOR MCROBBIE                                                 R125



 I transferred to 'F' Division on Monday 3 April 1989, as the Chief Inspector

 (Admin).

 The Operational Order for the F.A. Cup semi-final was drafted and I was not

 included on the order.

 As a new member of the Division I made a request to the Chief Superintendent

 to be able to attend the event in order to observe the Police operation.

    a preliminary to the event I received an overview of the planning and

 rationale from Inspector Sewell at 2.30 p.m. on Wednesday 12 April 1989-

 I did not attend the Commander's brief on Friday 14 April 1989 .

 On Saturday 15 April 1989. I attended Sheffield Wednesday football ground at

 9.45 a.m.   I was off duty attending in my own time, in civilian clothing in

 order to watch, listen and learn.

 I took up a place at the rear of the North St^«T, behind CID Officers, but

 in front of the Special Constables.

 It appeared to me that attention to detail was evident in the way serials

^ £ r e ordered, officers wore headgear and professionalism prevailed.

 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield imparted a factual briefing identifying the

 various Section Senior Commanders by name and in person.     He impressed that

 officers must act in a professional manner which would reflect credit on

 South Yorkshire Police.

 This brief was clear, concise and audible at the rear by use of a microphone

 and amplifier.

 This part was followed by Superintendent Murray.

 I was again impressed with the standard of briefing, again attention to

 detail such as the evacuation procedures and officers being aware of their

 indvidual requirement in the event of such eventuality.

 I particularly recall him saying,      "We have fully tried the evacuation

 procedures twice this season, the first time was good, the.second time was
                                         441
                                             -2-



    exceilence; if we are required to impliment evacuation today, it must be

    excellent."

    This   briefing was      followed by an up to date     intelligence report from

    Detective Sergeant Charlesworth.

    Finally, Inspector Sewell gave general information about radios, issue and

    mealing arrangements.

    It was stressed that all officers must be on their respective points by

    ^ ^ 1 5 a.m.

    After the briefing it was evident that little of value would be gained until

    later into the operation so I left the stadium to return to my private

    vehicle.       I was approached on three separate occasions in Penistone Road and

    asked if I had any tickets to sell.

    There were i. lot of people around first sitting on walls in groups.

    I went to my vehicle and drove to Hammerton Road Police Station where I

    carried out some outstanding clerical work.

    I began to walk back to the stadium, leaving my car at Hammerton Road Police

    ^^ation,    when a police     car offered me a lift to the ground.        This I

    accepted.

    I saw Policewoman Smith and another officer outside Threshers near Holme

    Lane and was pleased to see officers doing what was expected of them.

    I asked to be dropped a little away from the stadium as I wanted to observe

    officers on their respective areas and see how they were performing.

    I was really anonymous to them or many of them as I was new to the Division

    and not in uniform.

    All Police Officers were acting properly, but I was a little surprised that

    at 1.00 p.m. there were so few cars and pedestrians in the area.

    By Hillsborough Park I saw a group of people sitting around, there was a

    white plastic carrier bag with them and



I
The visible cans were of Heineken lager in the green can.

There were six men and they were joking about having to drink the lot as

 they would not be allowed to take them into the ground.

Approx 1.15 p.m.

 By Leppings Lane gates were few supporters, road clear, plenty of Police

 officers evident.

 I went to the barrier at Leppings Lane/Vere Road       where I spoke to      ’A'

^^vision officers, Police Constables Parkin and Drury.     A few people passing

 and we spoke about running and ’A' Divisional work.

I then walked past Leppings Lane gates and came to barriers and Police

Officers - Police Sergeant Norburn and others I do not know.      There were no

 other people near this area.   I knew from my preliminary discussions with

 Inspector Sewell the necessity to provia^ a sterile area to keep opposing

 fans separate.

I continued along the road being the South Stand past the T.V. unit vans

where I was met with another barrier of metal barriers and Police Officers.

   produced my warrant card, but I was known to one officer who I did not

 know.

 I went down and along Penistone Road which was busy.

 I walked towards Parkside Road and I was against the    flow of people, it   was

 very busy.

 I stopped and spoke to Police Constable Vallance from 'A1 Division and

 Police Constable Haltman from ’A ’ Division at separate points but due to

 enquiries and sheer numbers of persons it was prudent to move on, as they

 needed all their attention to deal with the volume of people.

 I returned to rear of South Stand.

 About 11.45 p.m, the Liverpool team coach arrived.

 There was a motorcycle lead and Police horses controlling a large crowd
  awaiting the trains arrival.

  I noticed the horse near me was displaying a Merseyside Police badge on the

  saddle.

  There were no incidents.

  Sergeant Sorsby of South Yorkshire Police Mounted said to the other officers

  - "Exactly the same for the Notts Forest Coach".

  10Lit 1.55 p.®. the Nottingham Forest team coach arrived.     The procedure was

  as for Liverpool, no problems, crowd good humoured.

  I left this area and returned to Penistone Road as I intended to use the

  entrance to the ground by the Police Room.

  Penistone Road was quite busy but there was no queuing at the turnstiles as

  I would have expected.     At that time about one hour to kick off.

u I knew there was a Liverpool train due at Wadsley Bridge around 2.0C ji.m.

  but decided to go into the ground.

  I went to the main sliding gate and produced my warrant card and a special

 ^^ird issued to me by Superintendent Murray.        Both were fully checked and
                         0

  examined by the stewards which I thought was excellent.

  I was assured no unauthorised person would gain entry at that gate.

  I went down onto the perimeter track and was immediately surprised       by how

  full the Spion Kop was.     I turned and saw the North Stand was not very full.

  I made my way to the Police Control box.

  Inspector Sewell had alerted me to the fact that inside there was only

  limited space.     I intended to visit, see it operated and leave if I was in

  the way.

  I wanted to see     the Control point as I was at Doncaster Rovers when the

  camera equipment    was first installed and operated at the beginning    of the

  present season.     The engineer was always quoting the Sheffield Wednesday

  system as being excellent and holding the system as the way all grounds
                                                       -5-



     should operate.

     On entering the Police box there was Sergeant Goddard, Police Constable Ryan

     at    the    front    and    Police    Constable      Bichard     at   the   rear   by    the    camera

     operating controls.

     I was       informed by Police        Sergeant    Goddard       that Superintendent Murray had

     gone    to speak to the referee so I sat on his seat and was offered a hot

    ^p*ink.       It didn't appear particularly busy and quite clearly everything was

     under control.

     Assistant      Chief    Constable      (Operations)       Mr.    Jackson     came   to   the    control

     point, he was in civilian clothing.

     I    saw    through    the   control    room     window    Superintendent       Murray    and    Chief

     Superintendent Duckenfield, in uniform, walking along the track.                           They came

     through the uncovered seats * . the South Stand and entered the control room.

     I went to the far end of the room and stood by the camera control area.

     I was prepared to leave, but did not appear to be hindering anyone and felt

     I would gain onset benefit from staying and observing from this point.

     On looking into the ground the Liverpool areas had a lot of space, the Notts

     Forest parts I could see on the South Stand and the Spion Kop were quite

     full.

     I recall Chief Superintendent             Duckenfield commenting about there being no

     entertainment being provided to encourage the supporters to come early.

     I remember      when    I was    a    child   there     always    being a band playing by           the

     players tunnel at every game at Hillsborough.

     Whilst I didn't see it, Assistant Chief Constable Operations commented that

     a person just below the Police control had just dropped his trousers.                             When

     I looked the person was jiggling around.                   I remember thinking how empty the

     area around this youth was.               Police Constable Bichard operated the camera

     and I watched him be able to zoom onto him which I thought was a super

                                                           445
f
                                             -6-



 facility for spotting troublemakers in the crowd.

 I was aware the area in Leppings Lane behind the goal was filling up but

 this was to be expected.

 I was then aware that both teams came onto the pitch for a pre-match warm

 up.   As there was nothing special happening on the screen or in the ground I

 looked onto the playing area.

 I was aware that Alan Hanson of Liverpool was on the ptich and was surprised

^ ^ 1 didn't think he would be playing.            The Liverpool fans were shouting his

 name and he acknowledged them by raising his hand.             All was good humoured.

The area behind the goal at Leppings Lane was getting full but there was

 space at the front.      People seemed reluctant to move forward, probably all

 wanting to maintain their best view of the playing area.

Approx 2.30 p.m.

 I looked on the left monitor and was aware there seemed a build up of

 supporters.

 I remember asking Superintendent Murray about this, he explained that due to

^^cessary segregation of fans, access to the North Stand, which had been

 allocated to Liverpool supporters, could only be done by Leppings Lane

 entrances, this meant that the entrances on Penistone Road to the stand

 which would normally be used were unavailable.

 This explained at that time in my mind the crowds on the screen.

 I recall a suggestion that the loud hailer/tannoy should be used to request

 fans to move forward to create room at the rear to prevent crowding.

 People began advising control that radio reception was poor.

 An    engineer   came   into   the   room   to    try   and   improve   transmission   and

 reception.

 I remember him in blue under the control room bench, I thought it was

 crowded as Police Sergeant Godd^ard was walking round/over him.
                                                    446
                                            -7-



  I thought of leaving but was unable to get past and was better staying where

  I was.

  I was aware Superintendent Marshall requested the closure of Leppings Lane

  to traffic.

  I looked to the screen and whilst there seemed a lot of people this was to

  be expected and this had been the situation for quite a time.               It was not

  extraordinary.     I recall seeing a cream double decker bus travelling slowly

  through the crowd which indicated the road was not blocked and free movement

  was possible.

  The situation remained like this, poor reception, the ground slowly filling

  up and everything progressing as one would expect for such an occasion.            The

  crowd seemed good humoured in the ground.

  Approx 2.45 p.m.

  The crowd outside appears denser on the camera but I can see a Police horse

  on the screen.       Having seen them at close hand control the crowd when the

  team coaches arrived, I sensed they were well in control.

  Officers were deployed to assist, including a land rover with P.A. equipment

^ ^ o assist officers outside.

  Around this time a radio message was relayed requesting the gates to be

  opened as persons were trapped up against the gates.

  I remember thinking, you can't open the gates or you lose control over who

  is admitted, you are unable to search or check persons admitted for weapons

  and may create a difficult public order situation for Police inside the

  ground.

  The   gates   were    not   authorised   to   be   opened   by   Chief   Sueprintendent

  Duckenfield at this time.

  I am aware that the teams are no longer on the pitch so the start could not

  be far off and there was still a lot of space on the terrace under the
                                              -8-



        Police Control.

        It occurred that some Liverpool supporters were leving it late but people

        often enter after the start of many games.

        About this time I can see people climbing over the wall and point this out

        to the controllers.     I then saw the gates displayed on the camera which I

        believe are the concertina gates on the service road to the rear of the

    ^pith Stand open and a surge of people rush into the ground.          I said, "The

        gates have been forced".

        It was difficult to estimate how many entered the ground but the gates were

        quickly closed again.    It seemed control was regained with help of a mounted

        officer who put his horse across the gap in the gate.

        People however are still being able to climb over the wall into the ground.

        Superintendent Marshall again requests the gates to be opened.       This is a

        general request.

        It is getting close to kick off time.

        I can see by the players tunnel a semi circle of photographers awaiting the

    %     rival of the two teams.

        It seems the Superintendent will have to try and prevent the start of the

        game as the fans will not all get in but I thought thereis no way anyone

        can get to the referee or team managers to do this at this late stage.    As I

        was thinking this the crowd errupted as a team ran on.       I've no idea which

        team as the sound inside the ground transmitted itself outside and from what

        I saw on the monitor control was difficult outside now.

        At this point Superintendent Marshall       requested the gates to be opened as

        there was going to be serious injury or someone killed outside in the crush

        if they were not opened.

        There was still room on the terrace under the control.      The South Stand was

        much fuller but not full.


f
                                     -9-



Superintendent Murray was standing with a personal radio in his hand asking

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield for a decision.

It was evident there existed a tremendous problem for officers outside the

Leppings Lane entrance.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was deeply considering the situation.

I recall him thinking aloud words to the effect - If there's likely to be

serious injury or death outside I have no option than to open the gates - He

^ f d Superintendent Murray, "Open the Gates".

Superintendent Murray gave the general instruction over the radio to open

the gates.

On the monitor I saw the concertina gates open and fans come flooding in.

The game had started when I looked back onto the playing area.   The play was

at the PenistoT’-' Road end.

I became aware of a perimeter track gate being opened and people being let

onto the track out of the pen behind the goal and ushered and pointed in the

direction of the part where there was still plenty of space.

    movement seemed orderly but the numbers were building up.

Fans were going onto the track starting to move in the direction as directed

but then stopping and standing watching the game.

A Policewoman was in control of the gate into the area where there was space

but did not open it.

I thought she probably didn't have a radio or handn't sensed that she must

open it to let fans into the open areas behind her.

I began to sense youths would run onto the playing area so ran out of the

control point, through the uncovered seats onto the perimeter track and got

the gate by the Policewoman open and began directing fans to the area.   More

and more were coming onto the track, I was ushering them to the open gate

and the Policewoman assisted.
                                       -10-



 I went behind advertising hoardings to prevent persons encroaching onto the

 playing area.

 I could see people pushed up against the fence but not aware of any

 particular problems or injuries as there is a steady stream of people onto

 the perimeter track.

 More and more people on the track and beginning to move onto the grass by

    goal line.

 I see Superintendent Greenwood on top of the fence, having climbed up and he

 is gesturing by waving his arms and asking for the game to be stopped.

 It seems by his frantic waves Control are not understanding his request.

 I run to control but by the uncovered seats I meet Superintendent Murray

 with his hat on running the opposite way.       We run together to a linesman to

 get his attention to stop the game.

 The linesman ran straight past Superintendent Murray.

 I chase the linesman shouting him to get the referee's attention to stop the

^^ame.

 I then see Superintendent Greenwood running towards the referee.

 There are lots of fans in the Liverpool goalmouth in front of Leppings Lane

 Terrace.

 I think it is a public order situation.

 As they are Liverpool supporters, I run onto the playing        area andprotect

 Nigel Clough in case any Liverpool supporters try to attack him.

 When I am satisfied there is no danger to players I look and see hundreds of

 people spilling onto the playing area.       There is quite clearly in my mind a
            »

 major public order situation which will need a large uniform presence to

 control.

 I am in the centre of the playing area, in plain clothes.

 There is nothing I can usefully do in a public c&er context s o ^ decide to
                                                  450                     ^
                                        -11-



 return to the Police Control point.

  En route I am passed by uniformed reinforcements as I pass through the

 uncovered seating.

 On re-entering control room I learn that persons are suspected of being

  injured.

 An ambulance is called for and quickly arrives behind the Leppings Lane

 -goal

  A message is relayed to Police control that many people are injured.        As

  they are not local people, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield decides to call

  out Casualty Bureau staff.

  I am directed by Assistant Chief Constable, Mr. Jackson, to call for Chief

  Superintendent Addis and request he comes to Hillsborough.

  I mak,~ vhe request by telephone to Force Operations Room as instructed.

  I've no accurate assessment of time, but this call should be recorded on

  tape in Force Control.       Coins or other items are being thrown at Police

  Control in large numbers.      In view of the situation unfolding, 'Operation

^feupport' is authorised.

  All available personnel are deployed in area.

  I suggest I go to Hammerton Road Police Station and receive Operation

  Support personnel and deploy them from there as directed by Ground Control.

  I go to Hammerton Road Police Station.

  I leave the ground by Leppings Lane and am able to stop Chief Inspector Shaw

  in a marked Police car.   He conveys me to Hammerton Road Police Station.

  I change into uniform and act at this location as Incident Commander.

  Officers are deployed as requested from Ground Control to specific areas in

  makeshift serials.

  I remain to organise Social Services who have arrived and set up an incident

  enquiry room.
                                               451
                                      -12-



Relatives and calls are all being dealt with from Hammerton Road.

At this stage there is little further which is of benefit regarding the

series of events under review.

Subsequent actions by myself involve reception and sympathetic welfare of

distressed relatives.

Liaison with Social Services and other support agencies.

Setting up of HOLMES incident room.

^^1 non contentious but essential facilities to assist officers at scene.

I did not directly handle any injured or dead bodies.
