CHAPTER 7



Summary


1.    In this chapter I summarise the findings which I have made.

2.    Before doing so I must make it clear that anyone who is familiar with the
      terrible events of 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough is bound to have great
      sympathy with the relatives of those who died and the spectators who were
      injured. I have now spent many weeks studying the evidence of what
      happened and considering the representations and submissions made by the
      families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to imagine anything
      more horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and those who
      lost their children, relatives and friends.

3.    That 96 people, the majority of them young, should set out in high hopes and
      spirits on a fine Spring day, and yet within a space of less than half-an-hour
      suffer crushing injuries from which they died, is nothing less than appalling. I
      have the most profound sympathy with all the families and friends of those
      who suffered in this way, many of whom I have met. I also understand the
      dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held to account,
      either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of
      losing their job.

4.    I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
       especially since they had had their hopes raised that something more could be
       done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to
       look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the
       light of the evidence which had previously been considered.

5.    Having done so, for the reasons I have set out, I have come to the clear
       conclusion that there is no basis upon which there should be a further Judicial
       Inquiry or a reopening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is no basis for a
       renewed application to the Divisional Court or for the Attorney General to
       exercise his powers under the Coroners Act 1988. I do not consider that there
       is any material which should be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions
       or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause them to reconsider the
       decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider that there is any
       justification for setting up any further inquiry into the performance of the
       emergency and hospital services. I have carefully considered the
        circumstances in which alterations were made to some of the self-written
        statements of South Yorkshire Police officers, but I do not consider that there
        is any occasion for any further investigation.

 6.    None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to the
       evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests.
Video evidence

7.     Chapter 2 of this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My
       conclusions about that are that there is no new video evidence of it or video
       evidence which was not available to Lord Taylor, the Coroner, or the other
        authorities who examined the disaster at the time.

8.     Two video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing.
        They were tapes of pictures from CCTV cameras operated by Sheffield
        Wednesday Football Club. They were not police tapes and would not have
        shown anything significant. Their theft is unsolved. The suggestion that
        the police tried to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on the terraces onto
        faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not blame the CCTV equipment.
        The police controllers had a good view over the terraces from their control box
        and did not pretend otherwise.

9.     The allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded,
        and the allegation that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of
        this ‘missing’ police footage is equally unfounded.     Police officers did not
        give false evidence about the state of the police CCTV system at the ground,
        and I do not accept the evidence of Roger Houldsworth, video technician at
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he realised from looking at police
        CCTV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time Gate C was opened at 14.52
        that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.


The aftermath of the disaster

10.     I deal in Chapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the
        deaths of those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there
        should now be a public inquiry into what was done, or not done, to help them
        and others who were crushed.

 11.    I do not consider that the Inquest was flawed. Most of the criticisms relate to
         the so-called ‘3.15 cut-off point’. I do not agree with these criticisms. The
         Coroner considered the questions of who the deceased were and when and
         where they died at the mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of
         matters long after 3.15. It was only in relation to the question of how, i.e. by
         what means, the deceased came to their deaths that the Coroner imposed a cut­
         off point of 3.15 p.m. He had good reasons for deciding to limit the inquiry in
         this way and the cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.

 12.    Questions of whether the response of the emergency services was adequate
        were not relevant to the task the Coroner had to perform. It was suggested to
        me that the fact that Dr Walker, Mr Houldsworth, and others were not called
        as witnesses at the inquest amounted to fraudulent concealment of their
        evidence. That suggestion is false and I regard it as wholly irresponsible.
13.    Lord Taylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published
       in his report. He made criticisms of the slow response of the police and
       recommendations for the future. I cannot see that any useful purpose would
       be served by having any further inquiry into the rescue operation. In my
       opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the emergency or medical
        services. Any wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the disaster would
        place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.


Interference with witnesses

14.    Chapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses
       to the disaster was tampered with, so that the truth did not emerge either at
        Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types -
        that the West Midlands Police put pressure on Derek Bruder, Debra Martin,
        and Paul Taylor which affected the evidence they wished to give, and that the
        way in which the South Yorkshire Police went about collecting evidence from
        their own officers who were at Hillsborough and witnessed the disaster was
        unacceptable. I have interviewed Mr Bruder, Miss Martin, and Mr Taylor and
        have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no improper attempt
        to affect their evidence.


Mr Bruder

15.    So far as Mr Bruder is concerned, I am quite satisfied that the West Midlands
       Police, in seeking to confirm details of his statement relating to Kevin
       Williams, did not subject him to improper pressure. He told me himself that
       they did not. His statements were accurately summarised at the inquest on
       Kevin Williams and there was no attempt to discredit him.


Miss Martin

16.      I did not find Miss Martin a reliable witness. Her statement about events at
        Hillsborough, where she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at
        variance with the account of everybody else who was there. She remains
        plainly - and understandably - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories
        of the day and of subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I
        think that she gave her account of Kevin Williams sitting up in her arms and
        saying ‘Mom’ in good faith. But it cannot be relied upon. It contradicts Mr
        Bruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the pathological findings.

 17.    I interviewed the West Midlands police officer who Miss Martin claims
        bullied her. I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see
        that she had any reason to discredit Miss Martin, and she told me that she did
       not bully or browbeat her.   I accept her account and prefer it to Miss
       Martin’s.


Mr Tavlor

18.   As far as Paul Taylor is concerned, I do not accept his evidence that he was
      bullied or intimidated by a West Midlands officer. His account of what he
      saw at Hillsborough has changed in various ways over the years, and he does
      not appear to have raised any complaint about the conduct of this officer until
      1997. I prefer the evidence of the officer, which is supported to some extent
      by the contemporary documents. In any event he had no reason to put
      pressure on Mr Taylor.


South Yorkshire Police statements

19.   I have looked with great care at the way in which the South Yorkshire Police
       obtained written evidence from their officers who witnessed the disaster to put
       before the West Midlands Police investigators and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.
       Soon after the disaster officers were asked to write out in their own words their
       recollections of the day and of the part which they themselves had played.
       Many of these statements were submitted to Hammond Suddards, solicitors to
       the force, to advise whether they were in a suitable form for submission to
       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

20.    The solicitors made no comment on the great majority of these statements, and
       in others their advice was confined to clearing up ambiguities and removing
       hearsay, comment or inappropriate language. In a very few cases, which I
       have referred to in Appendix 7, what has been excluded is either factual or
       comment in which factual matters are implicit. In these cases I think it would
       have been preferable for the factual matters not to have been excluded, or the
       comment elucidated.

21.    It was well known to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Tearn that the statements were
       being vetted in this way. The process did not materially differ from the way
       in which statements were taken from witnesses who were employed by
       Sheffield Wednesday FC or the Ambulance Service.

22.    Towards the end of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for
       collating the evidence of officers in the Force began to suggest amendments to
       statements without referring them to the solicitors. The suggestions they
       made were on the same basis as those made by the solicitors. I have looked
       at all the statements that were altered in this way. In most cases the alteration
       is trivial. Where comment or opinion is excluded the amendments cannot in
       my opinion be criticised. In no case is the statement rendered misleading.
23.     I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in any way inhibited or
       impeded by what happened. Lord Taylor was well aware of the criticisms
       made by some junior officers. His Inquiry examined these issues and he
       made findings about them which were adverse to the police.

24.    I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these comments did not affect the
       outcome of the Inquests, or the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions
       not to bring criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that
       there is any question of misconduct either by the solicitor who gave the police
       advice upon the statements or by the police officers who suggested alterations
       to the statements without referring the statement to the solicitors.


Other issues

Inconsistent evidence

25.    It is clear that there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
        some of the people who died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are
        inevitable given the scale of the disaster. The Coroner did his best to resolve
        these questions at the Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of
        those which remain and which the families of those who died have asked me
        to look into. I have not been completely successful in this. What is clear
        however is that no further inquiry involving examination of the witnesses
        could help after this lapse of time.


The Inquests

26.    The Divisional Court found that the Coroner was not biased and had no
        conflict of interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no
        evidence to support the suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave
        evidence at the Inquest were given a difficult time in the witness box.

27.    I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the Coroner and
        the way in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of
        the Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the
         Coroner should be limited in circumstances such as these. I have reached the
         firm conclusion that is not satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths
         caused by a major disaster when an Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has
         already covered the same ground.


 The police

 28.   Some of the families of those who died have told me that they have been
       unable to obtain copies of documents to which they were entitled from the
       South Yorkshire Police archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me
       with material to enable me to check on this. In neither case did I think the
       complaint was justified.

29.    The investigation of the disaster by the West Midlands Police was not biased
       in favour of the South Yorkshire force.

30.    The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised for
       the disaster on behalf of his force.


Examination bv doctors con firming death

31.    Criticism that doctors who examined bodies at the ground did so in a cursory
       or inadequate manner is wholly unsubstantiated.


The state o f the ground

32.    There are two questions to do with the state of the Hillsborough football
       ground which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord
       Taylor’s otherwise very full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the
       height of the crush barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster
       happened and the overall capacity of that terrace. I do not consider that they
       give grounds for reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.
APPENDIX 1


People who helped me in mv scrutiny



1.    This Appendix lists the people who have assisted me in my scrutiny. They fall
      into three categories;

      a) those who made written or oral submissions to me;

      b) those who gave evidence to me, orally or in writing; and

      c) those whom I consulted, mainly about what happened at previous
      proceedings.


Submissions

2.    The relatives of victims who put submissions to me in connection with my
      scrutiny were:

       Mr & Mrs Aspinall (parents of James Aspinall)
       Mr Roger Ball (father of Kester Ball)
       Ms Louise Brookes (sister of Andrew Brookes)
       Mrs Christine Burke (widow o f Henry Burke)
       Mrs Corrigan (mother o f Keith McGrath)
       Mr & Mrs Church (parents of Gary Church)
       Mrs Fox & Ms Lynne Fox (mother and sister o f Thomas Fox)
       The Glover family (family of Ian Glover)
       Mr & Mrs Hammond (parents of Philip Hammond)
       Mr & Mrs Hankin (parents o f Eric Hankin)
       Mrs K Harrison (widow o f Gary Harrison)
       Mr & Mrs Hicks (parents of Sarah and Victoria Hicks)
       Mr Howard (father o f Thomas Howard and grandfather o f Thomas Anthony
                  Howard)
       Mr & Mrs Lewis (parents o f Carl Lewis)
       Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Gary Jones)
       Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Richard Jones)
       Mr & Mrs Joynes (parents of Nicholas Joynes)
       Ms Deborah Matthews (sister o f Brian Christopher Matthews)
       Mrs Joan McBrien (mother of John McBrien)
       Mr & Mrs G McDonnell (parents o f Peter McDonnell)
       Mrs Irene McGlone (widow o f Alan McGlone)
       Mr & Mrs Pemberton (parents o f Roy Pemberton)
       The Roberts family (family of Graham Roberts)
       The Robinson family (family of Steven Robinson)
       Mr Harold Rowe (brother-in-law o f Alan McGlone)
      The Sefton family (family of Andrew Sefton)
      Mrs Sinclair and Jane Sinclair (sister and niece of Michael Kelly)
      Mr & Mrs Spearritt (parents o f Adam Spearritt)
      Mr & Mrs Steele (parents of Philip Steele)
      Mrs Sandra Stringer (mother of Paul Carlile)
      Mrs Thompson (mother o f Stuart Thompson)
      The Traynor family (family of Christopher and Kevin Traynor)
      Mr & Mrs Whelan (parents o f Ian David Whelan)
      Mrs Anne Williams (mother of Kevin Daniel Williams)

3.    All these people both wrote to me and saw me in private session, apart from
      those whose names I have put in italics, who did not seek private meetings
      with me. I also had oral and written submissions from the following:

      Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      Mr Julian Knowles, Junior Counsel
      Ms Ann Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group
      Professor Phil Scraton, Hillsborough Project, Edge Hill University College
      Ms Sheila Coleman


Evidence

4.    The witnesses who gave me oral evidence (in most cases in addition to written
      statements) were:

      Police Sergeant Julie Appleton, West Midlands Police
      Police Sergeant Trevor Bichard, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Derek Bruder
      Dr Matthew Bull
      Mr Donald Denton, former Superintendent, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Tony Edwards, former South Yorkshire ambulanceman
      Mr David Frost, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Roger Houldsworth
      Ms Debra Martin, former Special Constable, South Yorkshire Police
      Mrs J Martin
      Police Sergeant Graham McCombie, West Midlands Police
      Mr McRobbie, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Paul Taylor
      Dr Edward Walker

 5.    Witnesses whose written statements I consulted at the request of the families
       or the police, but whom I have not seen, were:

       Mr Ian McDermott
       Mr Andrew Worsley
       Mr Steven Williams
       Mr John Flack
      Mr Peter Howes
      Dr James Bums
      Dr Iain West
      Mr Noel Bume


Assistance

6.    People whom I consulted to assist me on various aspects of my scrutiny
      included:

       The Hon Mr Justice Collins
       Mr Christopher Dorries, presently Coroner for South Yorkshire
       Detective Chief Superintendent Foster, West Midlands Police
       Mr Douglas Fraser
       Mr Benet Hytner QC
       Mr Tim King QC
       Mr Peter Metcalfe, Hammond Suddard Solicitors
       Sir David Parry-Evans, St John Ambulance Brigade
       Dr Stefan Popper, former Coroner for South Yorkshire
       Dr David Slater
       Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steele
       Mr James Wardrope
       Mr Peter Wells, St John Ambulance Brigade
       Mr Richard Wells
       Mr Peter Whitehurst
       Dr David Williams


Correspondence

7.     At the beginning of my scrutiny, in July 1997,1 wrote to all the families
       whose relatives had died asking for any information they wanted to give me. I
       also wrote to the FA, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest, and Sheffield Wednesday
       Football Clubs and to the Director of Public Prosecutions, the Attorney
       General, the Crown Prosecution Service, and the Police Complaints Authority.

8.     I have had a number of letters from members of the public expressing views
        about the disaster.
