 IMMEDIATE



                                                               cc: Mr        Boys Smith
                                                                   Mr        Turney
                                                                   Mr        Goddard
                                                                   Mr        Watts
 Mr Mawer                                                           M *' G
 Mr Yates


 FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: NO 10 LINE


 Are you content, please, with the attached briefing for No 10 for
 Mr Wakeham's use at Questions this afternoon? 10
                5><L«Jc<2A ( k 3 e5 S L y ').                        '
 The line was prepared with agreement at official level with DOE.




                                                                     F J SMITH
                                                                     F8 Division
Number this morning: x 2343 or 3314


18 April 1989




                                                 -+&,     dhxAU. L       l   ^   A/c/o
                     Hi-         a/fepuiAve                    pvsaferTa/ X
chcuM ^                    M r & o -c U ^                       2

C e u jA        C*   « -     ^                  - - I \
                                                                         5=11 : 3 I 68,




     PRIMB MINISTER’S QUESTIONS: 18 APRIL

     THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
     Line to take



     As my Rt Hon Friend the Home Secretary said yesterday                      "the
     Government believes that the future of football in this country
     lies in a national membership scheme in designated grounds and
     [now it seems also] in providing all seated accommodation at major
     football clubs."

*•
     My Rt Hon Friend also said that it would be seemly to delay
     progress on the Football Spectators Bill for a short while in
     view of Saturday's tragedy at Hillsborough stadium.                 I do not
     wish     to   add   to my   Rt   Hon   Friend's   statement   to   the   House
     yesterday and       I think we should now allow a little time to
     elapse.

     Background
     1.    Third Reading of the Football Spectators Bill in the House
     of Lords was fixed for 24 April.    This has been postponed, no
     new date has yet been arranged.
     2.     The Bill is an enabling framework.    The Government has
     already given a full commitment not to implement the membership
     scheme    within  that   framework   until   arrangements  have
     satisfactorily been worked out.    That commitment still stands
     and obviously now embraces the lessons to be learned from this
     tragic event.
     3.    Lord Justice Taylor will be free to make recommendations,
     including interim recommendations. on any matters he considers
     relevant to the safety of spectators at football mptches-
     4.    Questions which now arise about the continuing use of
     perimeter fencing servfi only to increase the need for an
     effective system of excluding troublemakers from matches.


                                                                                          $
     Department of the Environment                                                        ,
     18 April 1989                                                                        3



      I\m0N
Supplementary speaking note




I would say 3 things to those who advise against proceeding with
Part I of the Bill at present


(i)   If perimeter fences are to be taken down this could only
      increase the need to protect supporters by excluding
      troublemakers through other means.


(ii) Part I of the Bill provides an enabling framework for a
      national football membership scheme.   No scheme will be
      implemented until the arrangements and technology are known
      to be satisfactory.


(iii) L J Taylor will be free to make recommendations (including
      interim rec's) on any matters he considers relevant to the
      safety of spectators at football grounds.
