                                                                         0
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                             50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                             London SW1H9AT
                                             01-273 2577/3602/2370

D S Oxley Esq                                  Your Ref:      DSO/TLC
Chief Executive
The Rugby Football League
180 Chapeltown Road
Leeds
LS7 4HT
                                             Date
                                               2 January 1990




               /
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Thank you for your letter of 18 December reporting several points
which have arisen in meetings you have held since we met you on 7
October.  It is very helpful to have these detailed arguments set
out so fully.

                                        Y«
                                               lb A 'WU
                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                        THE RUGBY FOOTBALL LEAGUE
                               180 Chapeltown Road Leeds LS7 4HT
                                Tel: 0532-624637 • Fax: 0532-623386
                                         D. S. OXLEY, O .B .E ., M.A.
                                                Chief Executive



DSO/TLC


18 December 1989


R M Whalley Esq
   Queen Anne's Gate

t NDON
  SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr Whalley

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Following our very helpful meeting with Lord Justice Taylor on
7 October 1989 we subsequently held other fruitful meetings with Senior
Police Officers representing four Forces most closely involved with the game
(Humberside, West Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and Greater Manchester) and
with the Officers of our very supportive All-Party MPs Group.

Lord Justice Taylor asked that we should if possible submit specific
examples of cases in which Rugby League might be said to differ from
Association Football where such matters as crowd behaviour and control are
concerned, and to which he might feel able to draw attention in the
recommendations and conclusions contained in his Final Report.

The following points have arisen out of the several meetings mentioned
above:

1)   Crowd Behaviour

     It is happily the case that the history of crowd behaviour in Rugby
     League bears no comparison with the worst aspects of hooliganism which
     have so beset soccer in recent years.          Rugby League attracts
     significant numbers of neutral people who support the game at large
     rather than any club in particular.     Moreover, partisan supporters
     traditionally stand side by side on the terraces where good humour and
     a friendly family atmosphere are the norm.        While we cannot be
     complacent, Rugby League supporters are knowledgeable, committed and
     well behaved. We would argue that this is a demonstrable specific fact
     not an airy generalisation.

                                                                                                      . . ./2




                                                  F o u n d e d : 1895
                                      Patron: Her Majesty The Queen
                   Life P r e s i d e n t : T he R ig h t H o n o u r a b l e The Ear! of D e r b y
2

18 December 1989

R M Whalley Esq

2)   Crowd Control

     It follows from the above that Rugby League supporters must not be
     segregated, fenced in or penned as is the usual practice in soccer.
     This view is strongly supported by the police authorities who consider
     that because Rugby League grounds are free from fences and segregation,
     there is a resulting "free-flow" of supporters which effectively
     prevents the dangerous over crowding witnessed at Hillsborough. You
     will recall that I recently submitted a report on the minor disturbance
     which occurred during the Yorkshire Cup Final at Headingley on
     5 November 1989.   I now enclose a cutting which refers to a report
     submitted by Safety Officers to the Local Authority which specifically
     states their strong view that there is no reason to consider penning in
     Rugby League spectators and indeed that the free movement of spectators
     throughout the Rugby ground was strongly to be recommended. The report
     also goes on to say that Rugby League spectators are to a large extent
     self policing and Lord Justice Taylor might well be able to conclude
     that the restrictions on the size of crowds and the level of policing
     required at soccer grounds need not apply to Rugby League.

3)   Alcohol

     We feel that the present situation which allows the sale of alcohol
     within most Rugby League grounds should not be interfered with.
     Indeed, the inability to purchase alcoholic drinks inside a ground can
     lead to problems with fans either lingering in public houses adjacent
     to the ground until the last minute or stocking up en route to the
     ground. We would agree however that no alcoholic drinks should be
     taken onto the terraces.

4)   All Ticket Matches

     If it has to be used at all we would ask most strongly that the
     all-ticket situation is applied very sparingly in the context of our
     game.   The all-ticket situation is anathema to the Rugby League
     supporter. He differs very specifically from his soccer counterpart
     who will tend to turn up without a ticket hoping - and indeed no doubt
     encouraged by recent police action - that he will be allowed into the
     ground in any case. The Rugby League fan tends to resist buying a
     ticket in advance and the result is that most all-ticket matches are
     played before attendances which are well below those indicated by the
     number of tickets available, a figure which in itself also tends to be
     well below the licensed capacity of the particular ground.

                                                                        -/3
3

18 December 1989

R M Whalley Esq

5)    Appeals Procedure

      We would strongly urge Lord Justice Taylor to consider how a speedy and
      effective appeals procedure might be set up to challenge unfair or
      aberrant requirements imposed by those in authority to do so.


In conclusion we would like to think that Lord Justice Taylor will be able
to discourage any "broad-brush" approach to the question of crowd safety and
control.   We accept that our game is a designated sport and we are a
  sponsible governing body determined to ensure that our spectators enjoy

t e reasonable standards of safety which they are entitled to expect.
  However, we are not in the same position as Association Football and we
would very much hope that Lord Justice Taylor will enjoin those in authority
to use in their dealings with our game the degrees of common sense,
feasibility and discretion still allowed them under the Safety at Sports
Grounds Act.

With my warmest personal good wishes.

Yours sincerely




D S Oxley
Chief Executive


enc
     Don’t 1
     pen RL j
     fans —
     report                          ■f.

    C10WD violence. at the f
  ' Yorkshire RL Cup Pinal at '<
    Headlngley on November :
 ■ S did not w arrant earn in g < :
    off areas of the gfoand. ;
       In a report to the Leeds
    W est p la n s su b -c o m ­
    m ittee, sa fe ty o ffic e rs
    covered three main points
    — penning, crush barriers L
    and screening spectators j
    through the turnstiles.             ;
       The report followed an ■
    incident during the final .
    between Bradford North-,
    e r n a n d P e a t h e r s t o n e ;■
    Rovers when a contro­
    versial decision by the
    referee caused a distur-,'
    b a n ce a m on g a s m a ll '
    g ro u p of R o v e r s ’ f a n s '
■ known as the Streeth-
    ouse Gang.
 j Resigned
 1     After the incident, Mr
    Richard Evans, chairman
    of Rovers, resigned s a y - '
  • ing: “Several features of '
    the Yorkshire Cup Final
    d istu r b e d me and my
    family deeply.”
       The referee stopped the -
 , game for between five '
    and 10 m in u te s w h ile
   police arrested 11 spec- ■
• ta to r s. T h e re w ere no
   casualties.
       T.hft: r e p o r t s aid,, th e
   grtiwfitf was desigi:e€i:;for ’
   free movement o f . Sffee-
   t a t o r s th ro n g h rfttt the
   rugby and cricket ground
   and this had worftei well
   over the years.
       “To pen certain areas ,
   would create problem s '
   and this isolated inci- :
   dent does not w arrant *
    such major alterations to
    the ground. RL specta- *\
    tors are, to a large ex-',
   teat, sett-policing.”
     —             ------ - j
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                    50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                   01-2732577/3602/2370




Councillor H Chase
Chair
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executive's Office
Room 5
Municipal Buildings            [>lte
Dal Street
LIVERPOOL L69 2DH          4 October 1989




Dear Councillor Chase

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you
for your letter of 21 September, together with
enclosures/ which he has read with interest.
He is particularly grateful to you for allowing
him sight of the various witness accounts and
of your own correspondence with other bodies.

                                Yours sincerely




                         Pf     R M WHALLEY
                        Secretary to the Inquiry
