                                                HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
m                                               Direct line: 01-273 3 3 1 4
                                              Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
Your reference:
    Neil, Kinghan Esq
    DOE
    Sport and Recreation Division
    Room P3/167
    2 Marsham Street
    LONDON                                            9 May 1989



    EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

    Bob Whalley has been discussing with us the arrangements for
    submitting evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.  As you know, oral
    evidence is being taken now and Sir Peter Taylor has asked that
    written evidence should be submitted to him by 12 June.

    My side of the Home Office will be preparing written evidence on
    the rationale for Part II of the Football Spectators Bill and on
    any other measures which the Home Office, rather than ACPO, have
    taken to promote effective crowd control with a view to preventing
    public disorder on football occasions.

    Bob Whalley will be approaching ACPO direct about the written
    evidence that they might submit.

    No doubt you will wish to organise within DOE evidence on the
    rationale for Part I of the Bill or for any other ideas that are
    likely to emerge in Parliament in this connection in the next few
    weeks.

    Written evidence should be submitted to Bob Whalley at his Home
    Office address.




                                                             J L GODDARD
                                                             F8 Division
hcc Mr   Chilcot
    Mr   Boys Smith
    Mr   Whalley
    Mr   F Smith
  CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING
                                                  /
  Introduction



5. 1.   Disorderly behaviour by groups of mainly young men is not of

  course confined to sporting events nor is it a uniquely British

  phenomenon.     However soccer fixtures do appear to present an

  opportunity for disorderly behaviour of often quite a violent degree
  and in particular in the light of the disorder at the Luton and

  Birmingham City grounds, and more, recently the tragedy at the European

  Cup Final in Brussels public concern with this problem is great.



5.2.    This part of the evidence describes the measures which the

  Government,    the police and not least the football authorities

  themselves are taking as a matter of urgency to deal with this

  problem;   it does not discuss the causation of such delinquent

  behaviour about which there are a number of differing theories.


  THE LAW



5-3.    The Government has announced its intention of making some

  adjustments to the criminal law which are directed at countering
  football hooliganism and strengthening the powers of the police when

  they reasonably apprehend serious disorder at a football match.        The

  Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Bill now before Parliament

  seeks to control the sale and possession of alcohol at or on the way

  to and from designated sports grounds in England and Wales.        The Bill

  is broadly based on Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act

  1980, though with variations    .   It is hoped that this Bill will be

  enacted, and be brought into force, before the beginning of the next
  football season.



5.4.    Next session the Government proposes to introduce legislation

  following its review of the law relating to public order.      The

  conclusions of this review were published in a White Paper on 16 May.
Of particular relevance to football is the proposal to give the police
power to exercise a degree of control over assemblies in the open air,

including sporting events.       It is proposed that where the police
reasonably apprehend serious disorder at such assemblies they will be

able, where necessary, to impose conditions,      including restricting the
numbers attending.     This   means that where the police reasonably

apprehend serious public      disorder at a football       match they will have in

reserve the power to limit the gate - a significant commercial

sanction.     This should strengthen their position in negotiating

sensible arrangements with the clubs (eg all~ticket arrangements,
changing the time of the      match) to minimise the       risk of disorder.



5.   The Government will      continue to keep under       review the adequacy of

the criminal law in penalising unacceptable anti-social behaviour, and

will consider any suggestions for strengthening the law in dealing with

aspects of football misbehaviour.       But the existing corpus of law is

already very extensive, and the Government does not believe that there

is any significant gap.       An important consideration - reflected in the

review of public order law - is the need to take into account the

practical aspects of law enforcement in situations of crowd disorder.
It would be undesirable to create new offences, however desirable in
principle,    if they could not be enforced effectively.



Penalties available to the courts



6.   Most offences with which disorderly football supporters are

charged carry the possible option of a custodial penalty and the

Government regards it as particularly important that magistrates make

full use of the powers they possess including detention and attendance

centre orders or bail conditions forbidding attendance at football

matches.     The sentences in the recent Cambridge case, which ranged from

five months to five years'      imprisonment or youth custody were widely

welcomed.     In his address to the Plymouth magistrates of 29 March the

Home Secretary reminded courts of the full extent of their powers.
    THE POLICE


    Police Operations


5
    7.   It is on the police that falls the unenviable task of dealing
. with outbreaks of soccer violence.       The strain which dealing with

    football hooliganism puts on the police service is considerable.

    Every Saturday throughout the season thousands of officers are

    deployed to escort fans to football matches and to keep order in the

    grounds.     In addition much police manpower is committed to dealing
    with offences committed by football fans at public houses and similar
    premises often some distance from the ground.


    Police tactics


5
    8.   In all major grounds there are now well established    arrangements

    for police command, deployment and liaison,   the location of away

    supporters and escorting them to and from transport.    Neither the

    police nor the Home Office would claim that these arrangements are

    incapable of improvement - on the contrary the must be kept under

    continuous review - but forethought,   local knowledge and experience

    have played and will continue to play a vital part in minimising the

    risk of disorder.    The importance of unremitting police effort and

    professionalism in avoiding disorder, and in coping with it when it
    occurs, cannot be overstressed.


5   9.   When violent disorder,   involving large numbers of people, does

    occur,   the immediate police priority must be to restore a degree of

    order (for example by clearing the pitch).    It may be impracticable,

    or impossible to spare manpower,   to make arrests at that stage.

    Arrests then follow as soon as the police feel that they have the

    situation under control.    The police bring serious charges whenever

    they have the evidence to do so and the successful prosecution

    recently for riot and affray in the Cambridge case is an example of

    this; the implications of that case are being considered by chief

    constables so that it can be taken fully into account in prosecuting
    decisions.
10.   As far as police powers are concerned there is no doubt that the

police have the power to enforce the criminal law inside sports

grounds.     For serious offences the police have a power of arrest

without warrant wherever the offence is committed.      In addition in

1976, the case of Cawley v Frost, the Divisional Court made it clear
that a football ground was a public place in its entirety for the

purpose of arrest under section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936


New measures



11.   Naturally,    the events of the last part of the 1984-85 season have

caused both the police and the Home Office to look again to see if

anything further can be done at national level to enable the police

further to minimise the risk of disorder and to bring offenders to

justice.     The legislative steps mentioned in paragraphs 3 and 4 above,

relating to alcohol and the review of public order law, are part of

the response.      In addition new arrangements are to be made for the
collection and dissemination of information about football crowd

behaviour.     So far as prosecutions are concerned, photography has an

important part to play in identifying offenders and providing evidence

to assist in securing a conviction.     The present position on

developments in relation to policing football matches is as follows:-



      (a)    Intelligence relating to crowd disorder   The Association of
      Chief Police Officers has decided to develop a co-ordinated

      scheme for the collection and dissemination of information

      relating to disorder at football matches.    After every League or

      Football Association Cup game (whether or not disorder occurs)

      the police will compile a comprehensive report covering all

      aspects of the game including offences committed and the

      travelling arrangements of the fans.    This report will be filed

      locally and a copy sent to the chief constable of the area of the

      visiting team.    This will enable each force to build up a

      comprehensive dossier, which is continually updated, on all

      aspects of their local teams' behaviour and will be a valuable
      aid when planning the policing of major football events.      This

      system is expected to be in place and working next season.
       (b)   Closed circuit television     A number of football grounds
       already possess closed circuit television installations which

       have a valuable role to play in crowd control.      The Football

       Trust has decided to allocate £500,000 to the provision of such

       equipment which is expected to give coverage in over 30 grounds.

       In addition to assisting in crowd control, photography has an

       important part to play in providing evidence to make possible the

       identification and prosecution of offenders.      Some forces have

       already used photographic equipment for such purposes with some

       success.    The Government understands that some of the available
      Football Trust money will be devoted to this aspect.



       (c)   Public Order Photographic Vehicle (the "Hoolivan")     The Home

      Office is pressing on with the development and provision of the

      Public Order photographic van - known in the popular press as the

      "hoolivan".     This is a suitably protected van which is capable of

      taking good quality still and video pictures outside and,      in some

      instances,    inside grounds.    It is intended to assist in crowd
      control and also to gather evidence for use in court

      proceedings.    Next season three such vans will be available

      centrally and a standard specification will be issued so that

      forces can decide whether to acquire their own vehicles.



      (d)    Radio communications     Radio communication links are being

      provided between British Transport Police contingents travelling
      on trains and local forces in order to ensure that there is

      effective liaison when supporters travelling to football matches
      become disorderly.




Other police matters



12.   The following paragraphs deal with other police matters which
Seem likely to be raised before the Inquirys-



      (i)    Searching of football supporters     The police do not possess a
      general power to search persons seeking to enter grounds, except

      with their consent or as a condition of entry.      The Police and
 Criminal Evidence Act does not change the police position in this
 respect.    When it comes into force on 1 January 1986 it will

 however give the police,    for the first time on a national basis, a

 power to stop and search persons in a public place where they
 reasonably suspect inter alia that the person possesses an

 offensive weapon.    (Under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol

 Etc ) Bill the police will also acquire a power to search a person
 whom they reasonably suspect of committing, or of having

 committed, an offence under the Bill.)     There is however some

 concern on the part of the police that the Police & Criminal

 Evidence Act will tend to focus much closer attention than in the

 past on their powers at law, and that this will have an inhibiting

 effect.    In the context of football grounds the Home Office has

 suggested to the football     authorities that it should be made a

 condition of entry to a ground that a    person should consent to be

searched by the police if so requested.      The football authorities
clearly have the right to      impose such a condition.



(ii)   Deployment of local     officers at away matches   It is

sometimes suggested that local community-based officers should

travel with sports supporters to away matches in order to identify
likely trouble-makers.    Throughout the 1983/84 season the

Hampshire Constabulary did send a team of local officers to each

away match played by Portsmouth.     That team has a hard core group

of violent supportes (known as the 657 Club) and the presence of
local Hampshire officers enabled members of this group to be

identified and effective preventive action to be taken.



The Association of Chief Police Officers accepts that the practice
has merit when the number of supporters involved is relatively

small and where, as at Portsmouth,    the trouble-makers form a

cohesive group.   Where large numbers of fans are involved,       and

this can run into thousands,    it is often just not possible for

local officers to know, much less be able to identify in a crowd,

more than a handful of the known trouble-makers.      The question of
whether to adopt this practice has been left to the discretion of
individual chief constables.
      (iii)   Section 188 of the Licensing Act 1964     Under section 188 of

      the Licensing Act 1964 the police may apply to any two justices of

      the peace to order the temporary closure of licensed premises

      (both pubs and off-licences) in the vicinity of any place where a

      riot or tumult happens or is expected to happen.

      This power is clearly relevant to licensed premises in the

      vicinity of football grounds.     It is a course open to the police

      if they judge it desirable.     This will however depend on the

      circumstances: there may be some operational disadvantage if the

      closure of pubs near to grounds leads to the dispersal of

      potentially disorderly fans who would thus become more difficult

      to control.



Financial responsibility for policing costs



14.   Generally the organisers of sporting events pay for those police

officers who are required to maintain order within their grounds.         The

costs of policing outside grounds fall on the police authority.         This

seems to be a reasonable division of financial responsibility and the

Government has therefore resisted suggestions that special financial

assistance from public funds should be given to football clubs to

assist them in discharging this responsibility.       (See also ^.6.)



ACTION BY FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES


15.   This part of the evidence is not concerned with those measures by

football clubs which, whilst having a public order function, are

principally concerned with safety; some options (for instance the

installation of closed circuit television) have already been

discussed.    In making the following comments the Government fully

recognises that the responsibility for these matters rests squarely

with the football clubs but equally the Government is convinced that

there is a heavy obligation on the football authorities to do all

within their power to control crowd disorder.
       Membership cards

  5
       16.     The Government has asked the football authorities to examine the

       possibility of introducing a system of membership cards, either

      nationally or on a more limited basis.     Such schemes    would help to

      segregate fans and in time enable the authorities        to weed out
      trouble-makers from true supporters.



      Bans on supporters at away matches



      17.     Limiting matches to home supporters would be     an extreme step and

      there would be serious difficulties of enforcement.       However it cannot
      be totally ruled out if the problem of crowd disorder at football
      matches worsens.


      Stewardinfl


5
      18.    Club stewards have an important role to play; in conjunction with

      the police, in controlling crowd behaviour inside grounds.       Clubs need

    to provide an adequate force of properly trained and efficient

    stewards.     Some police forces already co-operate very closely with clubs
    over the training of stewards.      Stewards should also be properly

    equipped with efficient communications and other facilities.


    Perimeter fencing



    19.      The installation of perimeter fencing is primarily to prevent

    spectators invading the pitch.      The considerations relevant to its

    provision are considered in the Home Office evidence relating to the
    review of the "Green Guide" (see para        if     ^ ,4


    Facilities for families


5 9n
  20.        At least as important as any of these specific measures are the

    steps which many football clubs are seeking to make attendance at

 matches an enjoyable activity for the whole family as is to some extent
  the case on the Continent; this can entail the provision of special

  family enclosures with comfortable and firmly anchored seating.            The

  Government fully supports this approach which offers perhaps the most

 promising hope for a long-term solution to the very difficult problem
 of football hooliganism.
