     %

<t




                                                 CONFIDENTIAL


          From:         Paul Pugh                      cc: Peter Edmundspn
                        Head of Operational Policing       Matthew P^rj0
                        Policy Unit
                        Room 539
                        Queen Anne’s Gate
                        8 0171-273-3141
                        27 February 1998




          Chris Bone


          HOUSE LIBRARIES


         Thank you for your note of 24 February, which we discussed. This note records how
         we will deal with each of the items identified in your note.

         Item i

         2.     The transcripts referred to are among those already placed in the library.
         Because Mr Bruder has previously agreed for a copy of his transcript to be sent to
         Mrs Williams, I see no need to check with his former force before placing it in the
         library.

         Item 2

         3.   W e will write to Mr Wells and Mr King, enclosing copies of the records of their
         meetings, seeking their agreement to placing copies in the library.

         item 3

         4.     As you suggest, there is no problem with written material from thoseidentified
         as witnesses, and it will be copied and placed in the library.

         5.   In relation to material from others who were consulted, the Home Secretary
         has already set out his view in a letter to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, and I do not
         consider that we need trouble the Judge further.

         6.     In relation to material from Judge Collins, Judge Steel, Mr Hytner, Mr
         Whitehurst, Mr Fraser, and Mr Metcalf, their views were sought because of their
         positions at the relevant times as legal advisers to their clients, and it may be that




         f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0612pd.doc
what they have provided would be treated as privileged material. We will seek LAB
advice on this point before we consider approaching those concerned.

7.     In relation to material provided by Mr Dorries, Mr Foster, Dr Popper, Dr
Wardrope, Sir David Parry-Evans and Mr Peter Wells, we will write to them seeking
their agreement that the correspondence should be placed in the library. As you
suggest, we will need to ensure that the home addresses of those concerned are
deleted from any copies placed in the library.

8.    W e will seek Dr Slater’s agreement that his letters should be provided on
request to Mrs Williams only.




Item 4

10.        To be copied and placed in the library.

Item 5

11.        W e will proceed as you propose.

Item 6

12.        Ditto.

Item 7

13.        Ditto.

Item 8

14.        Ditto.




15.       Ditto.

Item 10

16.   W e will seek the advice of Parliamentary Section about the requirements of
the House Library in relation to video material. W e will then as appropriate ask
Communications Directorate to copy the video tapes for us.




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0612pd.doc
South Yorkshire Police statements

17.       I recognise fully the weight of your reservations, but this matter was
discussed at length with Ministers before publication of the report, and the Home
Secretary came to the firm conclusion, reflected in his statement. The copy of the
documents for the Family Support Group was requested by Mr Peter Kilfoyle MP, so
I do not see any need separately to seek the agreement of South Yorkshire Police.
W e will now arrange the copying and transfer to the House Library.

18.  I am grateful to you for sorting out this material so methodically. Peter will
now ask Matthew to take forward writing to the various parties and copying the
documents as appropriate.




                                   PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0612pd.doc
