A   lun   M   ic h a e l   MP                                                                                      ilHgA
                                       CL<L                                        19 OCT 1998
                                                                                  H o m e O f f ic e
                                                          f   j/c-SkAsif        QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                                 LONDON SWIH9AT
                                                                                  Tel: 0171 273 4597
                                              A te -                              Fax: 0171 273 4090

                                              U h i C tc.
                                              b {S
                                                                                         3 r#

                                          /Vis         t-fCtf? fay
    Maria Eagle MP                        />»'
                                                                       /fQ      c to b to M                 V
    House of Commons
    LO N D O N SW1A OAA                  Aw
                                         A *r
                                                                                  jU vd<uM              W       v**^-
                                                                               w ~t                         fa *
                                                                                       Cc * '0 } /L*-   Gs0*A«      ^        ^
                                                                             fll . )^ 4 a A t»                      . )&*■
                                                                              £;          tt-T*             &      n ^*




    Following our telephone conversations yesterday about the appointment of
    Norman Bettison as Chief Constable of Merseyside Police I said that I would write
    to you, setting out in more detail some of the points we touched on.

    In terms of the appointment process, I confirmed on the ‘phone that it is normally
    the case for Ministers to see a shortlist of candidates and to confirm that they are
    content for any of these candidates to be appointed. As usual, this happened in this
    case. It is then for the Police Authority to decide who they wish to appoint from
    that shortlist.

    As I said on the ‘phone, Mr Bettison was given very strong references, not only
    from his own force, but also from Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary. I
    also understand that the Police Authority members were unanimous in their view
    that Mr Bettison was the best person for the job.

    Although I am unable to go into great detail, I said that I would look into some of
    the allegations which you said your local media were publishing about Mr Bettison.
    I also thought it would be helpful if I attach a copy of the press releases that West
    Yorkshire police and the Merseyside Police Authority released yesterday. In
    summary:

     •    Mr Bettison had no role in the operational decisions at the Ground on that day.
          He was off-duty when he attended the match as a spectator and he later played
          an active role in helping those affected by the tragedy by going to a local Police
          Station and helping to set up a Missing Persons’ Bureau.
•   Subsequent to this, Mr Bettison was part of a small Working Group, set up by
    South Yorkshire police which looked at what actually happened at
    Hillsborough on that day from a police perspective; safety of the Ground issues;
    and a full review of policing football matches in South Yorkshire.

•   Mr Bettison also attended the Taylor enquiry in a listening capacity in order to
    report back to the then Chief Constable on any major or relevant issues.

It has also been alleged that Mr Bettison was part of another team set up by South
Yorkshire police who edited statements from South Yorkshire police officers for
the purpose of extracting “emotional and irrelevant” passages. I have been told that
Mr Bettison was not personally involved in the taking of any statements nor was he
personally involved in editing statements at a later date.

 In sum, from what I have been told, Mr Bettison was off-duty and was not
involved in any operational decisions taken by the police on that tragic day in
Sheffield. It would seem that, as a football spectator, he tried to do all he could to
help those affected by the awful events at Hillsborough as he witnessed them
unfolding.




ALUN/MICHAEL
                                                                                                         P. o
     H -0C T -;99E   i0 :« 5     PROM   C . C . p .A                                  933270?




                     WEST YORKSHIRE                           PO. Box#
                                                              VVilwfWld

                     POLICE
                       Mecffa an d Public Relations
                                                              WF1JQP

                                                              Til; 01934 393041
                                                              Fn: 01924 2921N
                                                              vwMw                JW*noi»'




                                                                                                        NEWS RELEASE
                                                                   W ednesday 14 October 1998

                                  STATEMENT FROM NORMAN BETTISON
                                     THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

        I w ii a Chief Inspector In the Headquarters Personnel Department of 8outh Yorkshire
        Police at the time of the Hillsborough disaster. I was not Involved In any of the pre­
        planning or the policing of the match Itself. However, I was there a s a apectator,
        having bought a ticket for a seat In the South Stand, adjaoent to the Lappings Lane
        end. Along with thousands of other spectators I saw the tragedy unfold.

        I left the ground at 3.25pm and drove to the nearest police station in Hammerton Road
        to put myself on duty and help In any way that I could. Many people, who left the
        football ground and were looking for friends and relatives, were arriving at the police
        station and I was given the task, helped by a group of other officers, of taking details
        of people who had become separated at the ground. We eventually opened a boys’
        dub netf door to the station for people to wait. I went off duty at 8am the next day.
        That was the extent of my involvement on the day of the disaster.

        I returned to work as normal on the Monday. A few days later 1was assigned with
        other officers to a unit which was set up under a Chief Superintendent and two
        Superintendents. The unit was tasked with looking at what had happened on the day
        of Vie diaastsr. making recommendations about the policing of the remaining football
        matches at Hillsborough before the end of the season and reviewing policing
        arrangements for football at Hillsborough and other grounds in South Yorkshire the
        following season. The unit also liaised with and psssed information to W est Midlands
        Police who were undertaking the formal and Independent police Investigation into the
        disaster.

         After the Immediate work of the unit was complete, I was given a specific role to
         monftor the public Inquiry and the inquest and brief the Chief Constable on progress.

         No-one wfio was at Hillsborough on that day, myself Included, can fall to have been
         touched by the tragedy. I do not share the suffering of the bereaved fa ml IIlas but I do
         share some of the horror of that fateful day. Those who lost loved ones at
         Hillsborough will havs my deepest sympathy for ever.

                                                       ends




                                                                                                TOTPL   P.82
1 4 - 0 C r - 9 8    i i : i 7                                                                             P .02
K   14 OCT   ’ 98   16:26     FROM C H I E F   CONSTABLES OFCE         TO C H I E F   HMI               PAGE.0 0 1 /0 0 1



                                                           MERSEYSIDE
                                                           FOXJCE
                                                          IAUTHORITY



                K/132/93                                                                    October 1998

                           STATEMENT FROM MERSEYSIDE POLICE AUTHORITY

                M erseyside P<>lk*» Authority appointed Norman Bettison a s M erseyside's new Chief

                Constable a ft t two days of interviews with several high quality candidates.
                                  I


                The dedasien
                        sio n jo appoint
                                 si      Mr Bettison w as a unanimous one m ade by the
                                  |
                Appoint mentsi Committee of nine members. He w as an outstanding candidate and
                               I
                offered th e b^st qualities to lead the M erseyside Force into the next Millennium,



                M erseyside P oil aa Authority w as aware of Mr Bettison’s operational policing

                experience in:lL ding his association with Hillsborough, when a s Chief Inspector he

               w as part of S >uth Yorkshire s team of officers set up following the tragedy. Mr

                B ettisoi was r>oi Involved in any of the pre-planning or policing of the match.
                              i
                              !


                M erseyside F oli : e Authority h a s always recognised th e sensitivity of this issue and

                the feelings <f the fa mi ies concerned. It does stress however that Mr Bettison is an

                outstanding <f f i^ r and th at the Authority h a s every confidence that h e will u se his

                considerable abilities end experience for the benefit of the Force and th e people of

                Mersa/side j is a whole.
                For IvrtlHtr <nform*tion cimUtct:
                Sue Crmesl mr
                Tel;              3537
                24hr: 0139$ 7 i7 455

                    mpa/wwcMlMibn«




       14 OCT       ’ 90   14:3
                                                                                        **    TOT h L   PAGE.00 1 * *
