                                       IN CONFIDENCE



            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 528
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line 0171273 4347 Fax 2703



R B Wells Esq QPM                                              Your reference:
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police                                         Our reference:
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY                                              Date:         /    January 1998




                  Mr \jodXi
HILLSBOROUGH - REPORT TO THE HOME SECRETARY


You kindly visited Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 25 November to discuss a number of issues
arising out of his scrutiny of evidence relating to the Hillsborough football stadium disaster.

2.     One of these was the question of the apologies which you have made on behalf of
South Yorkshire Police. You gave the Judge some examples, including a video, and
mentioned four main police errors.

3.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that his report to the Home Secretary would confirm
that the force had gone on record as apologising. He added that he would show this part of
it to you before submitting it to the Home Secretary. The Home Secretary does of course
plan to publish the report.

4.     Work on the report is at an advanced stage and I am enclosing a copy of the part of it
which deals with the apologies. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would appreciate any
observations you may have as soon as possible.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




                                     IN CONFIDENCE
GAHILLSBORUWAIN W ELLS. 236
                                      IN CONFIDENCE




 draft


1.      One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police had
        never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have discussed this with
        Mr Wells, the Chief Constable. He told me the allegation is not true. He said that
        he was continually going on public platforms to express his and the Force’s regret.
        He gave me some examples (and there are many others).


2.      In apress release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:


                “If there seems to be any sense of relief in South Yorkshire Police today it
               should not be mistaken fo r celebration. I have the profoundest sense o f
               sorrow fo r the 95 deaths that occurred, any sense o f relief that we do feel is
               diminished by the desolation o f the families who lost loved ones. We have
               come to the end o f another phase o f the long, slow process o f understanding
               and healing. ”


3.      In atelevision interview on the same day there was the following exchange:


               Trevor Hicks: “I was gladdened when I heard his announcement earlier
               where fo r the first time publicly I have heard the Chief Constable publicly
               apologising and expressing regret to the families


       The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf of the
       Force that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:


               “I would not have said it if it wasn’t true ... as I say, as a parent with all


                                     IN CONFIDENCE
G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
                                      IN CONFIDENCE


                the feelings that I can muster, to Mr Hicks and everybody, else who has lost
                loved ones here, we are, not just the Chief Constable but all o f the officers
                involved are terribly sorry. It is an inexpressible grief to have to bear and I
                know■ words don't count fo r much but they are sincerely meant. ”


4.     In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:


                "I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could. I can only say
                sorry so much, but by God, we are sorry. ”




•
5.     In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:


                ‘The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure o f the police to
                order the closure of the tunnel leading to the terracing as a “blunder o f the
               first magnitude     South Yorkshire Police has consistently and unequivocally
               accepted the truth o f this finding. I repeat it now. How can anyone fairly
               describe this acceptance o f responsibility as evasion ?


               Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord Justice Taylor
               concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the disaster - the
               layout of the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion arising at the
               turnstiles, inadequate signing - were some . . . . I repeat that blame
               apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor has been accepted by South Yorkshire
               Police. ’


6.     Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ‘Hillsborough’’ Mr Wells
       issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:


                “I am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families fo r the
               police’s part in the tragedy and I repeat that every time I have the
               opportunity. We were found wanting and have faced up to our responsibility


                                     IN CONFIDENCE
G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
                                          IN CONFIDENCE


                  fo r our role, but we were not the only ones who played a part in it and it is
                   time fo r others, including the fans, to do the same and fo r the families to try
                   to start building bridges. ”


 7.     At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s Interim
        Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had been four main
        errors:


        i)     failing to delay the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at Leppings
                  Lane;


        ii)-      not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens
                  were full by 2.50 p.m;


        iii)      not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was opened and
                  not blocking off the tunnel - this was the critical mistake; and


        iv)       not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not reacting
                  sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.


8.      But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor (see
        Chapter 1, paras       ), and that the police did not bear the sole responsibility for the
       disaster although he accepted that they took the largest share. This is in accordance
        with Lord Taylor’s findings and is reflected in the settlement reached in the civil
       proceedings. Whatever may have been the attitude of the previous Chief
       Constable, I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police
       have never apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.




                                        IN CONFIDENCE
G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WELLS.236
