                         Upy K vis'iK        ^ /]}
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                 The Rt Hon Lordjustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                              S' i Q u e e n A:'., e - 1 uite
                                              l.i»ndon s\V! I I AT
                                              D l-J   i   2~i    'it'1 23~f)


Councillor Edward Brian Fallon
Chairman General Purposes Committee
Lothian Regional Council
Regional Chambers
Parliament Square
EDINBURGH
EH1 1TT                                       Date
                                                 27 November 1989




Dear Councillor Fallon

Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
15 November inviting him to visit Lothian Region.  He is very
grateful to you for your kind invitation.

As you know, Lord Justice Taylor visited Murrayfield on 28
October to see the arrangements for the Scotland v Fiji rugby
international and to talk to police and rugby officials.   In
addition, whilst in Scotland, he had meetings with the
Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland), the Scottish
Fire & Ambulance Services, the Scottish Football League and the
Scottish Football Association.  He has also visited Hampden Park,
Celtic Park, McDiarmid Park and Ibrox.

Given the tight timetable to which Lord Justice Taylor is working
I am afraid that there is no realistic prospect of another visit
to Scotland and he must, regretfully, decline your kind offer.
However, if you have any further comments or evidence which you
would like to draw to the Inquiry's attention please do not
hesitate to submit them in writing to me at the above address.

                                           Yours sincerely




                                           R M WHALLEY
                                      Secretary to the Inquiry
                                          IVfcNKV    IW dt*l
                            IW W j                  LO TH IA N R EG IO N A L C O U N C IL


                                    -t Pt IL        Regional Chambers,
                                                    Parliament Square, Edinburgh EH1 1TT
                                     iM             Tel: 031-229 9292



                                                    Councillor Edward Brian Fallon
                                         y ,        Chairman, General Purposes Committee
Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Secretary
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster
50 Queen Anne1s Gate
London
SW14 9AT                                               15 November 1989




Dear Lord Justice Taylor

SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS

As Chair of the General Purposes Committee of Lothian Regional Council
I wish to extend to you on behalf of my Committee an invitation to visit
the Region to view at first hand the situation in relation to major
stadia within Lothian. Lothian Region covers the Districts of Edinburgh,
Midlothian, East Lothian and West Lothian, with the following designated
stadia :

      Easter Road Stadium (Hibernian Football Club)
      Tynecastle Stadium (Heart of Midlothian Football Club)
      Meadowbank Stadium (City of Edinburgh District Council)
      Murrayfield Stadium (Scottish Rugby Union)

the last of which listed you visited on 4 November 1989.

This authority, the District Councils, Police, Fire Brigade and stadia
operators have worked together for many years to continually monitor sports
grounds, set down standards and improve facilities at grounds within the
Region.

The recommendations of your Interim Report have been acted upon as an
interim measure, in recognition of the broad approach adopted.

The conditions and systems pertaining in the Region are considerably
different from those that appeared to exist in Sheffield and the manner
in which the various problems - both physical and administrative - are
handled utilises the considerable local knowledge available to the
certifying authority.

This invitation is extended to you so that we may demonstrate the advantages
of the flexible nature of the current legislation and the benefits of
retaining this flexibility, while, at the same time, strengthening those
areas that are currently weak and where amendment will be of assistance
(eg annual certification).

We/
Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Secretary
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster               15 November 1989




We are anxious to ensure that any further proposals you might make
should continue to allow certifying authorities to take account of
local factors to provide answers to what, in many cases, are isolated
and unique local problems.

Yours sincerely




Councillor Edward Brian Fallon
Chair
General Purposes Committee
