f




    Edmundson Peter
    From:                      Bone Chris
    Sent:                      09 July 1999 09:02
    To:                        Duke-Evans Jonathan
    Cc:                        Edmundson Peter; Pyne Matthew
    Subject:                   Hillsborough



          w
        SCHEDULE.doc



    This follows u p your call to me yesterday.

    A ttached schedule (which I th in k appeared as an Appendix to the Hillsborough scrutiny report) lists all the
    docum entary evidence (written, photographic & videotape) w hich Lord Ju stice S tuart-S m ith considered
    during the exercise. Aside from w hat is listed here there were also the interviews he h ad w ith victims'
    relatives and others (all transcribed ap art from his discussions w ith Tim King QC & R ichard Wells, w hich I
    wrote notes of) and various (but not all th a t many) letters the scrutiny received.

    M att can access the bits of all th is docum entation w hich still rem ain in the Home Office.

    Hope this helps. I am out all today b u t will be back in the office on Monday if needed.




                                                            1
Schedule   -   Documents and videotapes examined by the Scrutiny


NOTE - This schedule lists the material examined by the scrutiny which is not
referred to in Appendix 1 o f the Scrutiny report. Appendix 1 lists particular written
statements which the scrutiny considered, and people who sent in written
submissions. These statements and submissions do not appear in the list below.

With these important exceptions the schedule lists all the documents and videotapes o f
any significance which the scrutiny team examined.


Documents

1.     Lord Taylor’s Inquiry - interim and final reports (published by HMSO).

2.     Transcripts and other documentation from Lord Taylor’s Inquiry (Public
       Record Office, 106 volumes).

3.     Transcripts of the initial (so-called ‘mini’) inquests on 95 victims, held at
       Sheffield from 18 April to 4 May 1990 (obtained from the South Yorkshire
       Coroner).

4.     Transcripts of the resumed (or ‘main’) inquest on the 95 victims, held at
       Sheffield Town Hall from 19 November 1990 to 28 March 1991 (80 days of
       transcripts, obtained from the South Yorkshire Coroner).

5.     West Midlands Police report to the Director of Public Prosecutions, including
       witness statements (23 volumes, obtained from South Yorkshire Police).

6.     Statements by South Yorkshire police officers (obtained from South Yorkshire
       Police).

7.     ‘Body files’ (obtained from South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of the
        Coroner) on, among others

                 James Aspinall
                 Kester Ball
                 Andrew Brookes
                 Paul Carlile
                 Gary Church
                 Tracey Cox
                 Ian Glover
                 Philip Hammond
                 Sarah Hicks
                 Victoria Hicks
                 Gary Jones
                 Richard Jones
       Nicholas Joynes
       Michael Kelly
       John McBrien
       Keith McGrath
       Lee Nicol
       Graham Roberts
       Steven Robinson
       Andrew Sefton
       Adam Spearitt
       Philip Steele
       Christopher Traynor
       Kevin Traynor
       Kevin Williams

South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 FA Cup
semi-finals at Hillsborough (obtained from South Yorkshire Police).

Legal Opinion by Alun Jones QC for the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
13 March 1997, with Annexes A to G (obtained from Hillsborough Family
Support Group).

Memorial to the Attorney-General on behalf of the families of six of the
deceased, seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992 (obtained from the Attorney-
General’s office).

Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court, seeking
judicial review of various decisions of the Coroner, 1993 (obtained from the
Family Support Group).

Judgement of the Divisional Court on that application, November 1993
(obtained from the Attorney General’s office).

Joint Opinion of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC for the Director of
Public Prosecutions, August 1990 (obtained from the Crown Prosecution
Service).

Report of a review of the evidence by the Crown Prosecution Service, May
1997 (obtained from the Crown Prosecution Service).

Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police, 1990 (obtained from
the Police Complaints Authority).

Inquiry and Report by J D Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of Devon and
Cornwall, August 1990 (obtained from the South Yorkshire Police).
17.   ‘No Last Rights’ (book) - Phil Scraton, Ann Jemphrey and Sheila Coleman,
      published by Liverpool City Council, 1995.

18.   'The Day o f the Hillsborough Disaster’ (book) - compiled and edited by
       Rogan Taylor, Andrew Ward and Tim Newburn, published by Liverpool
       University Press, 1995.

19.   ‘Guide to the Safety o f sports Grounds', 1986 edition, HMSO.

20.   Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office, 1997.

21.   Report ‘Advice in respect o f the Hillsborough Stadium and the disaster on 15
      April 1989’ prepared for Sheffield Wednesday FC by Sir William Halcrow
      and Partners, August 1990 (obtained from Hammond Suddard, Solicitors for
      the South Yorkshire Police).

22.   Photographic archive of the disaster held by South Yorkshire Police.


Videotapes

23.   Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 (originals of TB1 and TB2, copies of
       TB3 and 4 - from South Yorkshire Police).

24.   Police tape VRM2 (copy obtained from South Yorkshire Police).

25.   ‘Compilation tape’ of the disaster, made by West Midlands Police (obtained
       from South Yorkshire Police).

26.   British Broadcasting Corporation tapes of the disaster, MAP 1 to 9 (copies
      obtained from the BBC).

27.   Betacam tapes of the disaster owned by Yorkshire Television (obtained from
      YTV).

28.   Coroner’s exhibit C539 (extract from tape TB2, shown to inquest jury on the
      morning of 15 March 1991 (day 71 of the resumed Inquest) (obtained from
      South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of the Coroner).

29.   Proceedings at the Inquest on the morning of 15 March 1991 (obtained from
       South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of the Coroner).

30.   Granada Television drama-documentary ‘Hillsborough’, broadcast December
       1996.

31.   ‘Kevin’s M um \ an episode of the 'Cook Report' (Yorkshire Television),
       broadcast June 1994.
‘Disaster at Hillsborough’ (Yorkshire Television 'First Tuesday’
documentary), broadcast February 1990.
