 /-A C tft& S .                                                 fa,
                                                              INI
The Editor


2j_r                                                         10th NoveT.ber 1982
    It would be asking too much of political pygmies like Colin y.oynihsr. Kr to pause
and comprehend the sinister magnitude and reciprocal political subversive potential of
his (and Mrs Thatcher's) proposed identity card for soccer fans.
  Any mainframe computer system can be thrown into total confusion by the introduction
of a few small magnets placed in strategic areas within the computer.      A handful of
iron filings scattered randomly throughout the computer will destroy the monster comp­
letely.     There must be numerous soccer fanatic computer technicians with the know­
ledge and access to the proposed 'Soocer Control1 computer capable of taking a 'backs
to the wall' initiative.       A skill computer technician could easily reverse the flow
of information to any one of the proposed ninety two soccer ground terminals back to
the the mainframe computer to plant a cancer, virus, or simply wipe the existing memory.
  With twenty thousand fans outside the 'Den' or 'Kop' baying for admission, with the
computer immobilised or on the blink, what would the political cretin then advise the
ground officials do?      Run?
  6.5 million fans to be identified and placed on this state police computer?
What sort of mixed-race Anglo-Saxon ordour would submit to such dictate?      Surely not
the very same servile, compliant, bovine Anglo-Saxon cretin who is expected in 1992 to
up ~n^ capture the export markets of the world?     Currently banned from Europe, come
1992, the English fan must be granted automatic access, computer or no computer.
  Why bother with a'lid' to contain the mobile soccer hooligan when the social cauldron
is irreparably split asunder?
  Ihe writer‘is quite prepared to forego the occasional visit to Craven Cottage, reject
computerisation, and observe soccer's continuing decline until it withers and dies.
  With multi-choice satellite television sport the writing is on the 'storyboard'.
  It never ceases to amaze that the Anglo-Saxon soccer fan pays unsound money (Thatcher
money) to stand and watch an increasing number of over-paid ethnic players kick the
ball (and opponents) about.      Ethnic players on divisive salaries, perks, and life­
style those same fans will never ever achieve; plus the addditional arrorsl degenerate
attraction to the mutually responsive miscegenist.
  Surely the pattern for the political . radical anarchist of the future is to reject
the indiscriminate primeval bomb and bullet, mailing and killing the enemy, sundry
enforcers, and the innocent victim alike, and concentrate instead on the vulnerable
State regulation, control, and direction computers.
  England is finished as a stExle, homogenous,ur.ifiea country; it is going to fragment
disintegrate, go tribal into cults, creeds, mutual self-interest affliaticns, soccer
fashion.      Ulster and Ireland will eventually come to their dormant senses and unite,
not over Religion, but Race, to preserve their identical cultural integrity and harmony.
Scotland too, will take the same separation path to avoid the fate of rrulti-ethnic
England.     Wales, too small for autonomy, will almost certainly develop a nationalist
strain not unlike that of the IRA.
  Sport is now part of the political arena.      Far from forlornly attempting to eli­
minate the soccer fan, denying him access, etc., the Thatcher government should stop
intervening and leave the soccei^ro confront fellow soccer fan.      Crushing soccer
(fan and club) will transfer the problem to cricket, rugby, Wimbledon, and any public
sporting venue attracting a congregation, guaranteeing an audience.      In the few
years left for Remembrance Day to be observed even that occasion will/can become the
object of political demonstration.     It is truly surprising it has not become so now.
  This, after all, is supposed to be the government that never intervenes,leaving
matters to the 'free' market.      This government of menopausal Thatcher, and her
menagerie of acolyte eunuchs, have intervened in every aspect of life and social
affairs to a greater degree than any government in living memory.      This is a deli­
berate ploy to divide and pre-occupy the population, divert attention from the myriad
cancers eroding society., to develop a form of social aeurosis known to the more per­
ceptive as the slack bowel, loose stool syndrome.      The interventionist State para­
site, thug, and bully(and coward) only understands, reacts, and retreats when faced
with violence, hence the remorseless rise and rise of the socctr-playing exotic alienl
   Life is War, War is Life.      Mem needs conflict, conflict without contact,
aggression without violence, positive not passive.     The alleged soft-centre of
masculine Thatcher and her emasculated followers must be confronted by the assertive,
positive, creative hard-centre of the true man if he is to survive as a man.
  The people the writer feels most sorry for are the reserved, meek,shy, sensitive,
and fearful among the young (f..k the old who are responsible for this state of affairs)
who are condemned and treated as excreta.
  Go to it you computerised soccer fans - reciprocity is the name of the new league
game - you have nothing to fear but fear itself.
The Editor    __ ___ __                               ^
                                                      ___________
                   _ .                                              iSth June 19^8
copy to Buckingham Palace

Sir,
    The neutered male Hone Office sycophants sheltering behind the transparent skirt of
Thatcherism should ponder the possible reaetion if they succeed in confiscating the passports
of those mobile soccer fans with a penchant for positive physical action.
The intelligent soccer fan (sans passport) could easily make availability for jury service,
completion of a tax return, responding to mobilisation or conscription, compliance with the
Poll Tax, dependent upon the return of his passport.
  Before contemplating confiscation of passports of potential cannon-fodder I would much prefer
the Home Secretary elaborate on his plans to contain and eliminate the inner-city rapist and
mugger Cparwin's imported biological anarchist) in the event of a national emergency.
  Like the best informed defence sources the writer subscribes to the view that Britain, as a
pagan, amoral, multi-racial pornographic brothel, will never ever again witness total, mass,
or even partial, mobilisation, whatever the crisis or emergency.
  It is naive of Mrs Thatcher to reciprocate and threaten the soccer hooligan with the cudgel
of State incomprehension, ignorance.     The Europeans have only themselves to blame for being
captive hosts to pandemic British violence.      When political treachery took Britain into the
Common Market did the Europeans imagine for one moment they were getting a stable, mature,
worthy, wholesome and healthy addition to the socialist club?     Cretinous Edward Heath took
one look at Britain's mounting economic, industrial, social, sexual and racial problems,rightly
decided they were insoluble by internal domestic resolve, and bolted for Europe and an imposed
external solution to those problems.     The myopic, greedy, grasping Europeans (lustfully
coverting Britain's North Sea energy resources, Britain's massive overseas investments, plus
Britain as an offshore dumping ground for their surplus manufactured products and excessive
agricultural produce) thought it would be all selfish one-way gain for them.
  Did the Europeans not stop to think that a'free, independent, sovereign *island of 55nillion
moral-fibre deficient citizens, dominated by institutions and 'Pillars of Society' rotten to
the core, incapable of producing leaders and developing a survival philosophy and culture, was
anything but a terminally sick society?
  Soccer and social violence is merely symptomatic of a deeper, more widespread and sinister
malignant cancer in Thatcher's Utopia.    After Heath's demise, Mrs Thatcher, as a female global
egotist, was elevated by a Tory Central Office clique to frustrate debate and dialogue of
Britain's intractable racial and sexual problems.     In addition to the gender faetor Central
Office decided upon a form of pseudo-monetarism, which in reality is venal Hebrew economics
of materialism and consumerism, to pre—occupy the population.     Thatcherism comprises a
Judaean 'Epidemic of Spending' coupled with the endorsement of safe pre-marital sex - Licence
replacing Freedom as a means of regulating, controlling, directing society.
  A parallel exists here with Brazil where an intolerable rate of annual inflation, ehronic
poverty and social division,is made tolerable by periodic ritualistic worship of a 'Frenzy of
Fucking' (BBC idiom).    The massed soccer fans merely represent troops without leadership,
example, faith or hope.    The pitiful pathetic recourse to the Union flag by the soccer fan
indicates a yearning of a former national identity lost in the vassal status of Britain in a
Federal Socialist Europe.
  Absolutely no stone must be left unturned in the dissection of soccer and social violence.
What is the composition of massed collective soccer activists?         Do they include police
officers, prison warders, servicemen'*., customs' officers .,and sundry other civil and public
service enforcers?     A busman's holiday in reverse?       Are they aliens in their land of birth?
  The soccer fans in Germany were exclusively white.        Did the other variety remain at 'home'
to continue in their remorseless mission to indulge in miscegenation?         Are the white male
soccer Cans artisan craftsmen from what remains of Britain's manufacturing industry reacting
against the system which has put the unskilled, unequal amoral female police officer on average
earnings double of theirs?      The imposition of irresponsible, subversive Sex and Race Equality
Unequal Opportunity has dealt a mor'tal blow to the male psyche, undermined the role of male and
father in society, whilst iaporting the exotic alien (to the delight of certain female native
turpitude) has compromised the chaste caucasian libido.         Do the soccer fans' include self-
employed artisans and craftsmen (the last generation of indigenous skilled industrial strivers)
reduced to documentation fodder and administrative grist, travelling abroad to seek temporary
respite from the antics of the highly political index-linked inflation-proofed parasite and___
institutionalised tax bully and VAT thug?        'Poor White Trash' small businessmen consigned to "
'gutter' travel and packaged travel as a consequence of the VAT poverty-trap turnover limit?
  A terrifying political, moral, and spiritual vacuum prevails under Thatcher.
This was predictable, inevitable, avoidable.    After three elections and ten years of 'leader­
ship' Mrs Thatcher is still running a European bureaucrat dominated socialist interventionist
economy., intervening now in the proposed confiscation of passports.
  The Labour Party meanwhile, after generations of anti-work ideology (catering for those unable
to determine their own dubious worth), reduced hours, higher pay, increased leisure, aow
describes the white male mobile soccer fan as over-paid witi (2X01S5» surplus money.
Is the Labour Party advocating a low wage economy to deter and inhibit the itinerant hooligan
soocer supporter?
  Mrs Thatcher and her poisoned chalice of materialism are destined to be buried with the depth,
swiftness, remote anonymity reserved for the seventeenth-century plague carrier as the future
Tory Party adopts Tebbitism, Howeism, Lawsonism (God forbid!).           ,
  England no longer a nation, the English no longer a race?
