w

                                                                                          J j   f£ B 1935

                                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                                           12 FEB 1998
                                          Personal and In Confidence

      The Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
      Royal Courts of Justice
      London
      WC2A 2LL



               /^ J Q u - A -   x /t A ^ ^ N 'c t   if t v ^ v U ir    —*   jTiW   t
     I am now able to let you know how I intend to respond to the report of your
     scrutiny of the evidence about the disaster at Hillsborough.

      I will be making an oral statement to the House of Commons and publishing the
     report on the afternoon of Wednesday 18 February. I have considered your
     report very carefully, and I am very grateful for the thoroughness with which
     you have set out the relevant evidence and the reasons for your conclusions I
     am entirely satisfied that your central conclusions are right, and I shall be making
     that clear when I publish the report. I will ensure that you receive a copy of the
     text of my statement when it is available.

     In your letter of 29 January you referred in particular to the publication of the
     evidence which you considered during your scrutiny. As I said in the House of
     i ^ i T u 118 ° n 30 June' * intend t0 be as °Pen as possible with relevant material.
     I shall be publishing the transcripts of oral evidence and the written evidence of
     those listed in paragraph 4 of Appendix 1 to your report and in paragraph 5 of
     Appendix 1, with the exception of the reports which relate solely to the death of
     Kevin Williams. I do not think it would be right to publish material which relates
     specifically to the fate of individual victims, except those cases which are
     covered in the main text of your report. For that reason I do not intend to
     publish Appendix 9 in full: I will be arranging for the relevant sections of that
     Appendix to be sent to the individual families concerned. I am enclosing a copy
     of what will be the published text of Appendix 9. For the same reason, I agree
    that the transcripts of your private discussions with relatives and the
    submissions which they sent to you should not be published. It will of course
    be open to the individual families if they wish to disclose such material to third
    parties. I intend to publish the transcripts and written material arising from your
    discussions with those listed in paragraph 6 of Appendix 1. I understand that
    those people have in general provided assistance to your scrutiny, rather than
    evidence about the disaster itself; but I think this is a distinction which would be
    difficult to defend if the material in question were not made public.




                                                JACK STRAW
,/


         APPENDIX 9




         Some individual cases


         In his report as submitted to the Home Secretary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals in
         Appendix 9 with a number of questions put to him by the families of particular
         victims about the exact circumstances in which their relatives died and with
         difficulties which they said existed with the police documentation.

         Given that the appendix deals with individual cases, the relevant passages have been
         sent directly to those concerned rather than included in the published report.




     #
