The Institution of
Structural Engineers                                                                         %   The Institution of
Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royal Charter 1934                                                  Structural Engineers
                                                                                                 11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                                 London SW1X 8BH

                                                                                                 01-235 4535
From the President
P L Campbell   |P D i e CEng FIStructE F1CE FIM arE F1HT FIDE F A s l E M ConsF
                                                                                  3MAX19&9       Fax: 01-235 4294


             PLC/JWD/MT                                                            k{jttON



             26 April 1989



             The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP
             The House of Commons
             London
             SW1A OAA


             Dear Home Secretary
             THE HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC INQUIRY
             Following my le tte r of 18 April, I now enclose a copy of the cover le tte r that
             I have submitted to Lord Justice Taylor with evidence prepared by this Institution.

             Yours sincerely




             Enc
- The Institution of
  Structural Engineers                                                         The Institution of
 Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royal Charter 1934                               Structural Engineers
                                                                               11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                               London SW1X 8BH

                                                                                01-235 4535
 From the President
 P L Campbell   |P D i e CEng FIStnlctE FICE FIM arE F1HT FIDE FASCE M ConsF   Fax: 01-235 4294
   PLC/JWD/MT                                                                     26 April 1989

  R Whalley Esq
  Secretary to the Taylor Inquiry
  Room 662
  Queen Annes Gate
  London
  SW1H 9AT

   Dear Mr Whalley

  Re:      The Hillsborough tragedy - Saturday, 15 April:
           Evidence for the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor

  The Institution of Structural Engineers has an ad hoc committee that has been working
  since December 1986 to produce a report on the appraisal of sports grounds. The background
  to the work of this committee is given in the accompanying paper with the title 'Appraisal
  of sports grounds; Evidence to the Taylor Inquiry'. The work is not yet fully complete
  but has reached a stage where a complete draft is available together with minutes of
  the committee's discussion of the draft. This stage was reached before the Hillsborough
  tragedy so that the views expressed are not influenced by that particular event.

   I believe strongly that the views developed by the committee are important and will be
   a valuable source of evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry. Accordingly I enclose,
   together with the cover paper, the third draft report and minutes of the committee meeting
   held on 16 September 1988.
   The fact that the Institution is in the process of producing a report on appraisal of sports
   grounds has been reported in the technical press and there has been some speculation
   on its contents. However, it is not our intention to release the draft report to the press
   or other interested parties, at least at this stage. Our view, within the Institution, is
   that the draft cannot be separated from the minuted discussion and, in the context of
   Hillsborough, should be considered with all the other evidence that is available to the
   Inquiry.
   In addition to making the formal submission, I write to offer my own services as a chartered
   structural engineer and President of this Institution to help with the work of the Inquiry.
   In addition members of the Institution ad hoc committee on Appraisal of Sports grounds
   will be available to give evidence in their own right if so required.

   Finally, may I offer my best wishes for the success of the Inquiry with the expectation
   that the resulting report will provide guidance so that events like those of 15 April cannot
   happen again.

   Yours sincerely
