E*5t*


    From: M J Addison                      cc   Mr Walters
          FI Division                           Mr Yates
          Extn 3743                             Mr Chilcot
          23 May 1989                           HMCIC
                                                Mr Woodcock
                                                Mr Brownlow
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                Mr Malone-Lee
                                                Ms Edwards, LAB
                                                Mr Sandiford
                                                Mr Nagler
                                                Mr Whalley
                                                Ms Ransford


   Ms Adams


   HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS' POLICE-
   LORD FERRERS' MEETING WITH THE WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY ON 25
   MAY


   A background note, line to take and speaking notes on individual
   points which may be raised at the meeting are attached.
   Ms Ransford and I will attend the meeting,   it would be helpful if
   someone from Finance Division 2 would attend the meeting.




                                     M J ADDISON
HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATIONS: BACKGROUND NOTE
Background

West Midlands Police Authority wrote to the Home      Secretary on 25
April and 4 May about the costs of the West          Midlands Police
investigation into the Hillsborough Disaster.        (A copy of the
letter from Mr Astling, Clerk to the Authority, is   at Annex A).

2.   Mr Addison wrote to   Mr Astling (copy at Annex B) informing him
that the Home Secretary     had asked Lord Ferrers to receive their
deputation on his behalf    to discuss the costs issue. This meeting
has been arranged for 25   May.


3.   The Home Secretary has given an undertaking (in a reply to Mr
Anthony Beaumont-Dark MP and in correspondence with other Midlands'
MPs, copies at Annex C) that West Midlands will not have to meet
any additional costs arising from the investigation.       It seems
likely that the West Midlands Police Authority will press for a
direct payment to the West Midlands from central government funds.

Likely costs of West Midlands police inquiries

4.   West Midlands have initially committed some 350 police
officers to the investigation (which is interviewing witnesses in
Merseyside as well as South Yorkshire). They estimate that there
will be additional direct expenditure of some £2.4 million on the
next two months (for overtime working, expenses, accommodation and
travelling etc) plus £1.1 million for estimated consequential
overtime   (worked in West Midlands to cover for the absent
officers).   This gives £3.5 million, or £1.7 million for each of
the first two months of the enquiry. There may also be additional
costs in West Midlands associated with enhancing their computer
capacity for the enquiry and additional civilian overtime. Beyond
that, the costs have not been estimated, although there could be
some scaling down of the enquiries.

Responsibility for costs
5.   The investigation was initiated by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire.  It concerns matters which are the responsibility
of the South Yorkshire police who, if they had not been too close
to the events of the tragedy, would have carried out investigations
both for their internal enquiry and for the purpose of giving
evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.

Case for special payment
6.   In certain circumstances (as for example in respect of
policing the miners’ strike) additional assistance can be provided
by means of a special grant.    (This is in addition to the normal
51% police grant.)    The factors which might make application by
South Yorkshire appropriate in this case are


          i.   the expenditure was unexpected and seems likely to
                be on a scale which cannot be met from South
                Yorkshire's resources without threatening the
                efficiency of the force;

          ii. because it had been agreed that the results of the
               police investigations would be placed at the service
               of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry the investigations
               have gone well beyond what would be necessary for
               South Yorkshire's own purposes.

7.   We do see a case for providing a special payment to South
Yorkshire.  This would, however, require Treasury approval and we
are consulting the Treasury urgently.

Line to take at meeting with West Midlands
8.   In the meantime we cannot be more specific, in speaking to
West Midlands, than to say that it is in our view for South
Yorkshire to reimburse them initially and to seek any necessary
assistance with the costs by making a case for a special payment.
We should, however, invite West Midlands to put their case.    They
will no doubt argue strongly that all costs should be paid (i.e.
salaries as well as additional costs) and that any central payments
should be paid direct to them.    We can probably only note their
arguments at the meeting and undertake to consider them.
Meeting at official level with South Yorkshire
9.   Home Office officials met officers of South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 18 May.   Initially they were not very sympathetic to
the suggestion that they should pay the West Midlands costs and
then seek reimbursement by means of a special payment.        Their
members have asked for a meeting with Home Office Ministers. This
will probably be arranged for next week.    Before then we hope to
have a    Treasuryview on the possibility of offering South Yorkshire
a special payment.

Wider issues
10. It should be noted that both West Midlands and South Yorkshire
police authorities have the following axes to grind as members of
the Association of Metropolitan Authorities (and the Association of
County Councils would probably support them):
          (i)
                   some West Midlands members may well be furious
                   at the way in which a very major enquiry
                   conducted by their Chief Constable and over 300
                   of their officers was suddenly set up in South
                   Yorkshire with minimal reference to them, this
                   goes to the heart of AMA thinking on the
                   accountability of Chief Constables.

          (ii)     both authorities probably adhere to the AMA
                   line that full economic costs should be charged
                   in such cases.    The Home Office have always
                   argued that this is unreasonable because basic
                   salary costs would have to be met by the aiding
                   authority even if aid were not provided;

          (iii)    there is a general wish to create a precedent
                   whereby the Government recognises certain
                   polic£    commitments   as  'national'    and
                   consequently bears the whole costs.      (Any
                   direct payment to West Midlands by the Home
                   Office   could   therefore  set a damaging
                   precedent).
11. A general line to take and       speaking   notes   on   possible
supplementary points are attached.
MEETING WITH WEST MIDLANDS ABOUT POLICE                      INVESTIGATION      INTO
HILLSBOROUGH: LINE TO TAKE AND SPEAKING NOTES



LINE TO TAKE



We stand by our assurance to West Midlands that they should not
have to meet the additional costs of the investigations.                    But it
would be contrary to the normal basis of police funding for the
costs to be met directly and in full by Central Government.


Where     one force aids another, the normal course is for the police
authorities concerned to reach agreement             between themselves on the
appointment of the costs.             The Government contributes to police
costs generally through police specific grant                (at 51%) and block
grant.      The two together are likely to account for over 70% of

policing costs     in a year       in both South Yorkshire and the West
Midlands.      Against    such    a    background,     the   case   for   enhanced
Government support has to be very strong if it is to succeed.


The     investigations   were    requested    by     South   Yorkshire    and   are
primarily concerned with the policing of South Yorkshire.                       The
proper course seems therefore to be for South Yorkshire to meet the
costs      and to apply, if necessary, for a special payment to assist
them.       Ministers    have    agreed   to meet    representatives      of South
Yorkshire Police Authority to discuss the position.
SPEAKING NOTES


1.   DO THE HOME OFFICE EXPECT SOUTH YORKSHIRE TO AGREE TO MEET
     COSTS?


This is something we are still discussing with South Yorkshire.
Our officials saw theirs on 18 May and explained the position.
Their members have asked to meet us and we hope to see them early
next week.

2.   WHY WON'T THE HOME OFFICE PAY US DIRECT?

This is the sort of matter which one would expect the police
authorities themselves to sort out, at least in the first instance.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire originally asked Mr Dear to
take on the investigation. The investigation is concerned with the
policing of South Yorkshire.     It is for South Yorkshire Police
Authority to pay the bill, seeking assistance from the Home Office
by way of special payment if they consider that the cost threatens
the efficiency of policing in South Yorkshire.

3.   THE HOME OFFICE SHOULD PAY BECAUSE IT ASKED MR DEAR TO CONDUCT
     THE ENQUIRY


It was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (not the Home Office)
who invited Mr Dear to conduct the investigation.     Confusion may
have arisen because there was originally a thought that Mr Dear
might be invited to be an assessor for the enquiry (now being done
by the Chief Constable of Lancashire) . This was changed in order
to avoid a conflict of interest.

4.   THE HOME OFFICE SHOULD PAY BECAUSE MOST          OF   MR   DEAR'S
     INVESTIGATIONS ARE NOW FOR LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

We do not agree that is the case.     It has been agreed that Mr
Dear's investigation on behalf of South Yorkshire police will be
put at the service of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.  That seemed
only sensible, since South Yorkshire would otherwise have had to
prepare separate evidence for the enquiry.   We do not agree that
the investigation would have widened materially as a result, but if
South Yorkshire can demonstrate this was the case, this factor
would be taken into account in considering any request for a
special payment.

5.   WHAT WILL BE BASIS OF REPAYMENT?


This would be for South Yorkshire to discuss with West Midlands
initially.   Our view is that West Midlands should get additional
costs (not basic salaries but overtime, expenses for travel and
accommodation etc). We have also said that consequential costs (ie
overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for the absent officers)
should be provided for.


6.   IF PAYMENTS MADE ON BASIS OF HOME OFFICE MUTUAL AID CIRCULAR
     WEST MIDLANDS WILL NOT GET ENOUGH

The help given by West Midlands to South Yorkshire is not mutual
aid under section 14 of the Police Act 1964 and is not covered by
the Circular.    Nevertheless the circular could be used if both
police authorities agreed that that would be sensible.

The Circular provides reimbursement on an average costs basis
(including estimates of likely average amounts of direct and
consequential overtime). This was agreed with the local authority
associations and ACPO as the best way of meeting the costs involved
in large-scale aid. This may mean West Midlands does not get every
penny it thinks it has spent but it does save the authority from
having to provide detailed evidence of costs which are difficult to
document (eg consequential overtime).

7.   WILL SOUTH YORKSHIRE GET A SPECIAL PAYMENT IF THEY APPLY?

South Yorkshire have not yet decided their position and whether
they want to apply.   We cannot give an undertaking at this stage.
We will consider any application urgently.
8.   WHEN ARE SPECIAL PAYMENTS HADE TO POLICE AUTHORITIES?

Special payments are made in exceptional circumstances where the
efficiency of forces is threatened by the size and unpredictability
of the commitment. Each application is decided on its own merits.
(In some recent cases the basis was that expenditure was unforeseen
and well in excess of the produce of a penny rate for the area.
                                      or   i * i

                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                             cc/ifs AOcurr
                                                                           Mr CH.’iTaf                          rnrTu    ~~
                                                                        F a r cy^‘wiv        4                 *y)r"So
                                                                           '^f‘3                 UHw
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                                           Council House      s .\V K i
Clerk                                                                      Dudley        0
                                                                                          *>.4 .             n " ~ O c , . oet
                                                                           DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M.. M.Soc.Sc
                                                                           Telephone;
                                                                                                  75
                                                                                        Du Hey 456000
Mv RWeivntv.
                 AVA/AMD/RMC
Your R«<‘'f‘'nce:C T / E y p / V A R 1 / 2 3                                       25th
                                                                                          A p r i l , 1989

                 Dear Secretary of State,

                             Judicial Review - Hillsborough Football Tr igedy

                      I am writing to you to seek urgent clarific ition
                 regarding the cost of the police investigations :o support
                 the Judicial Review into the Hillsborough Footba .1 Tragedy.

                     As you know the Chief Constable of the West Midlands

£               Force, Mr. 6. Dear, and a large number of his officers,
                will be seconded to gather information for the J idicial
                Review and Mr. Dear is working directly to Lord justice
                Taylor.

                     Offices have been set up in Sheffield, Liverpool and
                the West Midlands and the expenditure being incurred will
                involve additional costs (eg office acc om modatio i , hotel
                accommodation, travelling, subsistence, overtime      vehicle
                hire, telephones and equipment).

                     Whilst the West Midlands is glad to assist Ln this
                matter, the members of the Police Authority wish to be
                assured that they will be recompensed for the lofe s of the
                officers and additional costs borne by the Autho city as a
                result of the Judicial Review.

                     In view of the national importance of the J idicial
                Review and the fact that the West Midlands Force was asked
                to assist by the Home Office, this is clearly a sase for
                special payment from central funds.

                     I should be most grateful for your confirma tion that
                the cost of the seconded officers and the additi anal costs
                incurred by the West Midlands will be reimbursed in full.

                     There is a full meeting of the Authority du s to take
                place this Thursday, 27 April, at 10.30 a.m. and it would
                be very helpful if I could report to Members on this most
                crucial issue which is now becoming very importajn t to
                members of the Authority.  A faxed response or   elephone
                call clarifying the position would be sufficient in -view of
                the short time available before the meeting.

                                                   Yours,, sincerely,


                                                          V \sj i\


                                   Clerk to West Midlands Police Authority
              TO: Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd PC, MP,                          c.c. South Yorkshire Clerk
                  Secretary of State,                                         Mr. jJ Chilcot,
                  Home Office,                                                Deoutv Secretary,
                                              HOME OFFIci
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate London SWIH 9AT
                                               Direct line: 01-273 17jl1
                                             Switchboard: 01-273


Our reference:
Your reference:                                                     ; 't
                                                         ;/r;   ;




  A V Astling Esq
  Clerk
  West Midlands Police Authority
  Council House
  Dudley
  DY1 1HG                                   5 May 1989




                 Kv •A   s   (
  PUBLIC INQUIRY - HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY

  The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letters of 25
  April and 4 May and to reply to them on his behalf.

  To take first your letter of 25 April, the Home Secretary has
  already accepted, in a letter to Mr Anthony Beaumont-Dark MP, that
  the additional costs of the police inquiries being undertaken in
  relation to the Hillsborough disaster by West Midlands police
  officers should not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.

  The precise arrangements for reimbursing the West Midlands Police
  Authority will, however, need further discussion.       I shall be
  asking for an urgent meeting with the Clerk to South Yorkshire
  Police Authority, since , it was at the request of the Chief
  Constable of South Yorkshire that the West Midlands police
  inquiries were set in hand and their inquiries seem related in
  large part to questions connected with policing in South Yorkshire.

  It is true, as you point out, that the results of Mr Dear's
  inquiries are to be made available to Lord Justice Taylor.    But
  that does not mean that the work of the West Midlands Police has
  ceased to have any connection with police issues in South
  Yorkshire.  For this reason it is necessary to start with a close
  examination of that authority's position.

  These matters will clearly take some effort to resolve.. I think it
  must be right for me to take them up with the Clerk to the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority initially, as the force in whose area
  the tragedy occurred and whose Chief Constable invited the West
  Midlands police in. But I will be in touch with you again as soon
. as I can after my initial discussions with South Yorkshire.

;As -for the request in your letter of 4 May for a meeting of a
 deputation from your Authority with the Home Secretary, the Home
 Secretary has asked Lord Ferrers, the Minister of State at the Home
 Office with responsibility for police matters, to receive the
 deputation on his behalf.    I should be grateful therefore if you
 would get in touch direct with Lord Ferrers' Private secretary on
 01-213-2769 to arrange a date for this.       r*




                                          M J ADDISON
                                                                  F r i d a y , 21 tn A p r i l , 1 9 8 9
                                                                                                    :rs ■
                                                                                                        .



                                                W r i t t e n No. 22

                                     .     :                 ; .         :          ■■               ■        'V,
!rs".                                                  ' '                               ■'                 ' :
        M r A n t h o n y B e a u m o n t - D a r k ( B i r m i n g h a m , S e l l y Oa k) : To a s k the v
/■V        S e c r e t a r y of S t a t e for the H o m e D e p a r t m e n t , w h o will m e e t
           the c o s t s a c c r u i n g to the W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y of
           the p a r t i c i p a t i o n of W e s t M i d l a n d s p o l i c e o f f i c e r s in the
           i n v e s t i g a t i o n of the H i l l s b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r , a n d of a r r a n g i n g
           p o l i c i n g c o v e r in the W e s t M i d l a n d s as a r e s u l t of t h e s e
           duties.



                                                ^    ' •      ■      '       -/V-




        MR D O U G L A S H U R D



                As I s a i d in a l e t t e r w h i c h I se nt to m y h o n F r i e n d
        y e s t e r d a y , no a d d i t i o n a l c o s t s w i l l be b o r n e by the
        West Midlands Police Authority.                           "Additional costs" include
        the c o s t of o v e r t i m e w o r k e d by the W e s t M i d l a n d s p o l i c e
        o f f i c e r s in t h e i r o w n f o r c e a r e a to c o v e r d u t i e s w h i c h w o u l d
        o t h e r w i s e h a v e b e e n u n d e r t a k e n by o f f i c e r s s e c o n d e d to the
  - Hi 1 l s b o r o u g h inquiry'.            T h e m e a n s of r e i m b u r s i n g the
        W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y s w i l l be f o r f u r t h e r
        consideration.
                                                                      AtOtOe*: 0   rz . .



                                              QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT


                                                            27 April 1989




                                                                                   -/&?:.-•<




                                  \
          We have spoken in the House about the costs incurred by the West
Midlands police in their inquiries following the Hillsborough disaster.      You
and other West Midlands MPs are understandably anxious that these should not
fall on the West Midlands police authority.


          It   seems   to me quite clear that, wherever the costs fall,     they
should not and do not fall to the West Midlands.    The Chief Constable of the
West Midlands was initially invited by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
to review all aspects of the police operation.        And subsequently it was
agreed that the results of these inquiries should be made available to the
public inquiry which I announced on 24 April to be conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.


          It will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the
West Midlands police should be reimbursed.    But I can guarantee now that at
the end of the day no additional costs will be borne by the West Midlands.
                                      ft




                                              o




                                                                \
Roger King, Esq., MP.
