From: David Hardwick                cc     Mr Roberts
      VSU                                  Mrs Shaw, CC
                                           Mr Roberts, Law Officers
        Tel 273 3007                       Mr F Smith, VSU o/r —
        23 August 1994




Mr Casev


DAVID ALTON MP: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL (PO 18997/94)

Issue

Correspondence to the PM from David Alton MP about the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
trustees: in particular reference to their management of funds in relation to his
constituents Mr & Mrs Devine whose son Andrew was seriously injured at Hillsborough
and is in a persistive vegetative state.

Timing

2.     PM's office returned the draft reply dated 15 August, and have asked that a
further draft focusing more on whether the Government should regulate private trust
funds be prepared to reach them by Wednesday, 24 August.

Summary

3. The correspondence refers to the Trustees' management of funds in particular, and
in general to the principles on which the funds are based. The money raised was placed
into two separate funds. The smaller fund (£2 million) was registered as a charity and
the larger fund (£12 million) was not. It is the use of the larger fund, and the division
of funds in this way in general, to which Mr Alton and his constituents object. The
essence of the previous draft, put forward for PS signature and transmission to the PM's
office was that the management of funds which are not registered as charities is
essentially a private m atter. The new draft emphasises this, and specifically rejects the
need for revisions to trust law. Any dispute between the trustees remains for the
individual concerned and the courts to resolve.

Recommendation

5. PS/SofS to write to the PM's Office as in the draft enclosed.

Consideration/presentation/handling

6. This is obviously a case of considerable sensitivity, as the constituents' son is gravely
injured with no apparent prospect of recovery. Where funds are held by a charity, the
Charity Commission have a locus in seeking to ensure they are administered
appropriately. However, with a non-charitable trust as here, the m atter is a private one
involving general trust law. This is a m atter for the Lord Chancellor's Department who
have been consulted on and agreed the revised draft reply. The PM's Office consider
that the adequacy of the law on trusts is an important point of Mr Alton's letter.




                                                 D J HARDWICK

F:\VSU\Chac\SBJ\Sub. 1
Draft Letter: PS to SofS to PM's Office



Mark Adams
No 10 Downing Street




DAVID ALTON MP: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL


Thank you for your letter of 17 August.


As requested, I enclose a redrafted reply for the Prime Minister's signature, prepared
in consultation with the Lord Chancellor's Department, who are in the lead on the law
relating to private trusts. This focuses more on the point that Mr Alton makes
concerning the need for more action on the part of the Government to regulate the
operation of private trusts. The draft rejects the call for Government regulation since
the vast majority of private trusts have no public interest component, and there is a
need for discretionary funds to meet unforseen difficulties.


It remains the case that, without any further regulation, the administration of such
trusts is a private m atter involving the individuals concerned.
I have considered carefully whether private trusts should be further regulated, but I am
not convinced that there is a general need for such legislation. The Government is not
b etter placed to take decisions about the disposal of funds than the trustees concerned,
or the courts. Indeed if the Government were to seek to place legislative constraints
on the actions of private trustees, this might well prevent the imaginative and efficient
use of resources which discretionary funds can allow.


In the case of private trusts, where someone who considers he or she has a claim to the
money disputes how it has been administered, the proper course of action would be to
pursue the m atter in the courts. With this in mind, I am afraid it would not be right for
me to comment on the actions of the trustees in this particular instance.


I am sorry that I cannot be of more assistance to your constituents in this case.
D raft letter PM to David Alton MP. House of Commons            (Draft 22.8.94)


Thank you for your letter of 28 July. I have the utmost sympathy for Mr and Mrs
Devine whose son was so seriously injured in the Hillsborough disaster. His condition
clearly gives rise to a very difficult and distressing situation for the Devines, and I have
the great admiration for the bravery and dedication they have shown.


There was enormous public sympathy following the Hillsborough disaster, in consequence
of which such a very substantial and impressive sum of money was donated. As you
appreciate, in such a situation those responsible for administering the money have some
discretion over the terms under which a trust or trusts are established. Guidance has
been published which can be of assistance in these circumstances, and this may have
been taken into account by the trustees of the Hillsborough funds.


One option is to establish a charitable fund, which would bring the monies within the
rem it of the law on charities, and would place the organisation concerned (which would
be a charity) under the supervision of the Charity Commission.            However, as the
trustees explained to you (as recorded in your letter of 28 July to Mr and Mrs Devine),
that can have significant limitations in the way the money can be applied. A considered
decision is necessary, taking the advantages and disadvantages of both into account.
The Government considers that both types of trust have their place in providing for the
 allocation of resources.


 Where a non-charitable, discretionary trust is established, its status is the same in law
 as any other private trust. As a non-charitable private fund, the use of the money is the
 responsibility of the trustees under the law as it relates to private trusts. Trustees of
 private trusts are responsible for the administration and distribution of the money and
 property pertaining to the trust within the terms of their trust deeds and the law.
 However, they do have the authority, within those constraints and subject to limitations
 on their powers of investment, to make judgements about how the money is used. Such
 judgements in the case of any disaster fund will be complicated and difficult; the
 allocation between short term and long term needs, for example, may well be an issue
 the trustees should properly consider.
