                                     simmm

                                                                                                                                                                                nmm:


                                                                                            wBm
                                                                          #£gH £|
                                                                       SlllllfNtei
                                                                                            mmM
                                                                                         *lafe^#5
     WmM                                                                       wgmsggi      wssm     w0
                                                                                                      §W&$
                                                                                                       mm                       §®§l®®i
     l®ttt§sH                                           I’mmmm^m                             m'iwsmm                                                                        ^ligsSl'S                                                         »M «S tl
    m§S§§S.
                                                          mmmsmmmss                                                'wmm                    mmm
                                                                                                                                                                                 mms.
    •SSSSMs;                 WmMw
                                M iM  a «
         m m sm                 mm mm SMBS!                                                                        mmrnmM&S.                                                                                              i#S§®®95~
                                                                                               M®*
            iMi&SSliU                   Sii^ii?                                           mttsimi
                                                                                              WiMwmm iS S tltiiM I                    Wl®fitllptS
                      «»«                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^M          h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ililliP li
                                                                                                      a i® ^ S ii«
                                                                                                         1-^JSiS                             SlfSillSII                                                                     ■ * eaiie^ ^ ^ ^ ^
                                                                              mmmmmim                 sigggliSil                          lll#«iil        SSIiSlS®                      'wm&k8$MifBe
                                                                                                                                                                                           SlSSiS
                        lamm                                                                        mm
                                                                       mMmmM                                                                                                      S§^SHPlSi
gi^Sfgi                 ■
                                                                                                                                                         wwms
                                                                                                                                                     ifeiSslll                  mmM                                  H «M M M 1£
                             iiilteiiiia     Pi®S8ilfSlliSSftj^ ®SllSlPtlll
                                                                    H l*                                                                                             la isiti
    ip
         % fl§ll§i8         lf®#®MI|f#i^^»SISf
                                            ItlS liS S llillsii                                                             _
                                                                                                                                                                                        1S8S8I8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ,            ,„,...

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WWm$&S»M                    wma$0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i* * *
                              ®‘“1st|*»««»*
                                  ® a-™ ..
                                                                                                         fB:Si
                                   p
                                                  liiisiiii                                                                                                                                            IStSSfSllIt
                                    ’MM0&f§'M
                            ititJStgl
                                            . &m mmm                                          WM&M&          $a®m.                                               im m m im m m g m m m m m m tm m                    'H
               M$MXil?MWM&M $$.ti;
                          :0$           ___ .-■s-.-.-oa^'.'-;- -:%*-
                                                                                                      S»8»®tlilS
                                                                                                                                                                   I1SI8I11H11S88I              MsMsm&s
                                                                                                                                                                                                           )5%^3       iS SIS
                                                                                                          s&#3sisis
                                a                                                                           mi'Mg.
                                                                                                                            SIP#?®;
                                                                                                                                                          ^iMW&0^»s*sH(^^^^^g^h!Bfciiai^®***i
                                                                                                                                                                §                           ®**8it‘®




                                                                                                                                                                                 WmStm


                                                                                                                                                                                                         £^gg@®S6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               muti




                                                                                                                   ®;li5?
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ®stsit§f
                   BEYOND DISASTER
      IDENTIFYING AND RESOLVING INTER-AGENCY
      CONFLICT IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
                     DISASTERS




              HOWARD DAVIS and PHIL SCRATON

           Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                    Edge Hill University College




               Research supported by the Home Office
                   Emergency Planning Division


  The views expressed in the document are those of the authors and may not
necessarily reflect the views of the Home Office Emergency Planning Division
                            or the Home Office itself.



                       © 1997 All Rights Reserved

 The text of this publication may not be reproduced, nor may talks or lectures
  based on the material contained within the document be given, without the
                         written consent of the authors.
                                   CONTENTS

PREFACE                                                                       i


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                          iii


SUMMARY                                                                   iv

The Immediate Aftermath of Disasters                                       iv
The Emergence of Inter-Agency Cooperation                                  vi
The Potential for Inter-Agency Conflict in the Aftermath of Disasters     vii
The Reality of Inter-Agency Conflict in the Aftermath of Disasters        xii


RECOMMENDATIONS                                                         xviii


CHAPTER ONE: CRISIS RESPONSE IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
             DISASTERS

Contextualising Disasters                                                  1
Communication and Co-ordination in the Aftermath                           7
‘Co-ordination’ and Control: Problems with the Consensual Paradigm         9
From Emergency to Aftermath: Para-militarism to Pluralism?                11
Tasks, Priorities and Police Dominance                                    14
Processing the Dead and the Living                                        15
The Identification Commission                                             15
Post-Mortems                                                              17
The Casualty Bureau                                                       17
Caringfor the Living                                                      18


CHAPTER TWO: CRISIS SUPPORT IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
             DISASTERS

Loss and Bereavement                                                     21
Post-traumatic Distress                                                  26
Loss, Trauma and Official Processing                                     31
Responding to Psychosocial Needs in the Immediate Aftermath              33
The Rise o f 'Disaster Counselling ’                                     33
Psychological First Aid and Sensitive ‘Processing ’                      36
Psychological Debriefing                                                 41
Support and Co-ordination in Practice                                    42
CHAPTER THREE: THE DISASTERS: ‘MOMENT’, CONTEXTS AND RESPONSE

Introduction                                                        45
Lockerbie                                                           47
Hillsborough                                                        51
The Marchioness                                                     58


CHAPTER FOUR: BEREAVEMENT IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
              DISASTERS

Confirming Involvement in Disasters                                 61
Confirming Fatality                                                 62
Identification, Viewing, and Grieving                               65
The Disaster Site and Personal Effects                              74
Responding to the Bereaved                                          77


CHAPTER FIVE: SURVIVING IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF
              DISASTERS

Surviving Disaster                                                  79
The Ordeals of Survival                                             79
Survivors in the Immediate Aftermath                                87
Surviving: Epilogue                                                 91
Responding to Survivors                                             94


KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Responding to the Needs of the Bereaved                             95
Responding to the Needs of Survivors                                98
Inter-Agency Cooperation in the Immediate Aftermath of Disasters    99
Responding to the Immediate Aftermath: Local Authorities           101
Crisis Support in the Aftermath of Disasters                       101
Responding to the Immediate Aftermath: Central Government          103
A Charter for the Bereaved                                         104


APPENDIX

Post-traumatic Stress Disorder: Origins and Definitions            105


REFERENCES                                                         110


NOTES ON AUTHORS                                                   122
                                       PREFACE



This research project was conceived as a consequence of initial research into the
afterm ath of the Hillsborough disaster. The rem it of that work was to inquire into
all aspects of the afterm ath, critically reviewing the Home Office, police and
coroner's inquests, the legal processes and the media coverage. It was apparent
from the accounts of the bereaved, survivors, witnesses and rescue workers that the
first responses to the disaster by key agencies and their workers set an agenda which
had consequences well beyond the immediate context. While the Home Office
Inquiry, the police investigation and the coroner's inquest were not concerned w ith
the events of the immediate afterm ath, the research identified significant issues
which required further, in-depth analysis. These included: conflict between agencies
over role, procedures, priorities and relative status; the im pact of poor
communications systems and misinformation; ill-conceived processes for the
identification and presentation of the dead; lack of appropriate crisis support for the
bereaved, survivors and witnesses during the immediate aftermath.

Exploratory discussions w ith those caught up in other disasters, together w ith
occasional references in w hat is a sparse but developing literature, indicated that the
experiences recounted post-Hillsborough were not unique. It was evident that
mechanistic co-ordination, insensitive procedures, ad hoc decision-making,
inaccurate information, inappropriate treatm ent and inter-agency conflict, added
significantly to the personal traum a already present. As the Hillsborough research
had implied, while shared experiences of bereavement can, and do, generate
collective strength and m utual support, personal grief and individual needs can be
marginalised and dim inished through generic, functional procedures derived in
professional priorities and convenience. The Hillsborough Project focused attention,
among other areas, on the significance of the immediate afterm ath of disasters, and
other traum atising events, and the pressing need to identify and acknowledge the
priorities of this 'second-phase' in planning for crisis response. Such priorities
would necessarily involve comprehensive inter-agency cooperation as an essential
antecedent to effective and appropriate crisis support.

In late 1995 the project, Identifying and Resolving Inter-Agency Conflict in the Immediate
Aftermath of Disasters: A Strategy for Second-Phase Planning, was supported by the
Emergency Planning Division at the Home Office. The research contrasts the
immediate afterm ath of three disasters: Lockerbie/Flight 103, Hillsborough and the
Marchioness, each of which occurred in quite different circumstances and contexts. It
also draws on a range of other disasters and the experiences of those involved.
During the project 16 children and their class teacher were tragically killed by a
gunm an at Dunblane Primary School. Research into the immediate afterm ath of
Dunblane is ongoing at the time of w riting and will be presented in a subsequent
report.
The findings of this research are based on a comprehensive review of the national
and international literature concerning crisis response and crisis support in the
immediate afterm ath of disasters, alongside in-depth interviews w ith the bereaved,
survivors and agency personnel. Using official reports, agency statem ents and
experiential accounts, the research examines the potential for and the reality of inter­
agency conflict in the afterm ath of disasters. W hat the findings dem onstrate is that
those initial concerns raised by the Hillsborough Project are fully justified and that
institutional and policy initiatives are priorities in affecting change in the provision
of adaptive and appropriate crisis support.

The Report which follows presents a comprehensive summary of the research
together w ith a range of key recommendations. Chapter One is a detailed review of
the literature concerning crisis response. It considers the operational processes and
practices which take effect during the hours that follow disasters and the principles
adopted by agencies in carrying out w hat is considered to be the essential tasks.
Chapter Two explores the issue of crisis support, particularly focusing on the current
debates over psychosocial needs, counselling and Post-traumatic Stress Disorder.
Chapter Three overviews the controversial background to the Lockerbie/Flight 103,
Hillsborough and Marchioness disasters, recounting agency responses, their adopted
procedures and their established priorities. Chapters Four and Five consider the
experiences of the bereaved and survivors in the immediate aftermath. Their
accounts represent the first systematic research into experiential assessment of post­
disaster procedures and support and their impact on the lives of the bereaved and
survivors. Both chapters conclude w ith a brief discussion on the potential for
reviewing official responses.



Phil Scraton
Project Director
Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
Edge Hill University College

March 1997
                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS



Researching bereavem ent and survival in the context of tragedy is demanding,
difficult and painful. It necessitates the exploration of, and reflection on, personal
loss and suffering. Those interviewed dem onstrated a great strength and resilience
and this enabled frank and open discussion. Throughout the project those close to
us at home and at work have given continual support and show n immense
understanding. We are deeply indebted to our colleagues at the Centre for Studies
in Crime and Social Justice for their kindness, support and understanding
throughout the project. Hazel Hartley, Deena Haydon and Ann Jemphrey provided
us w ith useful and im portant comments on the draft. Barbara Houghton, the Centre
Co-ordinator, provided the technical expertise necessary in presenting the report.
Barry Morris and Barry Hughes gave their valuable insights into psychosocial needs
and responses following traum a. At the Home Office, the Emergency Planning
Division not only agreed to fund the work following our proposal but has been a
constant source of encouragement. O ur thanks to Dr Suk Athwal, Ray East and to
Kevin Wallace.

Finally, we cannot convey adequately our sincere gratitude to the bereaved, the
survivors and others whose lives have been changed forever by their experiences
of disaster and the aftermath. They have given time generously and relived their
suffering with unselfishness and dignity in order to contribute to future planning
and policy which, sadly but inevitably, w ill be required. It is essential that their
voices are heard and are present in future crisis support provision.



Howard Davis and Phil Scraton
Merseyside
March 1997
                                      SUMMARY



The Im m ediate A fterm ath of D isasters

This research report provides an analytical and detailed overview of the national
and international literature on the afterm ath of disasters. Using this literature the
aim is to consider established practices and identify recurrent problems w ithin and
between those agencies responsible for dealing w ith the immediate aftermath. Apart
from the issues of priorities, processes and procedures there are other significant
considerations such as the identification of psychosocial needs, post-traum atic stress,
counselling and support services. Each of these are contentious areas involving
professional, state-funded interventions and together they represent an approach to
post-disaster work which is still in its infancy. The case-studies that follow, focusing
primarily on the Lockerbie/Flight 103, Marchioness and Hillsborough Disasters,
provide clear evidence of the ill-preparedness of agencies to identify, prioritise and
meet complex hum an needs in the afterm ath of disasters.

This research is based on the premise that disasters and other traum atic events
cannot be interpreted and understood simply in terms of their circumstances and the
response of emergency agencies. There is a well-established framework of analysing
disasters, connected to the official discourses governing inquiries and investigations,
which tends to emphasise the immediate circumstances surrounding the 'm om ent'
of disaster at the expense of a longer historical view and any consideration of the
aftermath. To rectify the short-comings of this narrow framework and to
demonstrate the significance of adopting a w ider view the work is committed to a
contextual model of analysis which relates to 'phases' before, during and after the
event. These phases are: the historical context; the immediate context; the specific
circumstances; the 'm om ent'; rescue and evacuation; the immediate aftermath; the
short-term aftermath; the long-term aftermath.

Establishing the historical context is, necessarily, a reflective exercise, coming after
the event and informed by the benefit of hindsight. It considers the long-term
background to, potential for and warnings of disaster. Often it reveals complacency
and negligence underpinning a tragedy which was 'w aiting to happen'. Both the
immediate context and the specific circumstances are phases which narrow the
disaster to a time and place. There m ight have been near misses or close calls
previously but on this occasion all contributory factors came together in a precise
sequence. The 'm om ent' of disaster is not necessarily literal; it can be a 'second' - an
explosion/a crash; it can encompass a period of time - a cru sh /a sinking/a fire.
Rescue and evacuation implies a response, both spontaneous by survivors and
bystanders, and organised, by emergency services and medical teams. W ith the
short-term afterm ath and the longer term medico-legal and psychosocial issues left
to the caring agencies, the immediate afterm ath has rarely been identified as a
significant period or phase in its own right.
There now exists a significant body of international research into most aspects of
disasters and related traum atic events. M ulti-disciplinary research, often supported
by national governments and international organisations, has provided an extensive
literature on disaster prevention and emergency responses. The principle being that
effective, informed planning contributes significantly to the avoidance of disasters
and if unforeseen circumstances occur the appropriate authorities will respond more
effectively to save life, minimise loss, limit damage and re-establish order and
stability. Related to these objectives, medical research has developed an impressive
range of specialised knowledge and interventionist skills from first responses and
treatm ents through to longer-term w ork on anxiety, stress and depression associated
w ith trauma. Yet the disasters research literature is weak regarding the dynamics,
needs and responses associated w ith the immediate aftermath.

A part from a few well-informed, observational research studies the available
literature provides little more than schematic reviews or appraisals published by
agencies giving accounts of their responses and some reflective evaluation.
However informative and useful, these publications do not provide a coherent,
integrated or consistent foundation on which appropriate and necessary policies and
strategies can be built. Meanwhile, accounts of survivors, rescue workers, the
bereaved and campaign groups have emerged during the 1990s which indicate that
w hat happens in the immediate afterm ath of a disaster can have significant long­
term, debilitating consequences.

It is, perhaps, understandable that the immediate afterm ath of disasters has been
neglected, not only in terms of research, but also w ith regard to planning. W ith all
efforts and resources directed towards rescue, evacuation, saving life and securing
the site (if appropriate) it is expected that w hat follows can be progressed gradually.
As w ith any other day-to-day emergency (road accident; house fire; heart attack) the
assumption is that people's needs can be assessed and m et by those agencies which
have established procedures and specialist personnel adaptable to each eventuality.
But disasters are not like other emergencies, even when there is minimal loss of life.
The sheer size and social impact of disasters, the call on resources, the 'unknow n
territory' and the media interest together create a dynamic in the immediate
afterm ath which can be as volatile as the disaster itself.

The weight of personal testimony, particularly from rescue workers, medical
personnel, survivors and the bereaved is that scant attention has been given to
meeting their needs in the hours that follow disaster. From the responses of those
involved in crisis management and support there is clear evidence that while
'aftercare' is expected for the days, weeks and m onths that follow a disaster, there is
rarely any such planning for immediate responses. This raises questions of
institutional, agency responsibilities in the context of appropriate provision and of
differential priorities both between and w ithin agencies. The issue goes to the heart
of the inter-agency relationships and the potential for professional conflict over
priorities in the immediate aftermath. While several Home Office publications have
attem pted to address possible conflicts of interest through guidelines, there has been
little questioning and virtually no critical analysis of agency responses and their
consequences for survivors and the bereaved.

The Emergence of Inter-Agency Cooperation

The post-war period of economic and social reconstruction, particularly the
advancement of welfarism, required the expansion of local and central government
to provide the infrastructure for the adm inistration of social change. If this period of
development was characterised by anything it was the rise and consolidation of
managerialism in the public and private sectors, underpinned by the arrival of the
'trained professional'. Each managerial function w ithin increasingly complex
organisations was defined by its specialist activity, reflected in agreed parameters
and new statuses ascribed through professional training and membership of
professional bodies.

The development and consolidation of 'new 7professions not only created specialised
roles w ithin organisations, but also shifted the balance of responsibilities,
particularly in public service provision, between organisations. As each state agency
or local government departm ent adopted more interventionist policies, identifying
needs and establishing services, so its work became increasingly compartmentalised
and precisely delineated. From policing to social work, from teaching to housing,
departm ents internally developed specialist skills in response to more complex
needs and demands. In this it became im portant to be proactive in provision rather
then simply reactive.

While each profession was based on principles of generic training, usually leading to
recognised certification, the necessity of specialist w ork was also accepted as part of
professional development.           Inevitably, professions developed their own
occupational cultures, vocabularies and discourses often reflecting clear perceptions
of role and territory. Job demarcation, although not always rigidly adhered to in
w orking relationships w ith 'clients', became underw ritten in agency policy
documents and guidelines governing responsibilities. In turn, this process was
reflected in professional training.

People's needs, however, whether personal, community-based or both, are not so
readily defined or categorised. They are diverse and not always satisfied by a single
agency provider. Social issues and problems w ithin families or communities often
require co-ordinated responses from a range of agencies. It soon became apparent
that the strengths of the developing professions, their positive sense of role, function
and responsibility, could also constitute real weaknesses. Relative autonomy,
statutory powers and professional discretion, while enabling planned intervention
and good practice also contributed to a form of organisational myopia. Agencies,
and sometimes specialised units w ithin them, regularly became restricted by their
established fields of operation and their professional ideologies and priorities. This
realisation, together w ith the complexity of external demands, encouraged the
development of inter-agency strategies.
From community programmes on so-called 'problem ' estates to case conferences on
children labelled 'disruptive', the framework of conflict resolution through inter­
agency cooperation and consultation gained professional currency. The media
coverage of high profile cases, for example those involving child abuse, has
emphasised the public expectation placed on inter-agency planning and response.
This was particularly evident in the afterm ath of the Cleveland affair. Yet, however
well-intentioned, or necessary, is the commitment to inter-agency cooperation, the
process is not always straightforward. Agencies not only can be bound by statutory
duties and policy obligations, they also have institutionalised priorities and practices
realised through professional discretion. The responsibilities and agendae defined
w ithin agencies, often the sites of internal debate and dispute, m ight not always
accord w ith those defined w ithin 'partnership' agencies.

Inter-agency conflict is often portrayed as being the inevitable consequence of 'tu rf
w ars', w ith agencies competing for credibility, status and scarce resources. While
the related issues of legitimate 'territory' and appropriate expertise is significant, the
more complex reality also involves the history, traditions and ideologies of
professional bodies and their accredited workers. This is not simply a m atter of
statutory duty, operational policy and interventionist strategy, it also concerns
policies which have their origin and development w ithin professional ideologies and
training. They are part of occupational cultures - initiating, informing and
protecting operational decisions. They shape, m aintain and reproduce distinctive
professional identities.

Recent research, particularly that focusing on community-based strategies initiated
as responses to shared and negotiated priorities, suggests that even when agencies
develop planned and gradual partnerships there are difficulties in achieving m utual
objectives. Q ashes over policies, priorities and practices are often exacerbated by
serious difficulties over the relative status of agencies. The questions are consistent.
W hat is the meaning of inter-agency co-operation when the context is hierarchical?
W hat is expected of 'partnerships' when the assum ption is that the responsibilities
and priorities of one agency have the 'lead' over others? Quite often the theory of
inter-agency work is underm ined by the practice of the participants as they refuse to
relinquish their agency objectives to a more considered, collective, approach.

The Potential for Inter-Agency Conflict in the Afterm ath of Disasters

The resolution of inter-agency disagreements or tensions is a difficult and sensitive
process even when time and opportunities exist for discussion, consultation and
negotiation. Attem pting this during periods of crisis, w hen immediate practical
responses are essential, is an impossible task. The immediate afterm ath of disasters
and traumatic events provides minimal opportunity for thoughtful, informed or
protracted discussion between agencies, their managers and workers. Recent
experiences, from Hillsborough to Dunblane, dem onstrate clearly that w ithout well-
constructed contingency plans, the arrangements and procedures necessary for
dealing w ith the dem ands of the immediate afterm ath emerge 'o n the hoof'. No
am ount of report w riting w ith the benefit of hindsight can disguise the fact that, in
most cases, afterm ath responses involving inter-agency work are the product of ad
hoc , 'off-the-top-of-the-head' decisions. Such decisions are not necessarily or
inevitably flawed; but neither do they represent outcomes informed by considered
planning and careful negotiation.

Anticipating disasters or other sudden, traum atising events presents a difficult
challenge even to those who respond daily to emergencies. They are unique
situations, never following a 'typical' path or direction. There are always distinctive
characteristics, unpredictable variables and unexpected consequences. The complex
mix of location, access, time, weather and other physical elements contribute to the
extent of the disaster as well as lim iting the potential of rescue and evacuation.
While physical contexts are crucial, disasters are also people-centred. Victims,
survivors, witnesses and rescuers represent a disparate, volatile dynamic as the
disaster and its full impact unfolds and consolidates. For such events happen when
they are least expected, disrupting routine and catching unawares those directly
involved. Even in their early stages the full consequences of disasters are not always
self-evident. The 1985 photograph of people peering through wooden flooring at the
sm ouldering rubbish beneath the Bradford grandstand is instructive. Minutes later
the entire area was a blazing inferno and the fire claimed lives.

Those involved in such situations inevitably endure experiences for which there can
be no personal preparation. Their immediate responses and their judgements and
decisions are spontaneous, regardless of professional role or training. This process is
compounded as the initial impact moves beyond those immediately involved,
extending to relatives, friends and whole communities. At Lockerbie, for example,
there were two disasters: one 'in the air' and one 'on the ground'. Those who were
passengers on Pan-American R ight 103 came from m any different communities and
countries and the realisation of bereavement was gradual and widespread. For
those living in Lockerbie, however, bereavement and survival was immediately
apparent, leaving its m ark on the community and projecting the small tow n's name
into the arena of international politics for all time. For the people of Lockerbie, the
afterm ath progressed as suddenly as the disaster itself.

In responding to disaster, w hat is required of the emergency services, hospitals,
social work departm ents and voluntary bodies is effective inter-agency cooperation.
It is a collective and co-ordinated response to complex and diverse personal and
community needs. Each agency, prior to the 'm om ent' of a disaster, operates
according to established routines, agreed policies and institutionalised practices.
W hat happens between and w ithin agencies when these routines are disrupted?
Whose responsibility is it w ithin organisations to foresee, plan for and mobilise
response to crises? Whose responsibility is it across agencies to co-ordinate effective,
efficient and appropriate interventions? For, it is literally a 'm om ent' which
separates norm ality from chaos, complacency from urgency.

Local authorities have invested considerable time, hum an resources and professional
training in developing effective emergency planning. By definition, the emergency
services are on perm anent stand-by, as are accident and emergency departm ents in
hospitals. The relative frequency of serious accidents, be they on the roads, at work
or in the home, incorporates the 'unexpected' into the routines of emergency and
hospital services. W hen larger scale emergencies occur the prim ary objectives are
little different. They are: to save life; to rescue the injured; to recover the dead; to
contain the incident; to evacuate the area; to secure and seal the site; to restore order
and re-establish 'norm ality'. These virtually chronological objectives dem and
progression-related actions combining the skills and training of relevant agencies.

Emergency planning and preparedness, from inter-agency consultation through to
field exercises, aims to foresee a range of potential scenarios thereby establishing
adaptable contingency plans. W ithin this framework agencies assume differential
responsibilities in line w ith their statutory duties or their appropriate specialist
skills. To that end, emergency planning is mechanistic in its approach. Agreed
plans are approved prim arily because they ascribe expected roles and functions to
each agency. In this context precise responsibilities, duties and chains of command
are allocated, reflecting a quasi-military framework w ithin which the shared
objectives listed above can be tackled. Connected to the performance of duties are
agreed lines of communication, information-flow and consultation procedures
necessary to the realisation of these objectives. The aim is to pursue effective order
in confused situations through the efficient functioning of the contributing agencies
and their workers. It is a systems-based approach.

The 'first-phase' response, however systems-orientated, has to prepare for volatile
and unpredictable situations. In reality the first rescuers 'a t the scene' are often
survivors and witnesses. When the British M idland flight crashed at Kegworth the
fuselage fractured on an embankment of the M l. Those initially involved in the
rescue were a combination of surviving passengers and m otorists who, regardless of
the risk, w ent into the wreckage to help the injured and dying. When the
Marchioness was hit from behind by the Bowbelle on the Thames other party-goers on
its sister-ship, the Hurlingham, risked their lives to save those drow ning in the river.
Many of the initial rescuers in these disasters simply w ithdrew from the scene and
returned home. The im portant point being that these people had needs yet they
were left in a state of shock by the horrors they had witnessed. Yet once emergency
plans are in full flow the tendency is for witnesses and non-professional rescuers to
be ignored, even asked to leave the site.

Following the completion of rescue and evacuation the 'site', if appropriate, is made
safe, secured and sealed. W hat happens next? Whose responsibility is it to manage
and co-ordinate the events which constitute the immediate aftermath? It is vital that
emergency plans extend to this period for, as realisation of the circumstances and
extent of the disaster emerges, broader personal and community implications take
hold. This research identifies the immediate afterm ath as a new phase, every bit as
significant as rescue and evacuation in term s of the consequences for those involved.
As indicated, there is a range of different people caught up in the immediate
aftermath. These include: survivors w ith and w ithout physical injuries; witnesses;
relatives and friends at the scene; rescue workers; the bereaved. Some individuals
can be classified in more than one category (eg survivors - rescuers - bereaved).
How are they identified and their immediate needs, practical as well as
psychological, established?

A part from dealing w ith the needs of those involved, in theory the immediate
aftermath is also geared to process. Arrangements have to be m ade for emergency
hospital treatm ent, often involving the urgent transfer of critically ill survivors, for
the holding of bodies and for receiving relatives and friends searching for their loved
ones. Procedures have to be initiated for the identification of the dead, for the taking
of formal statements, for receiving and providing inform ation and for the immediate
personal welfare of all involved. The assum ption is that the formal responsibility for
the immediate afterm ath, the first hours after rescue and evacuation, shifts from the
emergency services to the care agencies such as social services. Yet, it is also
assumed that the overall lead agency continues to be the police. Certainly the
statutory obligations on the coroner and the police circumscribe and determine the
scope of other agencies.

The post-disaster literature emphasises the problems of inter-agency co-ordination,
particularly breakdown in communication systems. Inevitably the dem ands on such
systems are high and varied. Despite telecommunications providers addressing the
issue, it is clear from a range of evidence that communications systems regularly fail
to provide an adequate flow of appropriate information to necessary destinations.
Aligned w ith this is considerable evidence that agencies rarely prepare effective
means of inter-agency communication. W ithin organisations it is not unusual to find
confusion and concern over role and responsibilities for the transfer of information.
This leaves associated agency professionals and others, such as the victims' relatives
and friends, w ithout access to reliable information.

There is considerable debate in the literature over co-ordination in the afterm ath of
disasters. Much of this focuses on achievable objectives as agencies work alongside
each other. It is recognised that often a 'consensual' approach means only that
competing agency priorities are disguised rather than dealt with. From the evidence
it is clear that different agencies are not equal in setting agendae and determ ining
outcomes. This differentiation in power is an organisational reality underpinned by
mechanistic top-down relationships between agencies. While such hierarchical and
militaristic frameworks are dom inant there is little recognition of other significant,
less formal processes through which people gain information and support.

In establishing agendas, priorities, procedures and tasks in the immediate afterm ath
the role of the police is both pre-eminent and directive. Supported by statutory
powers, Home Office guidelines and the established operational frameworks
initiated by the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO), the i police use their
authority and discretion to take control of the situation. W orking on the basis of
'scene of the crime' investigations or in consultation w ith appropriate accident
investigators, the police assume the lead role. Institutionally they have the capacity
to reallocate and redeploy considerable staff and material resources already at their
disposal. They take responsibility for: processing the dead; managing the m ortuary
or tem porary provision; determ ining access to bodies; post-m ortem assistance and


                                           x
support for the coroner; facilitating the identification of bodies; running the casualty
bureau; regulating the site, particularly as a potential 'scene of crime'; controlling
information flow and establishing communications systems; recording evidence;
reception of survivors and the bereaved; interviewing witnesses, survivors and the
bereaved.

It is in the operation of this range of complex and dem anding work that inter-agency
conflict is m ost likely to occur, contrasting w ith the cooperation usually prevalent
during the rescue and evacuation phase. For, the priorities of investigation and
regulation are not necessarily compatible w ith those of inform ation and care. The
lead role ascribed to the police rarely has been formally contested. Inevitably,
collaborating agencies accept that criminal investigations, liability inquiries and
medico-legal examinations take precedence over other needs and become the
dom inant context. As police work w ithin this context is carried out in close
consultation w ith the coroner and relevant investigating agencies or inquiry teams, it
is not unusual for other agencies to identify their role as that of supporting the
police. Effectively this means accepting their operational priorities, decisions and
direction. W ith the disaster site secured and controlled, access is governed by police
discretion. The bodies, under the jurisdiction of the coroner, literally are sites of
medico-legal examination w ith the medical cause of death often providing evidence
of the circumstances in which death occurred. Access, identification and viewing
become restricted processes.          Frequently, the bereaved are denied access.
Occasionally a blanket decision is m ade governing all who died, w ith bodies
returned home in sealed coffins. Invariably such decisions are taken w ithout
consulting the bereaved or their representatives.

Various Home Office documents and guidelines have recognised the need to balance
full, legal examination of the circumstances w ith the emotional and personal needs
of the bereaved. There is, at least, a stated commitment to the care and treatm ent of
those caught up in the immediate afterm ath of disasters and other traum atising
events. Despite this commitment, however, the potential for inter-agency conflict at
the scene and during the immediate afterm ath is considerable. As identified earlier,
professional priorities underpinned by, and reflected in, differing occupational
cultures create the defining frameworks and processes which govern those
procedures and practices adopted and operationalised. W ithout effective inter­
agency consultation, negotiation and agreement, the emergence of conflict between
agencies, in the w orst possible circumstances, is inevitable. Such ill-preparedness
leaves those involved in disasters vulnerable, but also it creates tension and discord


W ith attention focusing on operational procedures and agency requirem ents,
psychosocial needs in the immediate afterm ath have been relegated to m atters of
lesser significance. Many social services departm ents, in association w ith emergency
planning, have recognised the profound importance of preparing for such needs and
there is a developing research literature. Yet practical initiatives and academic
analyses tend to emphasise long-term psychological and emotional reactions to
disasters and traum a, focusing responses and provision beyond the immediate
aftermath. The identificatory, investigative and other formal processes also
contribute significantly to psychological distress. It is im portant, however, to review
the broader literature on loss and bereavement, draw ing on both distinctions and
parallels between unexpected, sudden deaths and those in disasters. Significant here
is the relationship between the increasing ' professionalisation' of death via agency
priorities and interventions and the 'public ownership' of disasters through
widespread m edia attention. W hat is apparent frotti the broader research into loss
and bereavement is that the bereaved are routinely channelled into 'appropriate' and
'acceptable' forms of grieving and any deviation is viewed as out-of-the-ordinary,
exceptional or, at worst, disruptive.

The Reality of Inter-Agency Conflict in the Aftermath of Disasters

In agency reports and professional w orkers' evaluations of their responses to
disasters or other traumatic events there is a tendency to talk up performance while
playing dow n mistakes, failings, poor decisions 0r inter-agency conflict. Where
pfoblems are adm itted or stated as 'lessons to be learned', invariably they are
explained, even justified, as to be expected given the 'exceptional' circumstances.
Equally, there is an understandable reluctance to be severe or critical of individuals,
holding them responsible for errors of judgem ent or poor decisions m ade in the
'heat of the moment7. W hat has become increasingly clear, both from the literature
and from the prim ary research conducted for this project, is that poor preparation,
inadequate training, confused inter-agency roles and responsibilities and differential
professional priorities contribute to a climate of vulnerability for front-line workers
and those who depend on them for care and support. 'G etting by' and ad hoc
decisions will always be part of any emergency response and do not necessarily
imply poor provision of essential services. Not every eventuality can be foreseen
and rehearsed and there m ust be scope for institutionally supported personal
initiative. But the full weight of responsibility for appropriate care provision cannot
be placed on 'ad hocery'.

Each of the disasters which together provide much of the prim ary data for this study
- Lockerbie/Flight 103, the Marchioness, Hillsborough - in quite different
circumstances resulted in the loss of life over a short period of time.
Lockerbie/Flight 103, as noted previously, combined two disasters. The first, in the
air, claimed the lives of all 259 passengers and crew. The second, on the ground,
killed 11 residents and destroyed property and services in the tow n of Lockerbie.
While the disaster centred on the town, bodies and debris from the high altitude
explosion were scattered over several counties. The recovery of bodies, parts of the
aircraft and personal possessions was a complex and prolonged operation. It was
made more difficult because of the political intrigue surrounding Pan Am Flight 103
and the subsequent international wrangle over c riminal liability and inter-state
responsibility. The majority of victims and their families came from around the
wjorld. While m ost of the bereaved eventually made the long journey to the town
those in the community were confronted w ith the traum atising reality of the
immediate aftermath.
In contrast, the Hillsborough disaster was contained w ithin two small, overcrowded
pens on the terraces of a football stadium . Because the Liverpool v Nottingham
Forest match was an FA Cup Semi-Final the disaster unfolded in the presence of
television cameras, press photographers and journalists. Although, coincidentally, it
was a repeat of the previous year's Semi-Final, both sets of supporters were relative
strangers to the stadium . 96 people died as a result of the vice-like crush in the pens
caused by police mismanagement of the crowd in the period leading up to the kick-
off. 400 people w ent to hospital, over 700 were injured and thousands were
traum atised by their desperate struggle to survive or by witnessing the plight of
others. Survivors and witnesses played an essential part in the rescue, resuscitation
and evacuation of people trapped in the pens. Caught up in the disaster, they
became directly involved w ith the circumstances of the immediate aftermath,
helping w ith the injured and searching for relatives and friends. Those in different
parts of the stadium , and others travelling the relatively short journey from
Merseyside, arrived at the stadium 's gymnasium (designated a tem porary
m ortuary), the hospitals and police stations in the search for their loves ones.

The Marchioness disaster occurred at night on the River Thames in central London
when the pleasure-boat was hit from behind and sunk by a working dredger, the
Bowbelle. 51 people died and many of those rescued from the river were saved by
people on another pleasure-boat, the Hurlingham. These rescuers had witnessed one
of the w orst tragedies in the Thames' history. In the chaos that followed survivors
and witnesses were taken to hospital or w ent home. It was not clear who had died,
who had survived or who was missing. From the outset it was difficult for
survivors, for relatives and for friends to access reliable information. The disaster
has rem ained controversial primarily because of the Government refusal to order a
public inquiry, the inadequacy of the Marine Accident Investigation Branch Inquiry,
the conduct of the initial inquests and the eventual inquest verdicts of unlawful
killing.

Each disaster occurred in different circumstances, making distinctive dem ands on
the emergency services (including the police), hospitals and other agencies. Despite
this, they provide consistent evidence of the problems endured by witnesses,
survivors and the bereaved in the immediate afterm ath of disasters. As in other
disasters there were serious problems.          These included: communications;
information flow; access to bodies; identification of the dead; site access; legal
processes. Collectively they confirm a picture of decision-making, institutional
complacency and professional convenience which prioritised technical, medical and
legal considerations over the psychological, social and m aterial needs of survivors
and the bereaved.

As people attem pted to gain accurate inform ation on the dead, injured or missing,
the inadequacy of the communications and information systems was apparent in all
three disasters. This extended, often over days, to the reliability of inform ation and
the insensitivity of its transm ission regarding confirmation of death. Even when the
authorities had the time to organise a more informed and considered response, the
bereaved report being treated inappropriately, w ithout concern for their welfare or
provision of personal support. Mistakes were made, including misinformation,
sometimes days after the event. Such errors, of fact or judgement, could not be
explained by the chaos of the immediate aftermath.

Those bereaved in the Lockerbie/Flight 103 and Marchioness disasters were denied
access to the bodies, extending even to the process Of identification. Those who take
such decisions invariably argue that they act in the 'best interests' of the bereaved.
Yet there is rarely any consultation to establish w hat constitutes 'best interests'. In
these disasters denial of access and exclusion from decision-making were heavily
criticised by the bereaved. Their sense of marginalisation, particularly w hat they
considered as a violation of their right to view the bodies, was com pounded later
when they were given photographs of their loved ones. Such deeply-felt and
strongly-expressed views were associated w ith how the bereaved felt that the bodies
of their loved ones had been treated. At Lockerbie bodies were left in the fields often
for several days. Many of the Marchioness victims had their hands removed, the
bodies returned to relatives in sealed coffins. This constituted unnecessary and
unexplained mutilation.

At Hillsborough a decision was taken to initiate physical identification on the
evening of the disaster at the stadium gymnasium, designated a temporary
m ortuary. No am ount of labelling changes a gymnasium into a m ortuary. W hat
confronted the relatives and friends of the deceased dem onstrated appalling official
insensitivity. Poor quality Polaroid photographs of faces in body bags were pinned
to boards, each given a number. At one end of the gymnasium the bodies were laid
out in rows, num bered to correspond w ith the photographs. Each body was
attended by a police officer supplied w ith a bucket of w ater and a flannel to wipe the
face of the dead person. As relatives or friends, often w ith considerable difficulty,
recognised a face among the photographs, the number was called and the body was
wheeled on a trolley to the door of the gymnasium. Amid scenes of deep sorrow
and screams of recognition, touching, caressing or other physical contact was
curtailed. The bereaved were then expected to sit w ith South Yorkshire CID officers
and give answers to detailed questions about the behaviour, background and
reputation of their loved ones. A process of criminal investigation was already
underway. This was the reception endured by the bereaved on the night of the
disaster. For those who identified bodies the following day at Sheffield's Medico-
Legal Centre, the bodies were presented behind glass screens w ith physical contact
or proximity forbidden.

Lack of direct access to the bodies of loved ones caused bitter argum ents in
impossible circumstances which then resulted in official claims to the 'possession' of
the body. To be told that 'bodies', which to the bereaved were people w ith
personalities, identities and .lives, were the 'property of the coroner' was legally
correct. But it also consolidated the alienation and m arginalisation of relatives and
friends from processes which they considered should have recognised, understood
and responded to their legitimate requests and concerns.
In these, and other, disasters the denial of access also extended to the disaster site
and to personal effects. While the site is the physical and tangible location of the
disaster and can provide im portant evidence of its causes, it is also a symbolic
manifestation of the deaths. There has always been formal recognition of sites,
through monuments, plaques or shrines, but it has become increasingly evident that
people w ant to express their personal sym pathies through shared tributes at the
scene. Inevitably, many of those bereaved in tragic circumstances w ant to visit the
site as soon as possible. Their needs can conflict w ith the official priorities of sealing
the site, which means denial of access. For the bereaved, this becomes difficult to
accept when politicians and dignitaries are provided w ith apparent unrestrained
access to the site.

In the immediate afterm ath, and in the m onths and even years that follow, survivors
struggle to establish their legitimate claims to support and access. Following
disasters, survivors are acutely aware of their struggle to live, and of the realisation
that only a short time previously relatives and friends died in horrific circumstances.
During this period the relief of survival is tem pered w ith guilt and the sadness of
tragedy is overlain w ith anger. Survivors also require access to reliable information
on the dead, the injured and the survivors. Often survivors are also the first-line
rescuers, getting people to safety, attem pting resuscitation and running further risks.
Regardless of how many people they help or save, it seems they only remember
those who die, those for whom they feel they could have done more. Yet once the
emergency services take over, survivors and witnesses - often in severe shock, are
neglected. Far from being essential, they become redefined as a potential hindrance
to the formal operation.

W hat interviews w ith the bereaved, survivors and witnesses indicate is that while
the priorities of rescue, evacuation and medical care often deal effectively w ith
physical injuries, there is no parallel or comparable provision of emotional or
psychological support. Yet longer-term work w ith survivors, particularly of the
Hillsborough disaster, dem onstrates that their experiences of participating in rescue
and evacuation and the immediate afterm ath in the gymnasium, was significant in
contributing to later stress and traum a. Their treatm ent by those in authority,
particularly police responses, and the apparent assumptions that left them to fend
for themselves, reveals institutional complacency in failin g to provide appropriate
and adequate support for survivors. While there is a commitment, particularly
within care agencies, to establish and offer aftercare support in the weeks and
m onths that follow a disaster or traum atising event, there is little evidence of such
provision in the immediate aftermath.

The emergency services invest significant time, effort and resources in disaster
preparation and pre-incident training. Central to this planning is the objective of
mobilising and deploying essential services w ithin m inutes of a disaster. As
discussed earlier, the mechanistic approach to emergency planning and the
hierarchical system of command and control dominates inter-organisational roles
and responsibilities. This research concludes that this process and its associated
procedures m ight be effective in realising the principle objectives of rescue and


                                           xv
evacuation, but it imposes a restrictive, limiting and closed structure on the
continuing tragedy of the immediate aftermath. Put bluntly, it does not provide the
framework nor the potential for identifying and addressing the psychosocial,
material or practical needs of survivors, witnesses and the bereaved. Further, in the
prom otion of medical and crimino-legal priorities it is likely to institutionalise
insensitivity.

There is no convincing reason as to why crisis support teams, skilled, trained and co­
ordinated, cannot be organised and resourced to respond immediately to disasters
or related tragedies. This research confirms that the process of crisis support -
including the identification of different needs of those caught up in disaster - should
be in place as soon as possible and should be operational at all appropriate locations.
However supportive voluntary or church-based agencies are, crisis support teams
should already have harnessed and integrated the range of skills appropriate to
effective consultation, negotiation and realisation of personal, social, m aterial and
community needs. The assumption is often that this transfers responsibility from
one set of professionals (emergency services) to another (crisis support/care
agencies), w ith the latter imposing a kind of 'counselling blueprint' on their 'clients'.

This is not the case. As happened at Hillsborough, community resources can be
mobilised quickly through media appeals resulting in a surplus of well-intentioned
voluntary helpers. W hat this does not provide is a co-ordinated response of people
w ith skills, understanding and experience trained to work in collaboration with
those 'in need'. The persistent failures in process and procedures, typified by the
mishandling of the immediate afterm ath at Dunblane, have been com pounded by ad
hoc agency responses and inappropriate care provision. Given the criticisms levelled
at inter-agency responses to the immediate afterm ath of a series of disasters in the
late 1980s, it is a m atter of considerable concern that survivors, their families and the
bereaved of Dunblane endured the severe consequences of ineffectual
communication systems, minimal information flow and weak procedures in the
hours that followed the killing of sixteen children and their class teacher.

What the research also finds is that crisis support is not simply about establishing the
means to meet the stated needs of individuals, their families and their communities.
Given that the conflict of priorities is so entrenched within agency imperatives and
occupational cultures and 'lead agencies' will impose their demands, decisions and
judgements on people traum atised by the experiences of survival and bereavement,
it is necessary for crisis support workers to be prepared to act as advocates. This is a
complex proposition involving informed preparation, sound consultation w ith those
in need and effective negotiation w ith representatives of defining agencies. Again,
this should not be left solely to the confusion of the immediate aftermath. Crisis
support team s' preparation and training should be closely allied to inter-agency
cooperation as part of planning for the immediate aftermath. W ithout such planning
there will be little common ground established between agencies over the 'rights' of
survivors and bereaved and considerable potential for severe and intransigent inter­
agency conflict.
The research also draw s on crisis support preparation and training in one large
county council and two m etropolitan boroughs. While all three providers had
developed crisis support teams incorporating, in various proportions, statutory and
voluntary sector agency workers and had initiated training programmes, two
instructive factors emerge from the work. First, the teams were established on the
basis of providing psychosocial support after the first 24 hours. In the context of this
research this represents provision for the short-term afterm ath rather than for the
immediate afterm ath. Second, there was no consultation between care agencies and
the police and no inter-agency training. The prevailing assumption, by managers
and workers, was that the crisis support role was specific to identifiable psychosocial
needs 'to the side of' medical and legal investigations. Despite often elaborate and
advanced planning, involving psychologists, clinicians, social workers and specialist
care staff, the issues surrounding the immediate aftermath, inter-agency cooperation
and intra-agency responsibilities were not addressed. The teams and their managers
voiced universal concern over their potential to respond to the range of needs in the
immediate afterm ath given the problems encountered by care professionals in
previous disasters.
                              RECOMMENDATIONS



A Charter for the Bereaved

      Central government should initiate the fullest possible consultation, involving
      bereaved and survivor campaign and advocacy groups, with the intention of
      establishing a Charterfor the Bereaved.

      The Charter should provide a clear overview of the statutory role and obligations of
      the police and the coroner, distinguishing between such obligations and discretionary
      practices.

      The Charter should provide a statement of rights for the bereaved concerning:
      information; viewing of the body; identification; post-mortems; return of the body;
      return of personal effects; access to the disaster site; crisis support.

      The Charter should be published and made available to those who suffer sudden
      bereavement in controversial circumstances, in disasters or related tragedies.

      The Charter should recognise that those bereaved, injured or affected by disasters have
      a right to privacy and a right to be protected from further suffering occasioned by
      intrusive journalism.

Responding to the Immediate Aftermath: Central Government

      Central government guidelines on emergency planning should include an operational
     frameworkfor the provision of crisis support in the immediate aftermath of disasters.

      This framework should provide guidance on nationally agreed strategies for
      psychosocial support, appropriate central funding and proceduresfor evaluation.

      Through adequate resourcing and review processes, central government should
      encourage local authorities to make consistent provision in their disaster plans for
      recognising and meeting the diversity of psychosocial needs in the immediate
      aftermath.

      A centrally-funded programme for research, information and training is required
      which should be located in an academic institution already associated with crisis
      support, providing a national resource.

      Current Home Office guidance and agency guidelines should be reviewed to
      accommodate the lead role of crisis support in the immediate aftermath.
      There should be a comprehensive review undertaken of the statutory role, duties and
      obligations of the police and the coroner in dealing with disasters and other deaths in
      controversial circumstances.

Responding to the Immediate Aftermath: Local Authorities

      Local authorities should assume the lead role in preparing for the aftermath of
      disasters, in establishing crisis support teams and in ensuring that effective inter­
      agency partnerships and 'second-phase' procedures are operational within their
      emergency plans.

      Local authority-based crisis support should incorporate workers from social services
      (the lead agency), statutory and non-statutory and voluntary agencies within a
      programme of integrated training and regular review.

      Local authorities should receive funding and resources from central government to
      develop and maintain provision for second-phase planning.

      Local authorities should be guaranteed central government grant-aid to meet the costs
      of developing post-disaster crisis support.

      Local authorities should ensure that all departments are conversant with the disaster
      plan, are adequately briefed concerning roles and responsibilities and have a clear
      understanding of the rationale and strategies adoptedfor crisis support.

      As part of disaster planning local authorities should establish provision for intensive
      media coverage including centralised facilities, close liaison with agencies and
      consultation with local press officers.

Inter-Agency Cooperation in the Aftermath of Disasters

      The guiding principle in responding to the immediate aftermath of disasters should be
      the provision of appropriate jacilities and support; identifying and prioritising the
      needs o f survivors, the bereaved and those who work with them in a caring capacity.

      There should be full cooperation between all agencies concerned with the immediate
      aftermath of disasters with designated crisis support agencies/teams taking the lead
      rote in assessing the needs of the bereaved, survivors and others affected.

      Inter-agency cooperation should be established to guarantee a coherent, planned and
     fully negotiated approach to the immediate aftermath of disasters and related,
      traumatic events.

      Crisis support, as part of its preparation, should involve regular meetings and
      consultation with 'opposite numbers' in other agencies, particularly the police.




                                           xix
      Second-phase planning should involve detailed strategies for organising,
      administering and processing the aftermath thus minimising the potential for
      inappropriate decisions taken in the 'heat of the moment'.

      All agencies involved in post-disaster provision of services should be required, as part
      of second-phase planning, to submit a thorough overview and evaluation of their
      response and performance to the local authority.

      In the immediate aftermath the demands of policy or other agency investigations
      should not necessarily take priority over the identification process and the rights of
      the bereaved.

Crisis Support in the Aftermath of Disasters

      An essential part of second-phase planning should be agreed principles jbr assessment
      of the needs of the bereaved, survivors and others in the immediate aftermath.

      As part of crisis support planning there should be:
!

      i      afull audit o f available professional skills within the agencies involved;
      ii     a training or recruitment strategy in response to any skills deficit identified;
      iii    an agreed protocol jbr the involvement of other 'care' agencies, such as the
             churches.

      A professional skills audit should identify the strengths within statutory and
      voluntary sector agencies, particularly regarding comparable work in non-disaster
      settings.

      Crisis support teams, and their providers, should receive full training and regular
      reviews with clear indication of their role, expectations and potential implications of
      the work.

      Crisis support training should include the perspectives of the bereaved and survivors.

      Crisis support teams should be resourced to provide 24-hour cover, across each local
      authority, for immediate deployment.

      Advocacy, in dealing with agencies in the immediate aftermath, should be identified
      as a major element and responsibility of effective crisis support work.

      Crisis support work should also include informed advice, such as that provided by
      Disaster Action UK literature, concerning the investigative and legal processes which
     jbllow on from the immediate aftermath (eg police inquiries; inquests; legal
      representation).




                                            xx
Responding to the Needs of the Bereaved

      The reception and accommodation of the bereaved should incorporate an appropriate
      physical environment with necessary emotional, psychosocial and material support.

      The bereaved, from the moment of first contact, should be kept fully informed and
      accurately briefed on all developments relating to the disaster and its aftermath.

      All agencies involved should undertake to provide accurate information and to uphold
      the bereaved's right to privacy in being given information relating to the death of their
      loved one.

      Information specific to the deaths of individuals, including notification of the death to
      the bereaved, should not be delayed or withheld until all o f the identities are known.

      Information concerning the circumstances and details of the deaths should not be
      shared between agencies or their workers to the exclusion of the bereaved.

      Reception centres and mortuaries should be staffed at all levels by trained crisis
      support teams deploying appropriate skills necessary to deal with the diverse demands
      of sudden bereavement.

     I f photographs are used as part of the identification process they should be of good
     quality, sensitively reproduced and presented according to categories such as sex and
     age.

     Procedures of body identification should be established and administered with care
     and sensitivity prioritising the identified needs of the bereaved and enabling privacy.

     Body identification should be considered a crucial element urithin the grieving process
     and it should provide the bereaved with time and opportunity to be with their loved
     one.

     The bereaved, other than in exceptional circumstances, should be allowed to touch,
     hold or caress the body of the deceased.

     The dead should be presented to the bereaved with dignity, fully recognising and
     endorsing the significance of this moment within the context of grieving.

     Body bags should not be used in the presentation of the deceased to the bereaved.

     Proper facilities, including medical and crisis support, should be provided jbr the
     bereaved before and after identification.

     Temporary or makeshift body holding areas, however professionally convenient,
     should be provisions of last resort.
Responding to the Needs of Survivors

      It should be recognised that survivors will generate a diversity of needs in the
      immediate aftermath relating to a combination of personal experiences, material
      circumstances and their relationships to others involved.

      Crisis support provision should be adaptive and flexible in identifying and responding
      to this diversity of needs among survivors.

      There should be recognition of the part played by survivors in the rescue and
      evacuation phase o f disasters.

     A reception centre or area should be established in which survivors can be
     accommodated and provided for; it should be staffed and administered by crisis
     support teams.

      Survivors should be encouraged to leave their names and addresses and, if requested,
      be given the opportunity to discuss any issues with support workers in private and in
      confidence.

      Provision should be made, where appropriate, for survivors' accommodation, travel,
      transport and communication vrith relatives orfriends.

      Survivors should be kept fully informed on all details relating to the disaster, its


     No formal statements should be taken from survivors by investigating agencies in the
     immediate aftermath.

     Survivors should be issued ivith contact telephone numbers to enable further advice
     and support if and when necessary.
                                  CHAPTER ONE


          CRISIS RESPONSE IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH
                          OF DISASTERS



Contextualising Disasters

Disasters in the UK or in neighbouring European countries are often referred to as
'dom estic'. In some way this distinguishes 'local' disasters from those that occupy a
world stage, creating dem ands for international intervention and relief. liv in g in
Britain it is difficult to envisage widespread famine, cholera epidemics, volcanic
eruptions and devastating earthquakes. Despite the speed and accessibility of
international news broadcasting, which brings 'natural' disasters and genocide
across continents in an instant, for those relatively immune to such tragedies there is
only minimal association. They live, literally, in a different world. Disasters 'at
hom e', however, are quite different.

      The reality is ... that all people live in the shadow of potential tragedy.
      Inevitably the domestic disasters of the late 1980s have brought the
      realisation that those who died or survived were simply unfortunate to
      be in the w rong place at the wrong time. Each year many millions of
      people attend sporting events, travel on car ferries, on planes or by
      train, use the underground or take a trip on a pleasure boat. (Scraton
      e ta l 1995:2)

In other words, people identify closely w ith the ordinariness, the everyday context,
in which disasters occur. Watching television coverage or reading news accounts of
coach or minibus crashes, boat or canoe tragedies, fires on oil rigs or w ithin the
London underground, crowd crushes, they can imagine being there. They have been
there and are potential victims.          M odem transport, communication and
organisational systems are significant in widening the constituency affected by
specific disasters. Further, those affected by the Hillsborough disaster were not
limited to Sheffield, nor to Liverpool football supporters. 'Involvement7 w ith those
who die in a disaster may be as significant as direct experience of the disaster.
W right et al (1990:37) suggest that the concept of involvement identifies a broader
constituency of those who m ight be affected, "defined by a community of meaning -
rather than by a community of place". They conclude:

      Disaster, tragedy and combat no longer have a clearly defined site or
      frontline w ith touched and untouched areas. Nor are their effects
      limited to the area of destruction. The consequences can reach across
      nations and oceans...




                                           1
While people think of activities which involve risk as being beyond their usual
experience disasters rem ind them that risk is everywhere. They reveal the full extent
of personal powerlessness and vulnerability in the context of social and institutional
complacency. W hat this does not mean, however, is that disasters or related
traumatic events are simply random or 'chance' happenings. They involve
vulnerability in systems, combining apparently 'natural' forces w ith social, political
and economic dynamics (Stallings 1988).

Disasters are not one-dimensional. There is no 'typical' disaster and no simplistic
defining criteria or clear parameters. The variety and complexity of disasters, their
definition and classification, has been noted (United Nations 1986; Taylor 1987). Not
all disasters involve mass deaths or extensive injuries to victims. In N orth Wales, for
example, the Towyn and Aberconwy floods caused devastation to the lives of
victims although no-one died at the time. N or are disasters restricted to a 'moment7
or a short period of time. Viruses, bacterial infections and contagious diseases
develop and reproduce over lengthy periods. This delay and gradual consolidation
has also been a feature of pharmaceutical disasters such as Thalidomide and Opren.
It is rare for these events to be recorded in the same way as fires, sinkings,
explosions, crashes and other 'im pact' disasters. Accounts of the sudden emergence
of HIV in the early 1980s and its devastating effect on gay communities, however,
parallel accounts of 'im pact7 disasters, not least in dem onstrating institutional
complacency and ineffectiveness, in contrast to the resilience and resourcefulness of
those affected (Kramer 1995).

In this project there is no intention to underestim ate the significance of those
disasters which emerge gradually or those which do not involve death or injury in
the short-term. There is no hierarchy in the assessment of suffering. W hat this
project is concerned with, however, are those disasters and other similar tragedies
which occur in a 'm oment7 or over a relatively short period and which involve death,
survival and bereavement.          Undoubtedly, there are issues central to an
understanding and evaluation of such circumstances which are relevant to a range of
other disasters or tragedies. The relationships between personal and collective
traum a, between survival and bereavement, between processes of aftercare and
investigation, are brought into stark relief by 'im pact' or sudden disasters. As public
interest and m edia coverage elevate personal tragedies into a w ider dom ain there
are tensions about 'ow nership' of the disaster and conflict over w hat constitutes
appropriate interventions and provision by investigative and care agencies.

It is im portant to contextualise disasters and their aftermath. In the literature this
has been represented by the use of medical analogies. References are made to
periods of 'incubation' as the potential for disaster grows and develops, hidden from
view but ready to emerge when circumstances coincide. This is followed by the
'acute' or 'crisis' phase when the potential, often quickly and irretrievably, becomes
the reality. Finally there follows 'recovery' which extends from rescue through to
normalisation. Categorising 'phases' as self-contained time periods w ith clear
boundaries is not a precise endeavour. The progression of hum an action and
reaction, involving the complexity of personal, group and organisational responses,
is neither easily m easurable nor compartmentalised. Identifying 'phases' which
encompass a m uch longer time-span does help in understanding, planning for and
responding to disasters.

Most emergency planning, although committed to foreseeability and prevention,
starts w ith the assum ption that, regardless of the m ost elaborate risk-reduction
strategies, disasters will happen. W hat it m ust not do is to be over-predictive given
the "extremely complex combinations of factors" (Horlick-Jones 1990:14) which
expose "vulnerable" systems and create volatile environments. To be over-
prescriptive can reduce the effectiveness of crisis response (Dynes 1994). Such
response, increasingly well-planned, is concerned w ith the 'incident', rescue and
evacuation and the prevention of escalation. Once achieved, as far as emergency
planning and provision is concerned, the incident is over. Emergency planners,
however, do consider the significance of social services' work and this is reflected in
most plans and guidelines. Criminal investigation and the coroner's inquiry (fatal
accident inquiry in Scotland), as w ith other relevant investigation agencies, focus on
the circumstances which immediately preceded disaster, the disaster itself and,
occasionally, on the response. In other words, m ost official inquiries work w ithin a
limited period associated w ith the immediacy of the disaster. This reflects, to an
extent, the conceptualisation of 'incubation', 'acute' and 'recovery' phases. While
this model serves the purposes of formal investigations, concerned w ith establishing
criminal or civil liability or the cause of death, it denies the longer-term background
and the longer-term consequences. It also underestim ates the significance and
complexity of interm ediate phases.

Following the interpretative model outlined in earlier work (Scraton et al 1995) this
research adopts an eight phase model in contextualising disasters and other
traum atising tragedies. These phases are: historical context; immediate context;
immediate circumstances; the 'm om ent'; rescue and evacuation; immediate
aftermath; short-term aftermath; long-term aftermath. Given the already stated
reservations concerning over-categorisation of 'phases', this framework is useful as it
is both reflexive and pre-emptive. It enables a more analytical approach, post­
disaster, to the key historical and contemporary factors identifiable as contributing
to the disaster. Also, in planning emergency and aftercare responses and service
provision, it m aps the progressions of the aftermath. Clearly people do not live their
lives or react to the world around them in explicit phases. Each of the phases listed
overlaps and reflects personal progression as well as institutional dem ands and
bureaucratic processes (inquiries, investigations, court cases, prosecutions, inquests).

W hatever the rem it of official inquiries it is im portant, in draw ing lessons from
disasters and other traum atic events, to place them in their historical contexts. A
'disaster waiting to happen' is the popular expression of longer-term foreseeability,
often supported by more formal or official appraisals. As Lord Justice Taylor's final
report into the Hillsborough disaster shows (Taylor 1990), there was a well-
documented legacy, report after report, w arning of the intrinsic danger of terraces,
access and egress in Britain's ageing soccer stadia. Similarly, concerns over the
safety of roll-on, roll-off ferries, of over-used and under-resourced railways, of


                                           3
operational practices on oil-rigs, of private gun ownership, of traffic on the Thames,
and so on, combine personal knowledge of those w orking in the field w ith official
warnings. As stated elsewhere:

       Despite their immediacy and suddenness, disasters rarely happen
       w ithout warning. Over time, and through complacency, circumstances
       are reported and become accepted, giving the im pression through
       habit and familiarity, that all is well and will rem ain so ... most
       disasters have histories which include established customs and
       practices adopted by responsible individuals and organisations.
       (Scraton et al 1995:7)

W hat this suggests is that lack of considered foresight, institutional complacency or
neglect and economic pressures often combine to create the inevitability of disaster.
In other w ords, disasters can be foreseeable and are regularly the inevitable
outcomes of established custom and practice. Yet, "W hat corporate bodies and large
organisations significantly fail to appreciate, or to accept, is that institutionalised
neglect and unrealisable objectives form powerful determ ining contexts in which
disasters occur" (ibid).

While the longer-term historical context creates the potential for disaster there has to
be a 'com ing together' of key elements which result in a specific set of circumstances.
One of the m ost significant aspects of risk is that on m ost occasions 'running the
risk', or heightening it, often becomes incorporated into everyday life. Fast turn-
round times and m arket-led competition on cross-channel ferries led to the regular
practice of putting to sea w ith the ships' bow doors open. There m ust have been
many occasions on which this, combined w ith other dangerous practices, could have
resulted in disaster. Eventually, due to a combination of factors, they did and the
Herald of Free Enterprise sank outside Zeebrugge w ith the loss of 192 lives. While
there is no clear distinction between the longer-term historical and the immediate
contexts, there are often changes in organisational policy or practices which conspire
w ith the intrinsic danger to provide the dynamics of disaster. The responsibility for
the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster w ent far beyond the assistant bosun who failed
to close the bow doors. "From top to bottom ", stated the Sheen Report into the
disaster, "the body corporate was infected w ith the disease of sloppiness" (in Crainer
1993:2-3).

The third phase, arising out of the immediate context, is concerned w ith the actual
circumstances. At Bradford a discarded cigarette ignited a plastic or polystyrene cup
among accumulated and highly flammable rubbish beneath a w ooden grandstand
and resulted in disaster. It is clear that the circumstances - cigarette in cup - caused
the fire but the longer-term institutional neglect and complacency over safety
contributed. The tendency, at all levels, is to focus on specific circumstances w ithout
working back through the immediate and historical contexts to establish the broader
contributory factors. Direct actions, or a failure to act appropriately, all too easily
become the focus of investigations looking to apportion individual responsibility.
While individuals do contribute, through their actions, reactions or inaction, to


                                           4
disasters the circumstances are often the inevitable outcome of longer-term
developments.

The 'm om ent' of disaster can be sudden, literally a moment, w hen an explosion
occurs, a crash happens or a building collapses. Or it can be extended over a
relatively short period of time. The crush at Hillsborough, the sinking of the
Marchioness, the fire on Piper Alpha, the Lyme Bay tragedy and the Herald of Free
Enterprise are each examples of disasters which unfolded and consolidated. W hether
the disaster is an 'im pact' disaster or develops over minutes rather than seconds, to
some extent, is immaterial because the forces at work are irreversible once they have
taken hold. Inevitably, and appropriately, questions are asked as to whether
different interventions during the 'm inutes' of a disaster m ight have saved lives or
limited damage but, again, these are retrospective questions. As concluded
elsewhere:

       The point of having safe and efficient evacuation procedures at
       crowded venues, hotels, halls of residence and schools, is to guarantee
       that a moment of danger does not extend to become a moment of
       disaster. W ithout the capacity to identify the potential for tragedy in a
       situation of dangerous build-up, and w ithout the necessary training
       and communication system to halt w hat is in motion, disaster becomes
       inevitable. (Scraton et al 1995:10)

From, the first realisation of im pending disaster, or from the moment of impact,
rescue becomes the only imperative. In this phase, which includes evacuation of the
dead and injured, saving life is the prim ary objective. Despite confusion and, often,
life-threatening situations, survivors and bystanders commit themselves to further
risk, responding unselfishly to the desperate needs of others.

       Survivors pull people from wreckages, save people from drowning,
       breathe life back into still bodies and return to smoke-filled rooms in
       search of others. Occasionally they include off-duty doctors, nurses
       and first-aiders ... At some point it is assumed that the chaos of the
       'm om ent' will give way to an organised, effective and professional
       response. (Scraton et al 1995:10)

Unless, as at airports, emergency services are at the location on stand-by, the official
response comes some time after the alarm is raised. The mobilisation of fully-trained
and equipped emergency services, briefed through operational emergency plans and
conversant w ith procedures for safe evacuation, triage, priority transportation and
inter-agency communications, is an impressive dimension of local authority
provision. Despite cuts in emergency planning budgets the co-ordination of and
cooperation between emergency response agencies has contributed significantly to
the saving of life and the lim itation of serious injury. Yet there have been occasions
when poor communications or lack of effective co-ordination has contributed to the
extent of disasters or tragedies.



                                           5
Rescue and evacuation is identified and prepared for as a self-contained phase w ith
specific and realisable objectives. The appropriate services w ith the necessary
equipm ent and skills m ust be on the scene quickly. Their joint responsibilities are to
save life, treat the injured, lim it damage, contain the incident, evacuate and secure
the site, establish stability and order. These are physical objectives dealt w ith in
progression. W hat this fairly universal framework reflects, however, is a functional
or mechanistic approach to problem-solving. It does not take account of personal
needs, states of mind, hum an responses and reactions or potential volatility w ithin
the social context.

       In m ost situations the 'disaster location' is sealed off pending official
       inquiries. There remains ... a significant num ber of survivors,
       witnesses, rescue workers, volunteers and onlookers, each w ith
       personal stories, memories, reactions and pain. Some survivors and
       witnesses are likely to be relatives or friends of the dead or injured and
       w ant information. Others leave the scene unnoticed, their presence
       unrecorded and their personal needs unm et. (Scraton et al 1995:12)

Far from evacuation draw ing a line under the immediacy of disaster, the events that
follow represent a quite distinct phase w ith the chaos of disaster easily superseded,
often through lack of preparation, complacency or inadequate provision, by the
chaos of the immediate aftermath. W ith the police designated already as the lead
agency in co-ordinating and managing the rescue and evacuation phase, they rem ain
so throughout the immediate aftermath. While other investigations are initiated,
including the coroner's inquiries if there have been fatalities, the police assume
overall control and regulate the immediate afterm ath in accordance w ith their
professional priorities.

W ith a range of agencies involved in the immediate afterm ath and w ith the bereaved
and the families and friends of the injured arriving on the scene, the needs and
dem ands are complex. Inevitably, such demands can conflict w ith the policy
decisions taken by the agencies involved. Lines of official responsibility and
effective communication, establishing appropriate and sensitive procedures for
identification, containing and controlling media voyeurism while providing reliable
information, and accommodating survivors and the bereaved while providing
supportive professional help, represent the broader priorities of this phase. Yet in
comparison to planning and preparing for crisis response, that which underpins
essential crisis support has been minimal.

Where consideration and preparation has developed, usually involving m ulti­
agency initiatives based around social services departm ents, is in the short-term
aftermath. Usually after the first 24 hours, acting on referrals but also increasingly
incorporating proactive responses, psychosocial support has been identified as
crucial in helping people to face their problems, in resolving practical or material
concerns and in providing sensitive counselling. The short-term afterm ath is
difficult as invariably the media lead the 'rush to judgem ent' and often people feel
that their personal tragedy has become a form of public property. While survivors


                                           6
and the bereaved try to deal w ith the daily reality of disaster, including recovering
and burying the dead, the official inquiries and police investigations begin. In high
profile cases these institutional responses create an added dimension, often further
inhibiting people's recovery.

As the investigations continue and result in legal proceedings involving
compensation, criminal or civil liability, prosecution, appeals and inquests, the
longer-term afterm ath brings to bear its own pressures on all involved. Witnesses
and survivors are often re-interviewed and have to give evidence. The bereaved or
those who have lost property have to engage solicitors and attend a seemingly
endless round of court cases. On each occasion the media is in evidence, trawling
through the issues over and again. Often at the centre of controversial and contested
cases is the issue of responsibility and liability for the disaster or traumatic event.
Findings of official inquiries sometimes seem to contradict apportionm ent of liability
within compensation aw ards and each outcome can appear to conflict w ith decisions
not to prosecute or w ith the eventual inquest verdicts. The long-term aftermath
phase makes dem ands on all involved and raises further questions concerning
appropriate psychosocial support and care agency provision. While these processes
continue, many of those caught up in disasters and their afterm ath suffer post-
traumatic or stress-related illnesses.

What the eight phases provide is some indication of the needs and associated
demands at each stage. As stated earlier, they are not hard and fast, measurable
phases providing accurate classifications for the 'progression' of disasters and their
aftermath. Yet they do dem onstrate the need to address post-disaster issues and
raise fundam ental questions about the responsibility and appropriateness of service
provision in the immediate afterm ath and beyond. For, the consequences of weak or
inadequate provision relating to psychosocial and material needs in the aftermath
are apparent in longer-term stress and illness endured by those whose needs were
neglected.

Comm unication and Co-ordination in the A fterm ath

The previous discussion illustrates the significance of conceptualising the immediate
afterm ath of disasters as a phase which follows on directly, in time, place and
circumstance, from rescue and evacuation yet precedes the organisational responses
of the short-term aftermath. Just as there is a responsibility to m eet the demands of
the emergency (crisis response), there should be a further commitment to those
caught up in the confusion and pain of the immediate afterm ath (crisis support).
Yet, as has been argued, planning and preparation for this phase has been given
minimal priority, little consideration and virtually no resources. W ithout effective or
appropriate planning the 'system s' which emerge are lim ited to the spontaneous
decisions of those 'on the scene'. Such ad hoc responses, involving complex inter­
agency and intra-agency provision, only succeed by chance rather than by
judgement.
Disasters draw on the skills and expertise of diverse organisations. Often, w ithout
prior inter-agency contact, planning or preparation, they face unfam iliar demands
on an unprecedented scale. Comfort and Cahill (1989:180) state:

       Problem-solving among m ultiple organisations committed to the same
       public goal is difficult under stable conditions. In the dynamic,
       uncertain environment of an emergency, complexity in problem­
       solving escalates in direct proportion to the scale of the emergency. No
       single organisation can m eet the massive, urgent dem ands of a
       disaster.

Co-ordination in planning and feedback is identified as a key element in planning
for and responding to disasters in the UK (Hills 1994:3; Home Office 1994a:3-4). The
growing disaster literature reveals significant difficulties between organisations at
times of crisis. Such difficulties are manifested m ost acutely in relationships between
organisations. As Auf der Heide (1989: 80) concludes:

       Disasters pose unusual dem ands for inter-organisational co-ordination.
       For this reason, a substantial portion of disaster communications
       problems are related to the exchange of inform ation among
       organisations.

Over the last two decades advances in communication, at all levels, have been
revolutionary. Telephone systems, radio communications, mobile telephones, long-
range microphones, the list is endless, give the impression that whatever the crisis or
emergency, communications will be efficient, effective and immediate. The very
nature of such events dem ands reliable and swift systems between the emergency
services, hospitals and site control throughout the rescue and evacuation phase.
While this is in train, it is vital that support networks are in place to deal w ith the
demands of the immediate aftermath. Survivors and witnesses need to access
relatives and friends while those w orried or concerned 'a t hom e' require helplines.
At the disaster site and other 'subsidiary' locations, such as hospitals or holding
centres, communications provision and procedures m ust be established to secure an
adequate and accurate inform ation flow between agencies, from agencies to the
public and to the media. As recent evidence demonstrates, it is folly to trust in the
sophistication of highly advanced technical systems if the operating policies and
practices have not been previously defined, negotiated and rehearsed.

It is clear from this evidence that failures in communication seriously inhibit and
underm ine the effective development and co-ordination of complex and uncertain
tasks during and after disaster (Comfort and Cahill 1988:181-2). Technical
difficulties can seriously hinder communication, between organisations, w ithin them
and w ith the public. Telephone systems are often inadequate or overloaded (Wilby
1990:194; Dyer 1991:12; W ood-Heath 1992:58; Mitchell 1993:25; Cullen 1996:15).
Radio frequencies are regularly incompatible, overloaded or pose 'security'
problems, and equipm ent is often otherwise im paired or inoperative (Auf der Heide



                                           8
1989:91-96; Taylor 1989: 54; Wilby 1990:194; Smith 1992:67; Mitchell 1993:25; Cullen
1996:15).

Auf der Heide (1989:81), however, suggests that many communication problems are
"people problems" rather than "equipm ent problems". Quarantelli (1994:12-13)
argues that in disasters it is rare for communication technologies to be destroyed or
disrupted, noting the frequent emergence of alternative means of communication
through CB radio or foot messengers. In his view:

       The major difficulties are in the processing of information through the
       available communication channels. The real problems in this area are
       in poor, incomplete or inefficient information flow. Thus in the great
       majority of instances, a major organisational problem that develops at
       the emergency time of disasters is in w hat is communicated, not in
       how it is communicated. (Quarantelli 1994:13)

Difficulties in communication can result from inter-agency unfamiliarity, their
isolation from each other and their established, autonomous working practices (Auf
der Heide 1989:81; Quarantelli 1994:13; Gillespie and M urty 1994). Additionally, the
change in channels of communication, from formal to informal, and the contrasting
content of information which is exchanged during the emergency period and the
afterm ath also present difficulties (Quarantelli 1994:13). The usual, more m easured
pace of inform ation flow, and the considered decisions taken w ithin the hierarchies
of most formal organisations, is in contrast w ith the change, uncertainty and urgency
which characterise emergencies (Lewis 1988:174-175).                Quarantelli (1994:13)
proposes, "... the more formal and bureaucratic organisations are in pre-impact
period, the more difficult it is for them to alter their inter-organisational information-
flow patterns during disasters".

'C o-ordination' and Control: Problem s w ith the Consensual Paradigm

Auf der Heide (1989:82-90) stresses the importance of 'pre-incident' consultation in
laying foundations for communication during crises.               This includes: the
development of trust; the resolution of political, personal and jurisdictional disputes;
knowledge of how other agencies function (routinely and in emergency situations);
standardisation, where possible; joint planning and training; establishing effective
informal contacts. Not least, he stresses that agencies should work together in
planning how to plan during emergencies, citing the United States' Incident Command
System as a model. Further, he emphasises the significance of creating specific plans
at the time of each incident, as each disaster situation is unique. Rosenthal
(1988:276), however, considers that while planning for disasters is im portant there is
a 'fundam ental paradox' in emergency management:

       We are dealing w ith plans, organisations, and people oriented towards
       events which they are supposed to prevent from taking place in the
       first place, and which come as a surprise and in unexpected
       dimensions and forms. The persisting question is along which lines


                                            9
      adequate preparations can be made and how disaster-relevant
      organisations can keep up their morale w ithout succumbing to the
      syndrome of 'w inning the last w ar'.

Yet, despite such difficulties, it is widely accepted that organisations need to co­
ordinate their activities regarding planning, particularly their impact on the disaster
and its aftermath. In his foreword to the Home Office guidance contained in Dealing
with Disaster the then Home Secretary proposed that the "key message" was "the
need for all who are involved w ith the response to any disaster to be associated w ith
planning that response" (Home Office 1994a:vii). The guidance suggests the concept
of "integration in emergency management", embracing prevention, preparedness,
response and recovery. For:

      There is no one model response to disaster; the response will need to
      vary just as the nature and effects of the disaster will vary.
      Nevertheless, any response has to be a combined and co-ordinated
      operation, and certain features will be common in the response to
      many disasters. (ibid:3)

Hills (1994), however, argues that 'co-ordination' is an ambiguous term. It can be
interpreted as being an obligation on agencies to inform each other of their decisions,
priorities and intended actions. Or, it can suggest the direction of a range of
agencies by a 'lead' agency. It can suggest both an inform ing and a controlling
function. Hills argues that for the term to be meaningful it needs to be directed
towards specific, attainable objectives:

      It w ould ensure that co-ordination w ould be confined to specific
      functions, rather than as an ambiguous element in contingency
      planning. No doubt it w ould continue to be used as an exhortation,
      but, for all practical purposes, co-operation is a more accurate
      description of the key element in the UK's emergency response. (Hills
      1994:8)

Hills is happier w ith the term "liaison", as this "provides an environment in which
co-operation and feedback can thrive" (ibid:8). Feedback, he argues, is particularly
important. In contrast to co-ordination by planning, co-ordination by feedback
allows m isunderstandings or mistakes to be adjusted by peer pressure. This position
values an environm ent in which different perspectives can be shared, and errors
identified and corrected. Rosenthal et al (1991:214) elaborate the point, arguing that
the prevailing emphasis on "comprehensive" and "integrated" disaster management
is seductive, but misguided. Although agencies regularly state a commitment to
collaborative and shared initiatives in times of crisis, the reality is somewhat
different:

      There is little evidence for the validity of the continuing normative
      assum ption of overriding consensus, unanim ity and solidarity
      amongst actors or agencies involved in m anaging crisis events.


                                          10
       Bureau-political activity ... may be associated w ith a concern for self-
       interest, institutional power or overzealousness in pursuit of w hat is
       defined by different agencies as the 'common cause'. (ibid:212-213)

Further, the authors contend that the objective of unified consensus is not only
unrealistic, but undesirable. Alternatively, w hat needs to be understood and
developed is the potential of pluralistic bureau-political exchange, although there are
implicit dangers should conflict spiral out of control:

       ... crisis management thinking needs to reconsider mechanistic notions
       of mono-centric, top-down government intervention, and
       acknowledge, amongst others, the problem solving potentialities of
       polycentric approaches stressing interagency checks and balances. A
       crucial problem, however, remains the control of bureau-political
       processes; they may easily escalate to intense and sustained rivalry,
       producing endless turf battles, perm anent stand-offs, and 'm inim al'
       compromises, which diminish governmental coping capabilities.
       (ibid:213)

W hat this suggests is that different organisations should specify and accept their
distinctive professional objectives but should also find ways of negotiating and
collaborating w ithout imposing their priorities. It is clear that organisations in non­
disaster situations do not compete w ith each other on an equal basis. Some are more
powerful than others. Analysis of multi-disciplinary work dem onstrates how
"institutional and structural power differences" are significant.

       Hum an and material resources, access to inform ation and claims to
       'expertise', affect the capacity of agencies and interest groups to
       achieve desired outcomes. In multi-agency crime prevention, pow er is
       largely exercised through the power to define: to set agendas, determine
       policy, direct resources and impose definitions ... (Crawford 1994:503-
       504).

Further, disasters do not occur in a social, political or economic vacuum. They are
contextualised by social inequality and institutional conflict and such structural
factors do not diminish after a disaster. As Stallings (1988:582) argues, "... it is tin(ie
that social scientists treat natural disasters as both products of as well as contributors
to ongoing social arrangements rather than assuming that they are politically neutral
'acts of nature'". A critical analysis of the afterm ath of disasters challenges the m yth
of consensus and considers where the power lies in relationships between
organisations and between those organisations and the public.

From Emergency to Aftermath: Para-m ilitarism to Pluralism ?

While there has been some acknowledgement of the need for a multi-agency
approach to the afterm ath of disaster, it is often combined w ith support for a mo|re
authoritarian structure to stabilise and bring order to the confusion and chaQs.


                                            11
Hoorweg and Q uint (1994:10) describe the changing relationship between
organisations as the 'acute' phase moves into the 'recovery' phase. They claim that
during the former, the professional emergency organisations dominate, but in the
latter, as their role diminishes, they are replaced by insurance companies, social
services, environmental services, church and volunteer organisations. Hoorweg and
Quint consider that this transfer of influence and responsibility impacts on the way
that decisions are taken. They characterise the organisational structure of the acute
phase as being vertical, almost m ilitary as "decisions m ust be m ade quickly and
w ithout interference from the public", but recovery "requires an effort that in many
respects resembles a community project" (ibid:10).

The vertical, param ilitarist model oversimplifies the actual operation of agencies
during and after disaster. Effective emergency responses are not always dependent
on such decision-making structures, nor should the longer-term afterm ath always be
characterised by a w ithdraw al of the emergency services. To take the second point
first, the police in particular m aintain a centrally im portant role in the short and
long-term afterm ath of disasters. This is not derived in their co-ordinating role for
the rescue response, but as criminal investigators, servicers of inquests and inquiries
and through privileged access to the media. For all the psychosocial care services
offered by health and social services in the short and long-term afterm ath of
disasters, the underm ining of this work, by sometimes insensitive police inquiries,
has been seriously underestim ated, leading to profound consequences.

Regarding Hoorweg and Q uint's first point, the assum ption of 'inevitability'
attached to hierarchical, vertical organisational structures in the acute phase is too
simplistic. It is precisely this assum ption that enables and verifies police dominance
in inter-agency relations (Dynes et al 1981; Lewis 1988; Nilson 1985; Dynes 1994;
Nilson 1995). Contrary to popular mythology, people are rarely rendered helpless
through panic, passivity or traumatisation. N or do they descend into anti-social
lawlessness or 'anarchy' (Quarantelli 1994). On the contrary, 'natural netw orks' of
citizens, public officials and voluntary organisations often emerge which "... exhibit
high levels of intragroup communication, highly similar sets of values and goals,
and often unarticulated but effective systems for feedback and evaluation of
performance" (Comfort and Cahill 1988:181).

Such spontaneous networks can be effective in dissem inating information. They also
are innovative and im portant vehicles for learning, understanding and responding
(ibid:181). By contrast larger, formal organisations have difficulties w ith the disaster
environment. Reviewing work on different organisational responses to the
uncertainty associated w ith "non-programm ed decisions" of the immediate post­
disaster environment, Lewis (1988:175) points out that w hatever the improvements
in communication:

      ... there will still be situations ... in which lower level personnel are
      faced w ith on-site decisions ... for which there are no clear pre-existing
      policies or standard operating procedures. In fact, some situations
      may involve 'bending the rules' and some may even require actions


                                           12
       that violate existing policies and procedures. In order to facilitate such
       actions, an internal climate is needed that encourages individuals to
       make independent decisions when necessary and enhances their ability
       to make them in a creative manner.

A clear example occurred at Hillsborough in the contrasting reactions between the
police and the survivors/fans. Lord Justice Taylor's report describes the point at
which some officers began to realise w hat was happening and their inhibitions about
acting w ithout authorisation while the fans acted w ith swift resourcefulness (Taylor
1989:43). After the Kegworth air disaster, the police and fire officers at the site had
to take a decision whether to accept the help of many volunteers, some of whom had
medical and para-medical skills and had left their cars to help remove the injured
from the plane, or to act in accord w ith their training and clear volunteers from the
area. They were sufficiently flexible to adapt to the circumstances and they chose
the first course. Members of the public assisted inside the aircraft, formed hum an
chains to help passengers dow n the slippery motorway embankment and
adm inistered first aid ('Rescue: O ut of the Blue', Channel 4 6 May 1996).

Most government agencies, however, tend to be "mechanistic in nature and to
discourage rather than encourage independent or innovative thinking in terms of
rigid standard operating procedures" (Lewis 1988:176). Rosenthal et al (1994:123)
argue that the predominance of "technological if not technocratic" perspectives pays
inadequate attention to the significance of "victim relief". They m aintain that
effective disaster management "goes way beyond internal and external co­
ordination" involving in particular, "setting a clear course in regard to the emotional
content of a major disaster".        Quarantelii (1994:9) describes the results of
organisational failure forcefully:

      ... social science research has concluded that the source and locus of
      most problems in the emergency phase of disasters is not to be found
      in the victims, but in the organisations attem pting to help them.

For Rosenthal et al (1994:125), the task facing disaster m anagers is more complex
than has been commonly acknowledged:

      ... the basic fact to understand is that technological risks may be at the
      beginning of a chain of events that may end up in a dazzling variety of
      crises. It would be quite wrong to assume that there w ould ever be one
      mechanical, if not manageable, psychological and social response ... A
      totally different perspective on disaster and crisis m anagement is in
      order. It asks for a comprehensive view of possible stakeholders and
      definitions of the situation in the wake of disaster...

Yet it has been difficult to achieve recognition and institutional legitimacy for these
ideas. They have yet to be recognised universally or incorporated into disaster
planning. This is not only because of competing tasks, interests and jurisdictions.
Nilson (1995:17) argues that occupational ideologies are crucial in the maintenance


                                          13
and reproduction of existing priorities and practices, contrasting the "fear centred"
culture of police/m ilitary organisations w ith the "hope-centred" culture of those
agencies w ith "soft" community development responsibilities. He concludes that
"Until and unless para-m ilitary organisational forms change their structures,
processes and their underlying rationales, a social mobilisation approach to disaster
organisation and planning will just seem unrealistic".

Tasks, Priorities and Police Dominance

The key features of UK disaster response in the UK include the guidance that the "...
core of the initial response will normally be provided by the emergency services
supported by the appropriate local authority or authorities and voluntary
organisations" (Home Office 1994a:4). The overall objectives of the disaster response
are:

       a)      to save life
       b)      to prevent escalation of the disaster
       c)      to relieve suffering
       d)      to safeguard the environment
       e)      to protect property
       f)      to facilitate criminal investigation and judicial, public, technical,
               or other inquiries
       g)      to inform the public
       h)      to prom ote self-help and recovery
       i)      to restore normality as soon as possible
       (ibid:6)

Although there is no prioritisation given to these objectives, the Association of Chief
Police Officers' guidelines (ACPO 1991:1) assert that "The immediate and overriding
responsibility of all emergency services at the scene of a major disaster is the saving
of life". Beyond this, however, the assum ption is that organisations will be
"committed to the same public goal" (Auf der Heide 1989:180).

W hat is not apparent from the post-disaster objectives as listed, is their potential for
fundam ental conflict. While all agencies involved place a high priority on saving
life, there are situations in which other objectives could be put at risk. Preventing
escalation often involves the commitment of emergency services personnel into
dangerous situations, putting themselves and those for whose rescue and evacuation
they are responsible, at increased risk. The Chernobyl disaster, for example, was
brought under control at the expense of the lives of fire-fighters who prevented its
escalation. There can also be conflicts between "the relief of suffering"/"the
prom otion of self-help and recovery" and the facilitation of "criminal investigation
and judicial, public, technical or other inquiries". This conflict is m ost prom inent
when the needs of the bereaved w ould be best served by accessing and returning the
body and personal effects of their loved one, but the interests of investigation and
inquiry dem and their retention for post-mortems and further forensic study.
Similarly, restoring 'norm ality' as soon as possible often conflicts w ith the


                                            14
exceptional measures taken in pursuit of many of the other objectives. It is
im portant to recognise how substantial these contradictions can become. Coleman et
al (1990) and Scraton et al (1995) reveal that for many relatives after the Hillsborough
disaster, the identification process was chaotic and insensitive, w ith relatives and
survivors stating that questioning during the body identification procedures was
akin to interrogation.

While loss of life and further risk during the phases of impact and rescue can bring
temporary consensus in identifying the m ost pressing priorities, therefore
minimising inter-agency conflict in terms of ends (if not means), the passing of these
phases into the immediate afterm ath presents agencies w ith a range of often
incompatible tasks. That this has seldom been recognised reflects police dominance
across both the rescue and the immediate afterm ath phases. Yet it is im portant to
recognise that this dominance is differently grounded in each phase. In the rescue
phase it is derived in the priority to secure the disaster site, access to and w ithin it
(both physically and in terms of communication), and the recognised need for on site
co-ordination, thus ensuring the efficiency of the rescue attem pts. In the immediate
afterm ath of disasters when danger has receded, however, dominance is grounded
in police pre-eminence in investigation and securing order.

While each agency has a defined role, the central importance of the police in the
initial response and immediate afterm ath is evident in the following Home Office
(1994a:4) overview:

      The police co-ordinate the activities of all those responding at and
      around the scene, which m ust - unless a disaster has been caused by
      severe w eather or other natural phenomena - be treated as the scene of
      a crime and be preserved accordingly. They also facilitate inquiries
      carried out by the responsible accident investigation body ... The police
      process casualty information and have responsibility for identifying
      and arranging the removal of the dead. In this task they act on behalf
      of HM Coroner who has the legal responsibility for investigating the
      cause and circumstances of deaths arising from a disaster.

Processing the D ead and the Living

The Identification Commission

Police control of information-gathering, in the management of the dead and in
handling the bereaved, is adm inistered through the casualty bureau and the
identification commission. The latter, whose task is to establish identification
procedures is adm inistered .under the authority of a police incident officer. Its
function and associated responsibilities:

      ... include liaison w ith and submission of evidence to the Coroner, and
      controlling the running of the m ortuary ... W hen a positive
      identification has been made it is the responsibility of the police to


                                           15
       inform the next of kin; this should be done in person. (Home Office
       1994a: 15)

The authorities consider it vital that pressure to remove bodies from the disaster
scene should not be allowed to prevent the recording of evidence (Matthews and
Foreman 1993:316). Consequently, bodies should be labelled and photographed
prior to being disturbed and then taken, unless a designated tem porary m ortuary is
functioning, to a body holding area (Home Office 1994b:5). At this stage medico­
legal requirem ents take precedence over the needs of the bereaved, thus denying
access to bodies by relatives (ibid:7). Bodies should be moved gradually to a
tem porary m ortuary avoiding excessive dem ands on m ortuary staff. At tem porary
m ortuaries the police are given the central role in managing m ortuary procedures,
assisting pathologists and forensic specialists, dealing w ith property, obtaining and
preserving evidential m aterial, and "where appropriate", supervising visual
identifications. Ensuring security and preventing unauthorised access are also police
responsibilities (ibid:7).

ACPO guidelines state that although visual identification of the dead is usually the
most appropriate m ethod, this is often not possible or desirable after major disasters
because of physical disfigurement or decomposition.            Thus the process of
identification depends on m atching ante-mortem and post-m ortem data (ACPO
1991:S6, 1.3-1.4). W hatever the medico-legal requirem ents, however, direct visual
identification may be possible (Matthews and Foreman 1993:319). Further, given the
importance of viewing the body for the grieving process, it is im portant that there is
no predisposition on the part of police or coroner against viewing, or of a 'blanket
policy' which universally denies viewing.

The guidelines m aintain that identification becomes more assured when each body
has been identified, thus emphasising the potential utility of identification by
"exclusion" (ACPO 1991: S6,1.5).The ACPO Guidelines conclude:

       It is recognised that where identification of a body has been m ade w ith
       some degree of certainty it is difficult to hold back this information
       until all the identifications have been made. If it is conceivable that the
       time scale for identifying all the bodies will be reasonable then it is
       desirable to w ithhold information of identification until all the bodies
       have been identified, (ibid: S6,1.6)

There is no indication as to w hat constitutes a 'reasonable' time. The guidelines
clearly dem onstrate the interests of the police in w ithholding information from
relatives, thus securing identifications that are accurate. Relatives also share this
interest. They w ould not w ish to undergo the added traum a of false information.
Yet, they also need to receive inform ation as early as possible, and not face a scenario
in which their relative has been positively identified, but the inform ation is denied to
them because others rem ain unidentified. Given the distribution of power between
police and coroner on the one hand, and the relatives on the other, there is a danger
that the authorities' conception of 'reasonableness' will prevail.


                                           16
Post-Mortems

The coroner, whose responsibility it is to establish the identity of the deceased and
the cause, location and time of death, may direct or request that a post-mortem is
carried out. The prevailing system is that post-mortems are requested via standing
arrangements w ith local pathologists (Matthews and Foreman 1993). Post-mortem
examinations involve considerable intervention.

       ... all body cavities are opened, the chest, the abdomen, the pelvis and
       the skull. The organs contained are removed and systematically cut
       through and dissected for evidence of changes deep w ithin the organ,
       the weights of various organs having first been recorded. (ibid:140)

Disfigurement of the body during the post-mortem process wherever possible is
avoided, w ith cuts m ade in places notvisible on presentation of the body by an
undertaker to the bereaved (ibid:141).        That a post-mortem is undertaken at all,
however, may cause considerable distress to the bereaved. It is reasonable to
question the necessity of post-mortems if the deceased is easily identifiable and the
cause of death obvious through external examination. Although it is a highly
sensitive issue following a traum atic death, the relatives may also have a substantial
longer-term interest in the conduct and outcome of a post-mortem. It is im portant
for the relevant decision-makers to be aware that the relatives of the dead have
rights in the process. Unless it causes undue delay, the coroner is obliged to inform
various persons of the time and place of the post-mortem, including any relative of
the deceased who has informed the coroner of their desire to attend or be
represented. Relatives are entitled to attend in person or, more likely, to be
represented by a medical practitioner (Matthew and Foreman 1993). It is unlikely
that relatives w ould be aware of this entitlem ent unless specifically informed.

The Casualty Bureau

The police also set up a casualty bureau in the immediate aftermath. Its role is "... to
provide a central contact point for all those seeking or providing inform ation about
persons who m ight have been involved." Its functions are:

       (a)    handling enquiries from the general public about relatives and
              friends who m ight have been involved;
       (b)    collating details of survivors, their condition and their
              whereabouts;
       (c)    informing enquirers of the condition and whereabouts of the
              survivors;
       (d)    confirming areas of evacuation and the location of evacuees;
       (e)   gathering data to assist in the identification of casualties;
       (f)   compiling a list of persons believed to have been involved who
              are now missing. (Home Office 1994a:16)




                                          17
The casualty bureau does not have a role in the identification process, or in the
notification of the next of kin. These responsibilities lie w ith the identification
commission, represented at the casualty bureau by an ante-mortem co-ordinator
(ACPO 1991). The bureau is divided into four sections. The m issing person enquiry
unit takes calls from the public, assesses, records and passes on information. The
casualty inform ation unit takes details from police hospital docum entation teams
and from survivor reception centres, then passes it to the collation unit. The
collation unit receives, records and endeavours to match casualty and enquiry data.
Matches are passed to the general message unit which informs inquirers, notifies
people of casualties and makes other general inquiries (ACPO 1991).

Caring for the Living

Home Office guidance published in Dealing with Disaster (1991:14) identifies the
importance of sensitivity to the needs of those affected by the disaster. It states:

       The care and treatm ent of those involved in a disaster lies at the heart
       of the response. This applies to the care and treatm ent not only of
       victims and their relatives and friends, but to everyone involved in the
       emergency response who may be greatly affected by their experience.

If necessary, the police establish a reception centre for relatives and friends travelling
to the disaster site. This is staffed by different agencies including the police, social
services and voluntary organisations, w ith "the fullest possible inform ation ... given
to enquirers" (ibid:16). In the Home Office National W orking Party Report Dealing
With Fatalities During Disasters (Home Office 1994b:12) attention is draw n to the need
of the bereaved to view the body as part of the grieving process. Similarly, the
Department of H ealth Disasters W orking Party Report Disasters; Planning for a Caring
Response, states:

      The police should be informed that although there may be no need for
      the family to view the body for identification purposes, there may be
      an emotional need to see the body to believe that the person is actually
      dead and not missing, to say goodbye, and to resolve fears or
      nightmares about w hat injuries the person m ight have suffered before
      they died. (Disasters W orking Party 1991: Part 2,31)

There is also some acknowledgement that survivors should be treated sensitively in
recognising that questioning in the immediate afterm ath may not be appropriate:

      Survivors will often be able to provide crucial inform ation about w hat
      happened and may' be im portant witnesses at any trial or inquiry. A
      balance has to be struck between the requirem ent to gather evidence
      from survivors and the reluctance of some to rem ain at the scene of
      their distress. (Home Office 1994a:14)




                                           18
There are practical recommendations concerning the viewing of the body which are
committed to the establishment of a sensitive process. These include: the availability
of a separate viewing area; no access through the m ain m ortuary; the viewing of one
body at a time; the presentation of the body and property; the provision of a suitable
area for people to compose themselves (Home Office 1994b:12). The potential for
conflict between medico-legal requirem ents and the needs of the bereaved, however,
is explicitly acknowledged:

       Dealing w ith fatalities during disasters m ust recognise the conflict
       between trying to satisfy the full and proper legal enquiry into w hat
       happened and the emotional and information needs and the
       sensitivities of the bereaved, both relatives and friends of the deceased.
       The responsibility for the former rests rightly w ith the coroner, assisted
       by the police and pathologists, and the latter involves a m ultiplicity of
       statutory bodies and voluntary agencies. (ibid:ll)

The resolution of such conflicts is sought through a process of professional
discussion. Specific guidance regarding the viewing of the deceased is equivocal.
Through official guidelines the police have been urged to review procedures
regarding the dissemination of information to relatives and to support workers and
in allowing relatives to view bodies (Disasters W orking Party 1991:14). In more
recent guidance, however, although the police are rem inded of the needs of the
bereaved, it is stated that, "It is generally better for viewing as part of the grieving
process to take place once ,the body has been released by the coroner and at the
premises of the undertaker ..." (Home Office 1994b:12). It is not clear for whom it is
supposed to be "generally better" that viewing should w ait until the body is
released. Yet the police and coroner could have interests in delaying the
dissemination of inform ation (ACPO 1991 :S6, 1.5-1.6). It is acknowledged that the
release of the body m ight be delayed, often for weeks, and that "Some relatives may
insist on viewing the remains in the interim period or may be advised that this is
im portant for psychological reasons" (ibid:12).

Rather than considering viewing as something 'norm al', 'natural' or as a right, the
above statements implicitly marginalise relatives before release of the body. The
impression is that rights will be negotiated only if relatives are insistent. This denies
a proactive approach, which w ould offer the same information and access to all
people equally. It is an impression reinforced by the comment that, faced w ith such
viewing requests, the granting of permission will cause "additional adm inistrative
problems" (ACPO 1991:S6,1.8). Even "insistent" relatives have to aw ait "discussion
between the family doctor (if available), the allocated counsellor and the police
relatives liaison officer before this request is acceded to" (Home Office 1994b:12). As
noted elsewhere, "it may take considerable time to negotiate w ith relatives, police,
funeral directors and the coroners office", thus causing considerable distress to those
who have spent frantic hours, perhaps days, trying to find information on loved
ones (Disasters W orking Party 1991:14).




                                           19
If the police consider it inadvisable for the family to view the body, "... they (the
police) should be encouraged to give an accurate description of the condition, and to
recognise the right of the family to view the body" (Disasters W orking Party 1991:14
emphases added). While families apparently have a 'right' to see the bodies of their
relatives, instead of this right being asserted, or the police being told of this right and
instructed to facilitate it, they are simply "encouraged" to recognise it. Although
official guidelines discuss the "needs", and even the "right" of the bereaved, it is
instructive that the police on site are not to be challenged but "encouraged" when
they ignore or override such needs or rights. Clearly, as the police are in control of
procedures w ithin and around the tem porary m ortuary, their refusal to respond
favourably to encouragement w ould be difficult to oppose, even by people at their
most rational and composed, let alone by those going through the distress and
despair of traum atic bereavement.

How inform ation about the condition of the body and identification is framed is
very im portant as relatives are unfam iliar w ith the processes, are under intense
stress and, inevitably, are vulnerable to suggestion. In the immediate afterm ath the
authorities possess the powers, knowledge and discretion through which the police
and coronial priorities of investigative and forensic tasks can be fulfilled. The
process, however, does not prioritise, and often neglects, the needs and wishes of
vulnerable and distressed relatives. In this context, then, the grudging advice from
the Disasters W orking Party and Home Office gives considerable cause for concern.
W hat individual officers believe to be 'good for' bereaved relatives is likely to
influence the way that inform ation is given and the options that are presented. The
tone of the guidance does little to encourage a positive, enabling approach.
Additionally, Scraton et al (1995:13) state that: "... there is the potential for the
identification procedure to become confused w ith the investigative procedure" w ith
those "shocked by the circumstances and by bereavem ent... led easily into making
statements which have nothing to do w ith identification but are part of the broader
investigation".

Even this comment, based on prim ary research, understates the potential problems.
For, conflict originates not only from the contradictory nature of the tasks for which
different agencies are responsible, but also from the dom inant ideologies w ithin the
professions. Com paring the significance of different professional ideologies, and
their impact on disaster planning and response, Nilson (1995:16) concludes:

      Bureaucracies, which recruit and create disproportionate num bers of
      right-wing ideologues, are those for whom 'threat' and 'danger' are
      regularly reinforced, real a n d /o r imagined ways of organisational life.
      Such a prism invariably produces perceptual patterns which dictate
      tough and uncom promising reactions to situations. Indeed, such
      perceptions predispose a right w ing - and often rigid or paranoid -
      ideological response. Hence we sometimes find m ilitary or police
      agencies behaving as though they were occupying hostile territory
      following disasters.



                                           20
                                  CHAPTER TWO


           CRISIS SUPPORT IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH
                           OF DISASTERS



Since the early 1980s a substantial professional literature has emerged developing a
broadly accepted framework for psychosocial planning and crisis support for
disasters. Brook (1990) identifies four key assumptions central to this framework.
First, that for individuals disaster is likely to have long-term psychological and
emotional consequences. Second, these consequences will be w idespread, thus
extending the range of 'disaster victims'. Third, there will be an increasingly
proactive agency response, including the w idespread advertisem ent of services and
visiting w ithout referral. Finally, there is recognition of the importance of resources
w ithin the community in form ulating and mobilising effective disaster responses.
The establishment of this framework, and the incorporation of its m ain features
w ithin official guidance (Disasters W orking Party 1991), has been linked closely to
an increased recognition that longer-term psychological problems can be derived in
the traum a of the 'm om ent' and the immediate aftermath. This has involved an
awareness of the significance of loss for psychological health, together w ith the "rise
of the post-traumatic stress disorders" 0 ackson 1991:533).

Loss and Bereavement

Theories of loss and bereavement provide a range of explanations concerning the
impact of death on surviving relatives and friends. Bereavement has a variety of
possible 'outcomes'. Physical ill health, psychosomatic disorder, psychiatric or
psychosocial disorder, depression, altered relationship patterns, vulnerability to loss,
anniversary phenomena and increased m ortality are each noted as potential, longer-
term effects (Raphael 1984:61-62).

Although each loss is unique, certain contexts of bereavement can have particularly
devastating effects. The death of a child, in a society which has eradicated many
former causes of child m ortality, leaves few unmoved (Gibson 1991:79). For the
child who loses one of two parents, however, there can be a 'double loss' as the
surviving parent suffers the full impact of h er/h is partner's death (Johnston and
Beeson 1993:70). Hodgkinson and Stewart (1991) note that sudden, unexpected or
untimely deaths, or those that are painful or horrifying, leave a legacy of suffering
and understandably negative reaction. They also distinguish between three types of
untimely deaths: prem ature, -unexpected and calamitous, noting that bereavement
by disaster can comprise all three elements. W hat this dem onstrates is that disasters
and other traum atic events which result in loss of life exacerbate the pain, suffering
and emotional upset associated w ith death in more usual circumstances.




                                          21
W hat happens w ith disasters, or w ith other high profile events where m ultiple death
occurs, is that the individuality or uniqueness of each death is overtaken by the
wider, collective loss. As Tumelty (1990:78) notes:

       The basic principle to be borne in m ind is that each person's
       bereavement is the w orst for them. The fact that, in a disaster
       situation, their loved one may have died along w ith a great many
       others will be, at least initially irrelevant...one widow, angry at the
       press categorisation declared emphatically to the social worker, "I am
       not a Piper Alpha widow, I am Jim 's widow."

Bereavement through disaster is different from other bereavem ent in im portant
ways. Some of the bereaved will be survivors, often w ith experiences of the
traumatic search for and rescue of others. They may have been involved in trying to
find or save relatives. They may have been physically injured or have lost their
homes, thus placed in tem porary accommodation (Raphael 1986:72-3; Haslum
1989:112). W hatever their direct involvement in the disaster, the bereaved will
probably face a period of uncertainty concerning their loved one's fate. This is a
time when effective communication and information may be difficult, but w hen it is
most necessary. Lack of information, together w ith institutional insensitivity, can
lead to profound distress (Raphael 1986; Coleman et al 1990; Scraton et al 1995).
Identification may be difficult and time consuming and viewing the body may be
restricted or denied. In some cases, bodies may not be recovered. The failure to
view the body can lead to long-term difficulties in accepting death (Singh and
Raphael 1981; Raphael 1986; Hodgkinson and Stewart 1988; Haslum 1989; Tumelty
1990). For those unable to view the deceased, the m ain problem is often that of a
longer-term, lingering doubt. As Hodgkinson and Stewart (1988:13) state:

       Despite the fact that the com puter-aided precision of identification
       procedures following mass disaster leaves little room for doubt, the
       conclusions of this scientific detective work are emotionally
       unsatisfying. The bereaved believe w hat they are told by the experts at
       an intellectual level, but for many, a process of questioning develops.

Hodgkinson and Stewart also summarise the salient aspects of bereavem ent through
disaster, some of which can be directly mitigated, or exacerbated, by official actions.
Shock can be worsened by sudden death particularly when it occurs as a result of
participating in an apparently 'safe' activity. The lack of any opportunity for
preparation, in common w ith other sudden deaths, can be com pounded by the
nature and dimensions of disaster. Feelings of guilt can be intense, often taking the
form of 'if only' speculations concerning alternative actions which m ight have
prevented an individual from being involved in the particular disaster. Also, they
can reflect difficulties w ithin relationships, especially if interpersonal conflict or
other concerns rem ained unresolved at the time of the disaster.

Of particular importance for agencies operating in the immediate afterm ath are
issues of anger , "the intervention of authority", "helplessness", and "aspects of


                                          22
death" (ibid:28-32). "Man-made" (sic) disasters inevitably add to feelings of anger
that accompany loss. Anger directed towards God, fate, friends, family or even the
deceased should not be confused w ith anger directed at those held responsible by
the bereaved for the occurrence of disaster, or for the mismanagement of its
aftermath. This anger may be well-founded and it is im portant that grievances are
not minimised, or dismissed, by reference to the 'irrationality' or spontaneity of
grief.

The "intervention of authority" accompanies or follows m ost deaths, in one form or
another. According to Toolis (1995:14) of 'norm al' deaths in the UK, 75% take place
in medical institutions and 206,000, approximately one third, result in post-mortems.
He argues:

       M odem death is the territory of doctors, rushing around w ith
       cardiopulm onary resuscitation kits, or pathologists who cut dead
       people open, or blacksuited professional undertakers who hurriedly
       remove the body and arrange its incineration or burial in a state
       licensed cemetery.

What this constitutes is a process of professionalisation which effectively
marginalises or excludes the bereaved from decision-making or any functional
responsibility. During the afterm ath of disasters, the bereaved become subjected to
an overwhelming tide of official response. The helplessness they feel in relation to
the death and its circumstances is often worsened by their dealings w ith 'authority'.
As described above, the police and coroner have extensive responsibilities and
powers in the afterm ath of disaster. The m agnitude and intensity of official
intervention implies the mobilisation and management of resources on a large scale,
w ith the personal and social contexts of people's suffering overlooked. Survivors
and relatives need to be received, catered and cared for. Identities of the dead need
to be established and relayed, necessitating the gathering, collation and
dissemination of substantial and complex information. Unless the disaster is defined
as 'natural', the site and its adm inistration becomes a 'scene of crime'. In this climate
the scene of disaster and the bodies, property, and pre-death actions of the deceased
each become potential 'evidence'. As such, the evidence is collected, controlled and
processed by the police, the coroner or other investigating bodies.

Most people caught up in the afterm ath of disaster have no prior experience of the
operation of such agencies, their powers or discretion. They have no knowledge of
their rights in the circumstances, or of the type of inform ation they need, or w hat
could be im portant in the longer-term. Even those actions which they w ant to take,
such as viewing deceased relatives, can be frustrated by official reluctance or refusal.
As discussed earlier, in such circumstances it is often difficult for relatives to accept
the death, or for them to avoid exaggerated fears of disfigurement. Official control
of the body,denial of access or insensitive adm inistration of viewing rights, have real
and lasting consequences for the development and progression of the grieving
process.



                                           23
A further significant difference in comparison to non-disaster bereavements, is the
intensity of m edia coverage that follows major tragedies. Single deaths can, and do,
receive substantial m edia attention, and even lesser coverage, which sensationalises
a death to elevate its 'new sw orthiness', can be intrusive, inaccurate, and distressing
(Shearer 1991; Stokes 1995). In this context some individual deaths have received
media coverage of the m ost intense kind (Shearer 1991; Davis and Bourhill 1997).
Disasters involving m ultiple loss of life, however, are guaranteed the status of major
news stories. Broadly, the behaviour of the news m edia after disaster has been
shown to involve the w orst excesses of journalistic practice, while coverage has
sometimes been seriously inaccurate and profoundly distressing (Coleman et al 1990;
Scraton et al 1995).

The speed w ith which the m odem news media obtains inform ation places a greater
responsibility to ensure efficiency and accuracy in coverage. The questionable
assumption, however, is that official sources will guarantee these objectives. While
there are major concerns over media insensitivity, intrusiveness and the deference to
prim ary definers of news (Coleman et al 1990) the media can also constitute a
resource for the bereaved and for psychosocial agencies. When, after Hillsborough,
the Director of Liverpool Social Services, David Mason, found that neither basic
information nor personal effects could be obtained from South Yorkshire Police, he
used the media to challenge the decision (Mason 1993). In the immediate afterm ath
of the Dunblane shootings, the husband of Gwen Mayor, the teacher who was killed,
could not obtain confirmation of her death and threatened to obtain the information
from the media (Cullen 1996:16).. W ithin days of the loss of TWA 800 from New
York to Paris, relatives used the media to assert their dissatisfaction w ith the
response of the Federal Authorities. In the longer-term, relatives are not merely
passive in their relationships w ith the news media. The campaign of relatives of the
Dunblane victims against handguns and the active participation of Hillsborough
families in Jimmy McGovern's dram a-docum entary Hillsborough (Granada 5
December 1996) are two examples of the proactive engagement of the media by
those bereaved by disasters.

Death in disasters is different to death in more 'norm al' circumstances, but in
im portant respects it also has similarities. Lamenting the contemporary pressures
which collapse the grieving and m ourning process to the shortest possible time,
Haslum (1989:112) writes:

      These days we spend 20 minutes at the crematorium, have a few days
      compassionate leave from work, live through an agonising fortnight or
      so w hen people put up w ith us talking about the departed (but are
      much more likely to tell us about their own losses) and w ithin six
      weeks we are expected to have got over it and to get on w ith the
      business of living.

More specifically, the afterm ath of death, whatever the circumstances, occurs within
the same professionalised cultures that control, contain and sometimes pathologise
'extrem e' emotion. The pain, however, does not diminish because it is suppressed.


                                          24
A m other whose son died in a road accident describes how, eventually, she was
allowed to see his body.

       Timothy was my child: he had not ceased to be my child. I desperately
       needed to hold him, to look at him, to find out where he was hurting.
       These instincts don't die immediately w ith the child. The instinct to
       comfort and cuddle, to examine and inspect the wound, to try and
       understand, most of all, to hold. But I had been told "not to do
       anything silly". And they were were watching me to see that I didn't.
       I couldn't find his hand by lifting the cloth. I couldn't do anything. I
       betrayed my instincts and my son by standing there "not doing
       anything silly". (Awoonor-Renner 1993:272)

The remains of Lucy Partington, a victim of Fred and Rosemary West, were
excavated from the basement of their house. She had been a university student
travelling home when she was abducted in December 1973. She had been 'm issing'
for just over 20 years. In an article of deep sensitivity her sister, Marian, recounts the
process through which she was reunited w ith her sister (Partington 1996). She
describes the m onths w aiting for the release of Lucy's remains: "the legal process
that we were trapped in moved slowly, beyond our control" but she was determined
to "rescue and protect, in some way, Lucy's physical remains".

       ... I w anted to place some special objects in w ith Lucy's bones. I know
       that some people m ight not understand my need to do this ... It was a
       chance to love and cherish w hat was left of her. It was a chance to act
       in a situation that was still out of our hands. It was a chance to reclaim
       her from her m urderers and the hugely disrespectful, wretched hole in
       the cellar of 25 Cromwell Street. (Partington 1996:18)

Marian Partington was certain of her feelings and of w hat she w anted to do. It was
clearly a process of reunion but also of reclamation. There was no m orbidity and no
voyeurism which has become such a part of the distortion of dealing w ith death
w ithin some w estern cultures. It was a challenge to Lucy's suffering, rejection and
vicious killing and a gentle celebration of her life. M arian Partington's account is
moving in its clarity of purpose and dignity in bereavement:

      As we drew nearer, I gasped at the beauty of her skull. It was like
      burnished gold and it was part of Lucy that had survived to tell the
      tale. At that moment I was full of the joy of finding something that had
      been a part of Lucy after all these years. N ot a glimmer of fear, not a
      morbid thought entered the experience. I lifted her skull w ith great
      care and tenderness, I marvelled at the sense of recognition in its
      curves and proportion... I pressed her to my h e a rt...

      ... Through that experience I had the opportunity to transform the
      language from the crude butchery of the basement tow ards a poetry
      that we shared in our childhood. This was real and tangible evidence


                                           25
      of her death. Sometimes I return to the image of her skull as a way to
      release my grief ... I feel deeply grateful for that unique, very intimate
      experience, an opportunity to pay tribute to Lucy in my own way, to
      begin to say goodbye, for real.

Marian, awaiting the criminal prosecutions of the Wests, realised that Lucy's
remains were listed simply as an 'exhibit' for the defence and she "chuckled at the
thought of a pathologist grum bling about interfering relatives" but she knew that
she "had done the right thing". H er experience dem onstrates w ith intense feeling
the need felt by m any who are bereaved in tragic circumstances for reunion, for the
"release of grief", for reclamation from the tragedy and from the authorities, and for
a physical, final parting.

Post-traumatic D istress (for the origins and definition of PTSD see Appendix)

There are profound norm ative issues in the question of w hat m ight be taken to
constitute a 'healthy' reaction to terrible events. This raises im portant questions
about the definitions, assumptions and identification m ethods of 'health' and
'pathology'. For example, someone who showed no sign of distress or disturbance
w hen faced w ith horror or threat could be judged as lacking in hum anity, rather
than reacting healthily. As Heather (1976:49, emphasis added) states:

      ... imagine a Nazi concentration camp and ... consider two guards who
      work at the camp. One of these guards is perfectly happy at his job,
      seems to have few cares or worries, mixes well w ith the other guards
      and so on. The other guard shows all the signs of extreme emotional
      disturbance, his behaviour is odd, and he does not get along w ith his
      fellows. Which of the two guards is normal and which abnormal in
      anything other than a purely statistical sense? Whose behaviour is
      adaptive and whose m aladaptive in the larger context of hum an
      progress? Which one is healthy and which sick?

The lack of symptoms is not seen as evidence of a psychological problem, or a need
for help. H eather's example illustrates that this may be profoundly problematic.
Might there be traum atic or horrific circumstances to which a healthy hum an being
should react? The importance of such normative, as opposed to medical questions, is
insufficiently recognised. Dominant beliefs about 'w eakness', 'strength', 'coping' or
'failing', and the behaviours that are deemed to be evidence of such, underpin the
supposedly value-neutral objectivity of the clinical approaches.

By the same token, w ithin psychiatric discourse 'pre-disposing vulnerability', or
'neuroticism ', are value-laden terms. This becomes clear, for example, in considering
the different connotations which result from reframing the issue in terms of
'sensitivity', a quality which, in more fortunate circumstances, w ould be judged as
positive rather than as a 'w eakness'. The point is particularly poignant given that
treatm ents of traum atic stress reactions w ere derived in m ilitary psychiatry. Such



                                         26
treatm ents w ere aimed prim arily at returning the 'sick', terrified soldier to a state of
mental 'health' in which he was again willing to return to the 'front-line'.

How psychological reactions to traum atic events are conceptualised is of
considerable significance not only for 'treatm ent', but also for the self-concept of
survivors and their relationships w ithin a changed world. U nderpinning dom inant
treatm ent approaches is the idea that unhealthy or dysfunctional ways of thinking
need to be changed if the traumatic experience is to be processed satisfactorily . As
Haslum (1989:106) states:

       Recent theories ... see as the im portant element the individual's
       transaction w ith h er/h is environment. Such theories see the individual
       as perceiving, reasoning, responding and m onitoring the effects of
       responding and responding again and so on.

It is often the case that the perceptions of those affected by disaster are difficult for
others to understand. In discussing the afterm ath of the Herald of Free Enterprise
disaster Johnstone and Beeson (1993:70) reflect:

      ... guilt was very raw and all-consuming. Even if they had personally
      been very brave during the disaster, rescuing people, lifting things
      they had never known they could lift, climbing things they had never
      known they could climb, none of them ever thought they had done
      enough. The crew members seemed to share an unspoken sense of
      'group responsibility' and 'hum iliation', and it was not only those who
      had been on board that night who felt this. It seemed to me that
      potentially every seaman in Dover felt that his life had been spared at
      the expense of someone else's ... They did not feel lucky. They felt
      guilty.

Such forms of self-reflection can be viewed as the root of pathology. The extent to
which the cause of events during the Herald disaster was believed to originate
internally and to be controllable were found to be strongly related to 'poorer'
psychological outcomes Qoseph et al 1991). Consequently, the m ost common aim of
much recent post-traum a work has been to change the way that people think.
Duckworth (1991a), who worked w ith police officers after the Bradford Fire and the
Hillsborough disasters, criticises "non-directive" approaches as likely to sustain
rather than reduce feelings of guilt and resentment. He concludes:

      When a person's way of interpreting and evaluating the traumatic
      events am ounts to building a psychological trap, and is thus
      pathogenic, merely helping to clarify and understand can am ount to
      reinforcing the structure of the trap when really it needs to be
      dismantled. (ibid:20)




                                           27
There are dangers w ith this line of argum ent. 'Cognitive', and preceding 'rational-
emotive' approaches, focus on changing the client's 'irrational' or 'dysfunctional'
ways of thinking thus providing the key to recovery. First, there are im portant
questions concerning who decides w hat is 'rational' and how. Despite Duckworth's
scepticism regarding "non-directive" approaches (1991a:20), the pow er relationship
in more directive approaches is an example of the professional role in "m aking
claims about the boundaries of the category and then ruling on who belongs to it"
(Cohen 1985:195). In this case the categorisation concerns the thoughts and thought
processes of the individual. Rowan (1983:16) asks of the diagnostic process, "Who
then, are the people who are m ost likely to be labelled?" His answer is unequivocal:
"the powerless".

In terms of PTSD it is not clear that 'the powerless' will m ost likely receive a
diagnosis. PTSD is unusual among psychiatric disorders in that it owes its status to
lobbying by sufferers and is a diagnosis often actively sought (see Appendix). This
can be for legal reasons, as compensation claims rely on dem onstrating 'injury'.
Additionally, to the extent that the 'cause' of PTSD is understood to lie beyond the
individual, the disorder may be considered less stigm atising than other psychiatric
disorders1. Despite a more favourable 'im age', cognitive treatm ent of PTSD implies
a categorisation and labelling of thoughts as 'irrational' or 'dysfunctional'. It is a
subject for future research to establish the extent to which such judgem ents are
influenced by the contexts of class, gender, race and sexualities of doctor and patient.
To date, critical research into the processes of diagnosis and treatm ent of PTSD is
lacking. Research into other areas of mental health practice, however, suggests a
need for circumspection (Littlewood and Lipsedge 1982; Showalter 1988; Johnstone
1989; Ussher 1991). Busfield (1986:143), in her discussion of gender-related factors,
makes the point:

          To the extent that specific types of mental illness have been defined as
          pathologies of thoughts, feelings and actions which are governed by
          gender specific expectations, then rates of mental illness will differ
          between m en and women ... Judgements as to w hether the experiences
          are problematic, m erit medical attention, are of a psychological nature
          and so forth depend in part on the sex of the person whose actions are
          under consideration.

The imbalance of power in the therapeutic relationship is well established and
recorded. It was a preoccupation of Carl Rogers, the 'founder7 of person-centered
counselling, on which m ost counselling practice is currently based (Rogers 1951;
Rogers 1967; Thome 1992). Masson (1993:290) argues the 'strong' version of the case:




1Post-disaster psychosocial service users often distinguish PTSD from ‘real’ mental illness and could resent the requirement
to visit a psychiatric unit for help or assessment This can be reinforced by how PTSD is ‘sold’ to service users. In the
experience of one of the authors post-disaster social workers also made this distinction. Service users were often relieved
that they had PTSD and were not going ‘mad’.



                                                            28
       If we place our trust in somebody, it m atters very m uch w hether that
       person only appears to be worthy of our trust, or actually is worthy.
       And these things we find out only over time, and in a relationship
       w ithout power and hierarchy. The therapeutic relationship always
       involves an imbalance of power.

Further, it is by no means clear that 'dysfunctional' or 'pathogenic' ways of thinking
are always 'irrational', any more than thinking 'rationally' is necessarily 'healthy'.
Janoff-Bulman and M organ (1994) argue that traum a does not necessarily cause
people to think 'irrationally' but, on the contrary, it shatters previously held over-
optimistic generalisations about the w orld and self. On this view post-traum atic fear
and sense of vulnerability, rage at injustice and even lowered self esteem, could be
understood as more 'rational' than previously deeply-held assumptions (for
example: the benevolence of government, the meaningfulness of the person's life and
that 'people get w hat they deserve'). On a more personal level, traum a can call into
question assumptions about self-worth and invulnerability. In such circumstances,
is the mission of the therapist to change the client's thinking so that they m ight feel
better about themselves, unconcerned by the possibility that the new 'healthy' beliefs
and ways of thinking m ight fly in the face of reality? While it m ight be more
comfortable for people to believe that their actions and interventions during a
disaster were beyond reproach, such beliefs may be unsustainable.

The focus on the individual of post-traumatic theory and practice is also
problematic. There is evidence to suggest that rapid and curative responses to
disaster and crisis divert attention from the need to change the conditions which
contextualised tragedies and from the issues of responsibility and accountability
which followed. This is a specific aspect of a more general question. As Busfield
(1986:369) concludes:

      To contend that curative individualism is the fundam ental lim itation of
      psychiatry ... is to move beyond debates as to the precise causes of
      mental illness ... The argum ent is that instead of directing all our
      resources and attention onto disturbed individuals, im portant though
      it is to ameliorate their situation, we need also to look beyond the
      individual to the forms and levels of intervention which w ould make
      mental disorders less likely for the population as a whole, or for
      particular groups w ithin it.

The conceptualisation of post-traumatic distress in terms of PTSD can be understood
as an example of a process of psychiatric expansion through classification and
categorisation. While the theoretical and policy/ treatm ent debates m ight not seem
of particular interest to the client/ patient, however:

      What does m atter, is the common denom inator of all forms of
      professional power, that is the 'technical fix' which aw ards
      professionals w ith knowledge and technique which no one else is
      capable of mastering. The rise of psychiatry has become the


                                          29
      paradigm atic case for understanding the emergence during the last
      century of various experts in deviancy control, each w ith its own
      elaborate ideology and systems of classification. (Cohen 1985:165-166)

PTSD has established the authority of psychiatry in a new area of potential growth.
Growth can be attained through the definition of, and research and practice into,
sub-categories; for example w ith the young (Yule and Williams 1990; Pynoos et al
1993) or w ith the old 0enike 1995). More im portantly, the focus of intervention has
been broadened substantially through concern that post-traum atic sub-pathological
distress may develop into the 'full' disorder (Disasters W orking Party 1991). PTSD,
in this sense, fits the bill as a legitim ator of professional and para-professional
expansion:

      In the therapeutic empire as well as the crime-control empire, the
      theory which so plausibly justifies this incremental growth, is the
      notion of an anticipatory syndrome which, if not dealt w ith properly,
      will lead to something worse. (Cohen 1985:174)

In naming the 'disorder' psychiatry has, in an im portant sense, established the
territory as its own. Yet this has occurred despite significant doubts as to whether
treatm ent is effective (Disaster W orking Party 1991; Robinson and Mitchell 1993;
Shalev 1994; Raphael and McFarlane 1995). It is one aspect of a process in which
professional expansion is directed towards, and driven by, the creation of new
categories of deviance and social problems (Cohen, 1985).

Despite the problems w ith the psychiatric conceptualisation of PTSD, it is clear that
in professional and official consciousness it has reinforced the idea that traumatic
events can have long-term psychologically distressing consequences. The Disasters
W orking Party (1991:5) cites Australian and American research of the 1970s and
1980s which dem onstrates that:

      ... from forty to seventy per cent of those directly involved experience
      psychological distress and im pairm ent during the first m onth
      following the disaster, and that after one year this has dropped to
      twenty five to forty per cent. Fifteen to twenty percent may experience
      chronic levels of anxiety which rem ain high for periods of longer than
      two years.

In raising broader public awareness, however, progress is equivocal. As Garland
(1993:77) states:

      By now it may be part of common wisdom that horrific events disrupt
      the personality, but that knowledge somehow lives disconnectedly side
      by side w ith the belief that people 'get over' such events quickly,
      especially if provided w ith a rest, a holiday in the sun, or a large
      cheque.



                                         30
Loss, Traum a and O fficial Processing

Contemporary theories of bereavement and post-traumatic stress reactions underpin
professional and official concern for the psychosocial needs of those affected by
disaster. It has been argued that the cognitive, emotional, physical and social
similarities between the effects of bereavement and those of life traum a make
possible a "unified model" of life and death losses (Trolley 1994). Although the
appropriateness of such a model is disputed (Parkes 1993b:242), in the context of
proliferating psychosocial approaches, it is im portant that professionals do not "...
operate out of single theoretical models and overlook the richness other models have
to offer ..." (Trolley 1994:296). W hether bereaved by or a survivor of terrifying
events, the im pact can be devastating. Trolley (1994:297) states:

      Independent of the nature of the traum a, commonalities exist. Content
      may differ but the process is the same. A gut-wrenching event occurs
      that challenges every aspect of self. The loss of a highly valued object
      is emotionally m ourned and cognitive means of coping are desperately
      sought. Integration of the loss into victims' lives in such a way that
      they become survivors is a common goal. Similarities and differences
      are two sides of the same coin as alpha and omega are infinite circles.

The importance for psychological recovery of w hat happens beyond the initial
traumatic event is noted in some of the research (Hodgkinson and Stewart 1991;
Ursano et al 1994b). Pynoos et al (1993:244), for example, interpret the extremely
high rates of PTSD among children involved in the 1988 Armenian Earthquake as
resulting not only from the enormity of the disaster, but also from the children's
subsequent experiences. They state:

      These included the break up and displacement of families, the lack of
      adequate housing, jobs and m aterial resources to rebuild, the
      disruption to community life and services, shortages of food and
      petrol, the inadequacy of health and mental health services, and the
      ongoing political conflict w ith Azerbaijan and the central government
      of the Soviet Union.

Raphael (1986) notes the possibility that compensation and litigation proceedings
can become additional causes of stress, adding to morbidity. She argues that gaining
compensation does not reduce morbidity. Psychotherapist Q eo van Velsen (cited in
Gerrard 1996:7) takes this further, arguing that the failure of compensation claims
made by Hillsborough bereaved relatives who had witnessed the disaster on
television was in their best interests. He states:

      For w hat we should never do is collude w ith that feeling of
      victimisation - our job should be to set them free. Most of the torture
      victims I w orked w ith didn't need to be diagnosed and they certainly
      didn't need to be medicalised; they needed to tell their story.



                                         31
This extraordinary approach to the compensation issue is flawed by the bizarre
assumption that the rightness or wrongness of judicial decisions should be evaluated
according to their supposed psychological effect on people. Taken to its logical
conclusion this w ould deny rape survivors, for example, their right to redress
through the courts simply to avoid feelings of victimisation. The appropriateness of
such judicial decisons, however, should be judged according to the facts of the case,
legal precedence and social justice. It may be true, as Van Velsen implies, that the
legal process governing compensation does require people to undergo a process of
medicalisation, and this encourages the status of 'victim '. Yet it constitutes the only
means of securing recognition of hurt, and of financial compensation. Further, given
the extent of suffering through bereavement or survival, m aterial welfare is
important. The problem, however, lies w ith the law and w ith the pathologising
approach it requires, not w ith those seeking, often against the odds and by whatever
means available, recognition and redress for suffering.

Returning to Raphael's concern, it is im portant to consider compensation not simply
in terms of m aterial benefit. Litigation and compensation proceedings also
encompass struggles for justice as well as securing financial recompense. It is not
surprising that those who have some success in compensation courts often do not
make relatively 'better' recoveries.       The legal processes, the concern over
representation, the personal and material costs of the case, the w idespread publicity
and the hostility of the courts, together comprise serious obstacles as people relive
the initial event and their afterm ath experiences. From Aberfan, through to the
Herald of Free Enterprise, Hillsborough and the Marchioness disasters, there is
considerable evidence to expose the inadequacy of legal and inquisitorial remedies
for those seeking justice and accountability (Bergman 1993; Crainer 1993; Young
1993; Slapper 1993; Scraton et al 1995; Christian 1996; Napier 1996; McLean 1997a;
1997b).

While legal processes dom inate the progress and development of cases, the struggles
of the bereaved are also profoundly political. These contexts change, sometimes
significantly, over time. Recently released government papers dem onstrate how the
fight for justice following the 1966 Aberfan disaster was obstructed by political
machinations at the highest level. A "producer dom inated culture" and the interest
of Labour MPs and the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) in m aintaining the
nationalised coal industry protected the Coal Board despite a dam ning official
inquiry report (McLean 1997b)2 . Over two decades later the Piper Alpha and Herald
of Free Enterprise tragedies occurred w ithin a very different, but still powerfully
determining, political-economic context in which private enterprise was ascendant
and profit was prioritised over safety (Crainer 1993; Tombs 1995; W hyte 1996).
Different again, was the 'lens of hooliganism' which formed part of a broader law


2
  The authors are grateful to Professor Iain McLean for sight of his unfinished work on the aftermath of the
Aberfan Disaster/ On Moles and the Habits of Birds. He describes how recently released papers "show that the
Coal Board spin-doctored its way out of trouble" (McLean 1997b:2). While most Labour MPs could not bring
themselves to criticise the Coal Board/ S O Davies "made himself a pariah" for his attacks on it, "all the more so
since he was a former miner" (ibid:9). He was then deselected by the Labour Party.


                                                       32
and order moral panic and provided the context for the policing that contributed
significantly to the Hillsborough disaster in 1989 (Coleman et al 1990).

Whatever the specific historical context and circumstances of disasters, the bereaved
and survivors inevitably face powerful vested interests. For some affected by
disaster the campaign to prevent similar tragedies, through exposing corporate or
official failings, is im portant, both as an end in itself, and as a means of retrieving a
positive and meaningful outcome from tragedy. Such campaigns are, by their
nature, political and the obstacles to their development and progress are formidable.
The cumulative costs of persistent legal and political actions, in term s of health and
money, are high. From the perspective of a clinician or therapist concerned w ith
'healing', campaigns and the toll that they take may not represent the best strategy
for 'recovery' or represent satisfactory 'adjustm ent'. Yet, historically, few political
struggles w ould have been successful had they been confined by medical advice.
Further, it is w orth noting that campaigning and resistance by survivors or the
bereaved represents legal and political action which directly challenges Van Velsen's
interpretation of 'victim hood'.

Despite occasional reference to post-disaster factors as they sustain or ameliorate
distress, there is a danger that the definitional and diagnostic focus on a specific
event can diminish the importance of the processes of the aftermath. This is the case
particularly if the processes are viewed as legitimate, normal, necessary or, indeed,
inevitable.    Official processes, from the dissemination of inform ation and
identification of bodies through to the setting up and conduct of inquiries, inquests,
criminal cases and claims for compensation, not only sustain distress but also create
new forms of anguish (Coleman et al 1990; Bergman 1993; Crainer 1993; Young 1993;
Scraton et al 1995; Christian 1996; Napier 1996; McLean 1997a; 1997b).

Responding to Psychosocial Needs in the Im m ediate A fterm ath

The Rise o f‘Disaster Counselling'

The recognition, prevention and alleviation of distress are distinct and different
processes. For those w orking in caring roles the immediate afterm ath raises
confusion and uncertainty about the nature of such roles. Those working in the
longer-term afterm ath have time to refer for guidance to w hat has become a
substantial literature . Although Hodgkinson and Stewart (1991:77), state that it is
the "phase two" response which has been "conspicuously absent" from UK disaster
planning, in recent years m uch has been done to rectify this deficit. Guidelines from
the Department of Health Disasters Working Party (1991) consolidated m uch of this
work.
 i




Although PTSD, the central diagnostic concept underlying official and professional
concern and practice following disasters, is psychiatric, post-disaster psychosocial
work is not restricted to psychiatrists but is undertaken by a variety of professionals,
para-professionals and volunteers. The scale and type of services appropriate to the
needs of survivors and bereaved, whether defined as pathological or not, are too


                                           33
great and diverse to be m et by direct and discipline-bound psychiatric intervention.
The paradox which results is that psychiatric classifications and approaches define
the param eters of professional intervention but often those who operate the services
are not psychiatrists. This provides psychiatry w ith a defining dominance,
psychiatrists being viewed as the 'experts'. It is a process which creates
opportunities for other para-professionals to intervene and extend the scope of
intervention beyond psychiatry's immediate resources. As Ivan Illich concludes:

       W henever m edicine's diagnostic power m ultiplies the sick in excessive
       numbers, medical professionals turn over the surplus to the
       management of non-medical tasks and occupations, (quoted in Cohen
       1985:172)

Such has been the change in the priority attached to offering longer-term
psychosocial responses that they are now regarded as a fixture of the post-disaster
environment. Rita Carter, w riting for The Times on the day after the Dunblane
killings, provided a clear illustration: "Now enter the counsellors. They will be
there, as always." (Carter 1996:19). In fact, they have not always been there.
Specialist psychosocial responses to UK disasters are a recent developm ent and have
followed the lead set by Bradford Social Services after the 1985 football stadium fire
in that city. The lead role of the local authority, in planning and managing the
psychosocial response to disasters, was acknowledged by the Disasters Working
Party (1991).

Assumptions concerning the ubiquity of post-disaster 'counselling' are not
necessarily a positive development for those engaged in such work. As the setting
up of disaster teams has become m ore common, m edia and academic attention has
questionned their role and performance. This reflects a general concern about
'counselling' and 'psychotherapy', well documented and developed by Masson
(1993). Bereavement counselling as a whole, it has been argued, creates dependency
on experts, contributing to a new 'grief technology' and underm ining 'traditional'
community responses to death (McKnight 1984). More specifically, the assumptions
and practices which form responses to major disasters have been criticised as
simplistic and overly-generalised, w ith the lead role of social services considered as
inappropriate or problematic (Brook 1990; Adshead et al 1993).

Further concerns include doubts about the suitability of workers engaged in the
post-disaster task, often reflecting inter-professional rivalry. Mary Braid (1995:6),
w riting in The Independent, highlights the concerns of "those like Simon Wessely,
reader in psychological medicine at King's College Medical School, who are dubious
about the whoie 'profession'." What, it is asked, actually goes on "behind the closed
doors or schoolgates"; and how effective are m ethods "acquired w ithout the
extensive training given to psychologists?" Similarly, a draft of the British
Psychological Society W orking Party Report, Psychological Aspects of Disaster,
criticises false assum ptions of competence in psychotherapy and counselling
allegedly held by social workers and psychiatrists. This was changed in the



                                          34
published report which directs its concerns, less specifically, tow ards "mental health
professionals" (British Psychological Society 1990:9).

Concerns also have been raised regarding planning for psychosocial responses at
organisational and inter-organisational levels. One study found that some Regional
Health Authorities had not accepted the Home Office requirem ent that the local
authority should be the "lead agency" and "would see provision of psycho-social
care as a health response, entirely separate from local authority responses" (Adshead
et al 1993:25). H ealth authorities have varying expectations concerning local
authority role, particularly the limited descriptions provided for training and using
volunteers:

      (This) gives rise to a question of the ability of social services and
      voluntary workers to detect severe psychological stress, which requires
      health intervention, and the ability of a social services lead response to
      provide long term help given the other regular dem ands on their
      services. (ibid:25)

It is not clear how such a potential deficiency in local authority services is deduced
through a survey of regional departm ents of public health. In contrast, evaluations
of broadly satisfactory social services' responses have been carried out (Clegg 1988;
Newbum 1993), in addition to internal assessments conducted by social services
professionals and departments. It is im portant to note that post-disaster 'successes'
or 'failures' are not the monopoly of any specific professional group. The lack of
bereavement work experience among professionals generally, and a
recommendation for caution in accepting psychiatric professional claims to
expertise, are emphasised by Clegg's (1988:134) analysis of the afterm ath of the
Herald of Free Enterprise Disaster:

      It seems to be widely stated that bereavement counsellors do a good
      job w ith clients who suffer from 'norm al' grief, but that they should not
      really tackle the 'abnorm al' grievers. Instead they should refer them to
      professional caregivers, such as community psychiatric nurses,
      psychologists and psychiatrists .... (Yet) it is quite likely that local
      professionals have no real knowledge of bereavement at all (either
      intellectually or emotionally) and so are likely to be quite in ex p ert...
      Once people are taken into the psychiatric system, not only may they
      be labelled in an unhelpful manner, they are also likely to be subject to
      waiting lists, an impersonal service, being seen in an institution rather
      than home, etc. Sadly, therefore, many bereaved people w ith severe
      difficulties can be worse off if sent to professionals for intervention.

A difficulty which confronts longer-term post-disaster intervention is the sheer
range of counselling and psychotherapeutic approaches now available. As well as
the increasingly popular cognitive behavioural approach, there are cognitive analytic
approaches, behavioural, rational-emotive, person centered, personal construct,
existential, gestalt, transactional analysis, psychodynamic (Freudian, Kleinian,


                                          35
Adlerian and Jungian), crisis and reversal theory approaches. It is not surprising,
given this variety, that many counselling practitioners utilise and develop a number
of theoretical sources to establish 'eclectic' practice (Dryden 1984). In some cases, an
eclectic approach is implied by a particular theory. For example, M urgatroyd
(1981:192), describing some of the counselling implications of 'reversal' theory
concludes:

       Even though the nature of the crisis in terms of events may be similar
       to crises others have experienced, it is the location of these events in the
       framework of the person's psychological processes that gives the crisis
       its force. Thus crisis counselling is a collective term for a set of
       practices rather than a single practice form ... crisis counselling w ithin
       the framework of reversal theory requires eclectic counselling
       practices.

While it is possible to identify a range of coherent forms of eclectic approach,
however, there is concern that 'haphazard eclectics'will pursue w hatever new-found
techniques they have discovered, regardless of their appropriateness to the needs of
their clients (Dryden 1984:351).

Choosing from the extensive 'm enu' of counselling approaches is not a problem for
the helper in the immediate aftermath. Contrary to dom inant m edia impressions, it
can be misleading to suggest that relatives of the bereaved and survivors should be
'counselled' immediately after a major disaster (Tumelty 1990:81; W hitham and
Newbum 1993:60; Gibson 1991:36). This is an im portant example of the general
point that psychological defences should be acknowledged and respected as they can
provide necessary protection from apparently unendurable pain (Hodgkinson and
Stewart 1991:167). The perception that therapeutic w ork is not desirable at a very
early stage, however, has encouraged the view that volunteers rather than
professionals may be relied on to staff reception centres and support relatives
(Hodgkinson and Stewart 1991:90). While it m ight be the case that social workers, or
other professionals, could find it difficult to w ork outside their norm al operating
practices and priorities, there has to be concern, particularly given the pre-eminence
of the police in the immediate afterm ath, that relatives may be left seriously
disadvantaged in asserting their needs if there is no supportive advocacy from
professionals used to inter-agency negotiation and resolution. W hat this indicates is
that although 'psychotherapeutic' and 'counselling' interventions are not
appropriate as part of the immediate aftermath, there are 'care' interventions which
are vital to the identification and containment of people's suffering during this
period of shock and confusion.

Psychological First Aid and Sensitive 'Processing'

Questioning the appropriateness of exploratory counselling in the immediate
afterm ath does not minimise the significance of a sensitive response. Initial, acute
distress often coincides w ith the period during which support workers first become
involved (Tumelty 1990:79). The perceived rejection of relatives and survivors by


                                            36
others, particularly those in authority, has been term ed "second injury" (Symonds,
cited in Holloway and Fullerton 1994:42). This suggests the need for scepticism
about representations of psychosocial care as counselling or therapy, distinctive
from all else that happens to the bereaved and survivors in the immediate aftermath.
On the contrary:

       Because the roles involved in psychosocial first aid are so linked to
       many other essential tasks in the immediate aftermath, they should,
       wherever possible, be carried out in association w ith these tasks, and
       w ith the recognition of and collaboration w ith the other emergency
       workers. (Raphael 1986:260)

In other w ords, during the immediate afterm ath of disaster the post-disaster
processes themselves can represent a significant problem. Those affected by disaster
inevitably become engulfed by a maelstrom of events and processes of which they
have little, if any, prior knowledge. Such processes can increase emotional
vulnerability while denying those suffering any control of the events. Their
particular form depends on the nature of the disaster. Some official interventions
involve the meeting of survivors' physical needs, but even these can have negative
psychological consequences. For example, Brook (1990:7) argues that mental health
problems after the Buffalo Creek flood disaster, cited after the Bradford Fire in
support of the need for a large-scale psychosocial response, in fact were largely
attributable to re-housing policies which divided communities.

According to the disaster literature, in the immediate afterm ath the helper is faced
with the tem porary cognitive and emotional disorganisation of those affected. The
worker needs to consider how this can be addressed to mobilise and increase
personal competence and skills (Cohen and Aheam 1980: 77). Raphael (1986)
provides outlines for "psychological first aid". These include: comforting and
consoling; protecting the disoriented; meeting physical needs; goal orientation;
support in the 'reality tasks' that are necessary (including searching for loved ones
and identification of the dead); the re-establishment of some sense of security in the
real world; utilisation and prom otion of networks; assessment of those who may
need psychiatric care; collection of data to enable follow-up. Orientation is
im portant and according to Scott and Stradling (1992:Appendix D) the role of "crisis
counselling" at times of emergency:

      ... is more one of orientating than of treating, m apping out for the client
      the sort of difficulties that m ight be encountered and the directions
      from which means to resolve the problems m ight be found. The goal
      of crisis counselling is to help the client get their bearings.

Although psychological first aid lessens the stress experienced and, together w ith
comforting, is centrally im portant, it is also vital that cognitive and emotional
control should be re-established (Cohen and Aheam 1980; Raphael 1986). With
regard to emotions:



                                          37
      Some ventilation of feelings may occur spontaneously and should be
      accepted, but always w ith the idea of helping the victim to reconstitute
      his (sic) defences and regain control until he is in a more secure
      emotional situation w ith support for more in-depth working through
      of the experience. (Raphael 1986:259)

While it may be desirable for the bereaved to re-establish some m easure of cognitive
and emotional organisation, however, it is im portant in each situation that
practitioners are clear about whose interests are to be served by 'prom oting' the re­
establishment of 'control'. It is not difficult to appreciate how such a view
legitimises the control of grief by highly pressurised agencies for their own
adm inistrative convenience. Individual workers, unable to face the intensity of the
bereaved's distress, can consciously or unconsciously prom ote 'control' to protect
themselves. The cost to survivors and the bereaved may be the denial of their need
to express norm al emotions. This is particularly significant, for example, given the
guidelines which indicate that bodies w ould be better viewed at funeral parlours,
w ith inter-agency consultation taking place before 'insistent' relatives are allowed to
view (ACPO 1991 :S6, 1.5-1.8; Home Office 1994b:12). While for some individuals
'professionalism ' masks an inability to bear the distress of another hum an being
(Gibson 1991:64), so the institutionalisation of such responses in policy and practice,
controlling and managing the distress of the bereaved, m ust be prevented.

The first priority of people who fear that their loved ones have been involved in a
disaster is solid and reliable inform ation concerning their fate. For most, telephone
calls are the first resort in extracting information. Those who make quick contact
and receive bad news, those who do not and are left to bear the w eight of their
uncertainty, and those for whom news of the disaster has re-opened old wounds
from previous traum as, may need sensitive support as well as information. Social
services' helplines are a major and universally planned provision as part of the
immediate response to disasters. There is, however, a danger that the sheer range of
telephone numbers publicised after a disaster can increase, rather than reduce,
confusion (Tumelty 1990:11). The police are responsible for processing casualty
information and for identifying the dead (Home Office 1994a:4) and the Dover
District Council Report into the Herald of Free Enterprise disaster noted that:

      No ground rules had been established for sharing inform ation between
      agencies. Who was doing w hat for whom was obscure. Quite rightly,
      the police were reluctant to release possibly inaccurate inform ation
      w ith no control on how it w ould be used. Townsend Thoreson (the
      ship's owner) was guarded because of legal complexities and financial
      liability issues. There was significant duplication of effort resulting in
      loss of privacy for some people and probable neglect of others,
      (quoted in Tumelty 1990:11)

While for Tumelty this danger is balanced by the hope that the social work helpline,
as distinct from others, provided people w ith time, there are ironic consequences.
W hitham and N ewbum (1993:54-55) describe how, after the Kegworth Aircrash,


                                          38
some callers found the social work helpline preferable to that offered by the police
casualty bureau, declining to give inform ation to the latter. In this event, the social
workers took identifying information which should have been a police
responsibility. The authors also reveal the difficulty this presented to social workers
untrained in such work.

The problems faced by relatives in accessing accurate inform ation are exacerbated in
those disasters where body recovery and accurate identification are difficult. Such
was the case after the Herald of Free Enterprise, Piper Alpha, and Lockerbie disasters
(Tumelty 1990:80; Lammens and Hodgkinson 1990; Johnston and Beeston 1993;
Bogie (undated)). Further, the provision of information about those still alive can
also lead to distress among people still awaiting news (Lammens and Hodgkinson
1990:26). Technology and resources have been insufficient in meeting the immediate
demand for inform ation following disasters. While 1.75 million telephone calls were
made to the Sheffield telephone exchange in the afterm ath of the Hillsborough
disaster, only 0.25 million reached the exchange, of which only 1,000 were answered
by the casualty bureau (Dyer 1991:12). Initiatives were taken to overcome this
problem (Wood-Heath 1992), but clearly it remains a significant issue (Cullen 1996).

Some of those relatives who made telephone contact w ith the police in Sheffield
were given inform ation that turned out to be false, being told initially that their dead
relative was alive (Interview w ith Steve Kelly 12 June 1996; Scraton et al 1995:210).
According to the literature, even after the initial crisis has passed, information has
been withheld, or selectively distributed, to the distress of the bereaved (Mason
1993:45-6; Tumelty 1990:85). For many seeking information about the safety of
relatives, the eventual news is positive. They had not taken that particular flight or
ferry; they were in a different part of the football stadium. They were involved with
the disaster, but survived. Less good news, however, may be that they were injured
and adm itted to hospital. For others, however, the news is tragic. Informing
relatives of the death of their loved one is both painful and difficult. In the chaos
that follows disaster prioritising the need for interpersonal and procedural
sensitivity can be easily overlooked.          The physical surroundings may be
inappropriate, the personnel untrained, distracted or following different agendas.
Gibson (1991:63) states:

       The way in which the information that a death has occured is relayed
       to people can have a major effect on their grieving process ... Truth
       w ith sensitivity should be the key to this process.

The bereaved should be separated from the crowd, and informed slowly and clearly
of the facts surrounding the death. There is a danger, given the psychological chaos
which may engulf the bereaved, that 'soft' or euphemistic terms for death may add
to confusion. Although words can be difficult to find, cliched responses can worsen
people's experiences (Tumelty 1990:82; Gibson 1991:63). The appropriate use of
words, or silence, and the communication of touch can convey concern and
compassion, but they do not take away the person's loss or pain. The principle is
similar to that described by Tumelty (1990:83), regarding the longer-term:


                                           39
       Sitting quietly w ith someone who may be wailing in their distress, or
       sobbing deeply or lashing out in their anger and confusion is not an
       easy task but one th a t... (if maintained) will pay dividends.

The danger is that the intensity of this pain can lead the w orker to rem ain
'professionally aloof', departing quickly. As Gibson (1991:64) observes, "One
suspects that their professionalism, in such cases, is more about the protection of
their own feelings than their ability to care enough to share and bear the distress of
another hum an being."

It is im portant that the bereaved are provided w ith personal space, to say their
farewells and to take leave of the deceased. This requires preparation, including the
opportunity of touching and time (Raphael 1986:259; Gibson 1991:64). As stated
previously, for some this is denied because the body is never found, while for others
the body may be disfigured. In these difficult and dem anding circumstances the
sensitivity and openness to the wishes and needs of the bereaved are crucial.
Hodgkinson and Stewart (1988:13-14) consider the case of Mrs Allen, whose son,
Colin, and his wife Mary, died on the Herald of Free Enterprise. M ary's body was
recovered immediately but Colin was not found for five weeks:

       Mrs Allen was advised by the undertaker not to view the body but was
       not told why.       In addition the vicar, a longstanding family
       acquaintance, refused to have the coffin in his church overnight for
       "hygiene reasons". Mrs Allen was horrified - w hat had happened to
       her son's body? - but she could not, w ithout support, ask to see him to
       check.

She became seriously concerned that if the physical damage to Colin's body had
been so severe, a positive identification would be impossible. This led to doubts that
it was her son who had been buried and, consequently, she deeply regretted that she
had not viewed the body. At the inquest she was given access to photographs but
this did not allay her fears. The m ortician had presented the body prior to the
photographs being taken. She asked to see a second photograph, taken before the
mortician's involvement, in which Colin's damaged body was covered in oil:

       Immediately she said, "That's my boy, I've seen him awake, asleep ... I
       w ould recognise him any way. He could just be asleep in the garden".
       She kissed a fingertip and put it to the face in the picture. "So it is him
       in the grave", she concluded, (ibid: 14)

Even w hen the body is recovered prom ptly and is in good condition the bereaved
can be denied contact by the authorities. This can take the form of an explicit refusal
to view, or by creating an atmosphere in which 'excessive' time, intimacy or
expression of emotion are discouraged (Raphael 1986; Coleman et al 1990; Awooner-
Renner 1993). The role of helpers in the afterm ath of disasters is not usually
conceived or perceived in terms of conflict, but it is often im portant for the bereaved
to be supported by helpers who are able to assert effectively their needs, as


                                           40
acknowledged in some of the guidance (Disasters W orking Party 1991:part 1,14; part
2,14).

Psychological Debriefing

While counselling of relatives and survivors may be inappropriate at an early stage,
the same judgem ent has not been applied to the 'debriefing' of workers. The
psychological effects of disaster work on rescuers, those handling bodies and others,
has become widely recognised, and the principle of immediate response has been
established. This takes various forms, from informal and personal contact during
operations, to more formalised group debriefing (Taylor and Frazer 1982; Berah et al
1984; Mitchell 1990; Q uintyn et al 1990; Alexander and Wells 1991; Disasters
W orking Party 1991; Duckworth 1991a; 1991b; Hodgkinson and Stewart 1991; Paton
1991; Raphael et al 1991; James 1992). With its roots in quick response, military,
psychiatric treatm ent of casualties close to the front-line (Solomon and Benbenishty
1986; Scott 1990) there are several models of debriefing, and Shalev (1994:214)
identifies their common elements:

      Debriefing is usually done shortly after a traum atic event. It is usually
      practised at the site of the action or w ithin the same organisational
      setting in which the exposure took place. Debriefing is conducted in
      groups, w ith individuals who have been exposed to traum a. It
      involves a degree of cognitive review of the event and has a factual
      basis. It includes verbal and emotional exchanges w ithin the group,
      and results in the sharing of various levels of inform ation and most
      often in refram ing previous views and learning new information.

There are, however, problems w ith the provision of psychological debriefing. First,
in large-scale disasters the num ber of survivors, relative to psychologists,
psychiatrists and other competent professionals, often makes such provision
untenable. For example, there were approximately 50,000 people at Hillsborough.
Debriefing has been used primarily w ith survivors of smaller-scale emergencies,
such as that given to forty employees whose workplace was the target of an arson
attack (Hodgkinson and Stewart 1991). The use of debriefing after larger peace-time
disasters has been confined to rescue or care workers. Second, doubts have been
expressed concerning the effectiveness of debriefing. Shalev (1994:201) notes that
although debriefing intuitively seems helpful, its structure, goals and mechanisms
have yet to be identified and confirmed. Raphael and McFarlane (1995:1479) state
that "... although military psychiatry has succeeded in returning troops to action,
outcome studies suggest that soldiers who are repeatedly traum atised by returning
to combat may suffer even higher rates of severe and chronic post-traum atic stress
disorder in the longer term".

Despite the rapid expansion of debriefing programmes, and their perceived success,
there has been no systematic evaluation using random ised controls to demonstrate
their w orth in terms of symptom outcomes (Robinson and Mitchell 1993; Raphael
and McFarlane 1995). Further, some of the uncontrolled studies indicate that


                                         41
debriefing can lead to worse outcomes than had no intervention been made (Raphael
and McFarlane 1995:1479). This is echoed by Shalev (1994:212) who, in considering
the role of coping strategies in debriefing, suggests that denial, repression and
avoidance for some people can be beneficial. Deahl et al (1994) found that w ar grave
troops in the Gulf War who had received debriefing showed no better symptom
outcomes than those troops carrying out the same task w ithout debriefing. Yet,
recent non-controlled research w ith subjects some time after traum atic experience
does suggest that significant benefits are obtained when debriefing techniques are
incorporated w ithin psychotherapeutic groupwork. It is suggested that the
completion of personal accounts may be particularly im portant in this process
(Busuttil et al 1995).

Support and Co-ordination in Practice

While the coroner and the police have the responsibility for satisfying legal inquiries
after disasters, a "m ultiplicity of statutory bodies and voluntary agencies" are
"involved" w ith identifying and meeting the needs of the bereaved (Home Office
1994b:ll). Of these, the local authority is recognised as the lead agency in
responding to psychosocial needs (Disasters W orking Party 1991:9). It is, therefore,
local authorities which are considered best placed to advocate on behalf of relatives
and survivors. Also, in contrast w ith those agencies charged w ith responsibility for
the medico-legal and other investigative tasks, the role of the local authority is to
support the emergency services.

      In the immediate afterm ath of a disaster the principal concerns of local
      authorities include support for the emergency services, support and
      care for the local and w ider community, use of resources to mitigate
      the effects of the emergency and co-ordination of the response by
      organisations other than the emergency services. As time goes on, and
      the emphasis switches to recovery, the local authority will take a
      leading role in rehabilitating the community and restoring the
      environment. (ibid:5)

The extent to which local authorities in practice have been supportive is debatable.
Clearly, the efficacy of the overall response influences local authority willingness to
support the activities of other agencies. Although direct criticism between agencies
is rare in published accounts, there is evidence that responses following disasters
have been problematic. W hether or not this has caused concern w ithin local
authorities, or has led to internal review, is unclear.

The breakdown of triage and communications' problems in the emergency phase of
the Kegworth Aircrash have been noted (Smith 1992:67). The response of social
services and the police was also problematic. Further, the Q ueen's Medical Centre
Hospital social w ork departm ent had not been included w ithin the H ospital's major
incident plan (Whitham and N ewbum 1993:52). There were also problems for social
workers who staffed the telephones. They were ill-prepared to take decisions
concerning the reception or transm ission of information. Information regarding


                                          42
people who were known to be dead was not given to relatives by social workers.
Rather, relatives were given the num ber of the police casualty bureau. Those
phoning w ith identifying inform ation similarly were referred on in accordance w ith
police instructions. The manager of the Social Services' response team stated,
however:

       We then started to get some people ringing back and saying, "w e've
       phoned that num ber you've given us and it's just the police and w e're
       finding it really difficult to talk to them. They're being very m atter of
       fact about it and can we not talk to anyone else". (ibid:55)

Although reluctant to provoke a confrontation, the m anager did discuss the m atter
with the police. The police agreed that identifying inform ation could be sought by
social workers. The social workers, however, had no experience or preparation
concerning the gathering, assessment or dissemination of such information. As time
passed they learned of the importance of clothing and jewellery for identification
(ibid:55). This was not a satisfactory situation. The police were perceived by some
callers as 'm atter of fact', and off-putting to the extent that the callers did not wish to
give them the necessary information. Yet, the social workers had no appropriate
knowledge or experience to provide an appropriate response. A part from the
difficulties this caused for the public, the effect on workers was also considerable:

       We had one member of staff who was involved in ringing back a
       family several times in order to get a very intimate detailed description
       of a baby, to help us identify a child that had been adm itted to our
       hospital. We were led to believe that two babies had been on the plane
       and that only one, the one in our hospital, had been found at that stage.
       Consequently the relatives this member of staff was telephoning did
       not know whether their child was alive or dead. That was horrendous
       - it really was, and that worker spent the best part of an hour sorting it
       out. She was very traum atised by it, although this did not really
       manifest itself for some time. (ibid:56)

The Herald of Free Enterprise disaster left many of the relatives of victims w ith a long
w ait before bodies were found and deaths confirmed. W hen the inform ation centre
was able to provide a precise list of those whose whereabouts were known, "the
situation became worse, for survivors then began to realise that the names of those
who were not on the list m ight well be dead" (Lammens and Hodgkinson 1990:26).
According to Foreman (1991:27), the police and social services failed to share
information, the result being that some relatives were told that their loved ones were
dead when they were alive and, tragically, vice-versa. The identification procedure
involved relatives walking through lines of coffins in the m ortuary (Lammens and
Hodgkinson 1990:127). Differences in philosophy and practice, as well as
geographical factors, have been cited as underlying the decision to split the
counselling response into a 'H om e' and 'A way' team (the 'H om e' team worked with
the bereaved and survivors at Dover and in the South-East while the 'A w ay' team
worked across the UK). Also, serious questions were raised about the num ber of


                                            43
social workers who had experience in bereavement work (Johnston and Beeson
1993). Brook (1990:23) puts the point succinctly:

         Social work has no exclusive right or duty, by virtue of its functional
         agenda or its practise skills, to offer a long-term service to disaster
         victims. Neither is it able to invoke research as an incontrovertible
         witness to the universal need for such a service.

Recent developments w ithin social work have sharpened such concern. There are
serious questions over the development of 'care management', following the 1990
NHS and Community Care Act, and whether this will render bereavement and
traum a work redundant w ithin social work (Lloyd 1992:151). Taken together w ith
the prioritisation of statutory work in the fields of childcare and m ental health, it is
clear that this redefinition of the social work task could have serious implications for
planning. Local authorities cannot assume the existence among their workforces of a
reserve of suitably skilled practitioners, who, w ith a little training, are then able to
offer the psychosocial services necessary following disaster. The m ethods of
working, models of supervision, training requirem ents, working priorities and
cultures of post-disaster work are substantially different from, and often
contradictory to, those of 'everyday' social work, increasingly rooted in statute,
regulation, and resource prioritisation3 .

Despite these problems and reservations, the nature of the tasks faced and skills
required during the crisis of the immediate afterm ath suggests that social workers
are better equipped to respond during this phase than they are for subsequent
phases. Although Brook (1990:23) rightly points out that social workers have no
monopoly in 'crisis intervention' skills, they do constitute a directly accountable
resource for the immediate aftermath-skilled in listening, knowledgeable about local
resources, accessible and, not least, experienced in negotiation and assertive
advocacy. Given that the post-disaster environment is inherently political, with the
competitive assertion of conflicting interests and tasks, those directly affected
require representation and advocacy from well-prepared, properly-resourced and
appropriately informed professional workers. It is imperative that this role is not
underm ined by inappropriate deference to other agencies, or by false assumptions
which deny or diminish the inherently political and ideological realities experienced
by the 'least pow erful' at a tim e of increased vulnerability.




  Many social workers (though not all) in the Liverpool Social Services Hillsborough Disaster team felt their
previous training left them ill-equipped for post-disaster work. Several workers completed counselling courses
during the life of the team to try and rectify this deficit This was often at their own expense, in terms of time or
money. The same problem, in reverse, was the anxiety expressed by workers when faced with return to 'normal'
social work. The Children's Act and NHS and Community Care Acts were implemented during the life of the
team, and social workers felt out of touch with these developments.


                                                        44
                                  CHAPTER THREE


        THE DISASTERS: 'MOMENT', CONTEXTS AND RESPONSE


Introduction

       I couldn't believe the chaos and the lack of civility we encountered at
       the identification. It was a m atter of: identify the body and leave the
       building. We did and drove home. It was the m iddle of the night and
       none of us remember a moment of the journey. We didn't speak. We
       got back, walked through the door, stood together hugging each other
       in the living room. We all knew it could never by the same again. The
       family could never be together.

       You can never say that you fully understand w hat someone else is
       going through. O ur grief is personal and even in the family we have
       our own pain. But w hat unites us all is that we all lost loved ones in
       the same disaster and we all went through the bureaucracy and
       suffering afterwards. We were treated awfully - as if we were in the
       way - it was support and information we needed, not hassle...

       ... and then they talk about people ... you know, this compensation for
       remoteness and mental torture they w ent through. Well, all I can say
       of us, we w ent through mental torture. But, according to the law
       because you're sitting at home, waiting for horrible news, you didn't
       suffer. I'm afraid there's something twisted and sick about the law.

These three extracts are taken from interviews w ith people bereaved by disaster.
Many others who have experienced the pain of sudden bereavement, through
illness, accident or violent killing, m ight recognise their feelings or emotions w ithin
these statements. As the preceding literature review shows, at a range of levels,
there are similarities and parallels between bereavement in quite different
circumstances.      Previous research also indicates that there are significant
characteristics which seemingly typify the immediate afterm ath of disasters. These
include: the sheer scale of death, injury or survival; the complexity and potential risk
of rescue and evacuation; the confusion and ad hoc organisational responses of the
immediate aftermath; the potential for inter-agency conflict in mobilising effective
procedures; the tendency to subjugate care and support needs to crimino-legal,
investigative priorities; the intrusion of the media and the public 'ow nership' of the
disaster.

As the full extent of disasters becomes apparent, the processes which dominate the
lives of survivors and the bereaved are those of professional direction and
intervention. Understandably, those most deeply affected seek help mainly from


                                           45
their general practitioners but also, in terms of making appropriate arrangements,
from specific agencies such as funeral directors. Consequently, personal suffering
and its psychological and physical consequences leads directly to medicalisation
and, often, on to psychiatric diagnosis. Two im portant dimensions require
consideration. First, is the issue of w hat appropriate interventions m ight be made -
and when - to provide care and support. These include proactive and preventive
agency responses. Second, is concern over the processes which actually contribute to
the experience of sudden bereavement. This includes the form and content of post­
disaster arrangem ents and the added pressures placed on the bereaved and
survivors.

The period of time from the moment of identification or, if access is denied, of
confirmation of identity through to the funeral involves complex demands and
unusual pressures. Not only do the bereaved have to make standard arrangements
concerning death but also they have to contend w ith the w idespread publicity given
to the disaster including the media-level 'rush to judgem ent' concerning blame and
liability. Further, is the stress and anxiety caused by visits from investigating
officers, be they from the police or other agencies, and access to personal belongings.
If the disaster involved potential criminal or civil proceedings these inquiries can be
extensive and difficult to handle.

Beyond the funerals, which can be delayed for significant periods w ith considerable
institutional insensitivity accompanying the delay, there is little opportunity for the
bereaved, or survivors, to grieve in peace. The legal processes, including official or
other quasi-official inquiries, police investigations and the coroner's investigation
are long, complicated and draw n-out affairs. They often involve further statem ent
taking and require legal representation. The process of legal representation,
consisting of m ultiple solicitors organised into steering groups, and the financial
burden implied, is an added dimension. Campaign and support groups together
w ith a range of informal advice organisations regularly become a significant part of
the short-term aftermath.

Each of these developments has to be negotiated by the bereaved and by survivors.
Many come to realise that if compensation cases are to be fought and won, if
inquiries are to be held in public and if prosecutions are to be made, then they will
be required to give evidence and be cross-examined by skilful barristers. Disasters
invariably lead to major adversarial legal battles fought in the gaze of news media
determ ined to pick up and amplify every controversial issue. As the full litigious
potential of such cases is now well appreciated all official bodies concerned w ith the
disaster, including the emergency services and medical providers, from the outset
are aware of the implications of poor judgem ent or professional mistakes. Clearly,
this can create a climate dom inated by bureaucracy and agency priorities,
diminishing the opportunities for adaptive, responsive interventions which should
provide the basis for identifying and meeting a wide diversity of care needs.




                                         46
Since the late 1980s there has been a series of domestic disasters w ithin the UK which
have focused public and political attention on risk, response and aftermath. Much of
this attention has been concerned w ith those major disasters which cost many lives.
Often, other disasters, such as the Towyn and Aberconwy floods where there was no
direct loss of life, or m inibus/coach crashes which happen as part of the 'routine' of
road accidents, receive much less public attention. If the full range of disasters is
recognised and these, and related, traumatic events are noted, it becomes clear that
they are much more frequent occurrences than is widely recognised. Yet, still the
experiences of those who survive or are bereaved by these tragic events are
marginalised, if not neglected, by the research literature. W hat follows represents
experiences draw n primarily from three disasters, Lockerbie/Flight 103, the
Marchioness and Hillsborough. The research here connects directly to the key issues
raised and developed w ithin the preceding literature review.

Lockerbie

At 1903 hours on 21 December 1988, Pan-American Flight 103, a Boeing 747 carrying
259 passengers and crew, exploded at an altitude of 31,000 feet above South-West
Scotland. The explosion was subsequently found to have been caused by a bomb,
described as an "im provised explosive device" by the Departm ent of Transport Air
Acidents Investigation Branch. Debris and bodies fell over an area of 850 square
miles, from the town of Lockerbie, throughout Dumfries and Galloway, Borders and
Lothian, Cumbria and Northum berland, all the way to the N orth Sea. It was the
small town of Lockerbie, however, which immediately became synonymous w ith the
disaster, as major sections of the aircraft fell on a residential area, killing eleven
people, destroying homes, utility systems and blocking the m ain A74 road from
England to Scotland (Emergency Planning College 1994:41). Devastating to the
bereaved, it also traum atised many on the ground who survived the fall of the
aircraft from the sky (Jenike 1995). The bomb was concealed in a baggage container
which had been taken on board at Heathrow, transferred from a Frankfurt
connecting flight.

The origins of the disaster rem ain controversial. Its historical context was one of
volatile and violent international politics in the Middle East, in which civil aviation
traffic was targetted, among other objectives. Anti-American feeling throughout the
region had hardened after the US bombing of Libya in 1986, and the shooting down
of an Iranian airliner by the USS Vincennes in July 1988. It has been noted that the
political and personal injury done to the Libyan leader Colonel Quadaffi by the first
of these events m otivated Libyan sponsored revenge against Flight 103. In 1991 US
and Scottish prosecutors released an indictment charging two Libyans w ith the
attack. Others, however, have expressed concerns regarding the motives of the US
adm inistration in discounting evidence which implicated the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine - General Command (PFLP-GC), a group w ith alleged links to
both Syria and Libya. It has been suggested that the American Government had
motives for 'scapegoating' Libya, ignoring the evidence that pointed to Syrian
involvement in the bombing. First, was the need to secure Syrian acquiescence in
the Gulf War against Iraq. Second, it has been suggested that the bomb was loaded


                                          47
onto the plane as 'heroin', on a CIA sanctioned route, as part of complicated
negotiations regarding American hostages in Beirut (Stenhouse 1995; G oddard and
Coleman 1993). Such allegations, that government intelligence and drug agencies
were 'used' by the bombers or even that a 'rogue' CIA agent may have actively
helped in the bombing, emphasise the highly controversial and international,
political nature of the disaster (Duffy 1992; G oddard and Coleman 1993). Further, to
the distress of their families, individual passengers were placed under suspicion of
either planting the bomb or facilitating its placement (Cox and Foster 1992).

In July 1997 the German Government announced its reopening of its investigation
following allegations by a "senior Tehran intelligence detector" (The G uardian 7 July
1997). Abolhassem Mesbahi, an aide to Iran's former President, inform ed German
investigators that Iran "ordered and organised the downing of Pan Am Flight 103 ...
in reprisal for the US downing of a civilian Iranian aircraft five m onths before the
Lockerbie atrocity." His allegations received credibility prim arily because of his
previous reliable track record in anti-terrorist cases. The allegations centred
specifically on orders given by the then Iranian leader, Ayatollah Khomeini. Scottish
investigators had no direct access to Mesbahi or his contention that the Iranian
foreign m inister had negotiated w ith Libya and the Palestinians over the details of
the bombing. In contrast to the Scottish investigation, which concluded that two
Libyans placed the suitcase bomb on an Air Malta flight to Frankfurt where it was
eventually transferred to Flight 103, Mesbahi claimed that the bom b's components
were smuggled separately from Frankfurt to London by an Iran Air worker. The
bomb was then constructed in London and planted on Flight 103.

 The relationship between effective security procedures and practices and commercial
 pressures is also im portant in considering the immediate context to the disaster.
 Although Pan Am prom oted its operations as having developed up-to-date security
systems, "Behind the scenes there were indications that Pan Am 's new security was
little more than window dressing" (Cox and Foster 1992:48). The recruitm ent of
inappropriate staff, inadequate staff training and the lack of appropriate and
necessary equipm ent had already led to criticism from independent consultants and
the Federal Aviation A uthority (FAA). Additionally, procedures for screening
luggage from connecting flights allegedly im paired Pan Am 's ability to match items
to individual passengers, and were unable to detect plastic explosive. The failure to
issue a known, specific w arning about an imminent terrorist threat to Pan Am via
Frankfurt, and a w arning given to government personnel yet w ithheld from the
public, fuelled the subsequent controversy (Cox and Foster 1992). In 1995 a federal
jury in New York City aw arded the widow of Michael Pescatore, a US citizen, $26
million, finding that Pan-Am failed to follow security regulations (Maclean's 1 Mav
1995).

An inherent part of the problem concerning the theories which surround the disaster
has been the issue of political interest. Different parties clearly have had interests in
establishing specific scenarios which transfer the focus of blame to other sources.
W ithin a context of international realpolitik, the obvious secrecy of international
terrorist and intelligence organisations, and the eagerness of the international media


                                           48
for a story, it became inevitable that contradictory versions of events w ould emerge
and receive wide publicity. While all domestic disasters become absorbed in wide
political and public debate, Lockerbie/Flight 103 was soon overtaken by the
complexity of international politics in the fast-developing 'new w orld order7.

None of this, however, was apparent at the time of the disaster. Difficulties faced by
the emergency services in responding to the disaster were exacerbated by
communications problems. Telephone systems were overloaded and additional
units were dispatched from surrounding areas to the scene. British Telecom's
redirection of 50 domestic lines for use by the emergency services com pounded the
problem, as members of the public, unable to contact their relatives in Lockerbie
telephoned the police (Wilby 1990:193; Mitchell 1993:25). At the peak of the response
36 ambulance crews and 20 fire tenders were at the Lockerbie scene, despite the
relatively low num ber of injured. The police had difficulty co-ordinating the overall
emergency response due to the convergence of rescue services on the town. This
combined w ith the difficulties of communication. The Radio Amateurs Emergency
Network (RAYNET) provided valuable assistance from about 10.30 pm (Dumfries
and Galloway Regional Council 1989; Wilby 1990; Mitchell 1993; Emergency
Planning College 1994).

The rescue and evacuation dem ands at Lockerbie were relatively small. It was a
disaster in which many died, but only two people were seriously injured (Mitchell
1993:27). The nature of the disaster, however, necessitated a large-scale and ongoing
response in the aftermath. First, the immediate needs of people evacuated from their
homes had to be identified and addressed. Between 350 and 400 people were
evacuated, most of whom were accommodated w ith friends or relatives or taken into
private homes or hotels in the town. Families from 18 properties were unable to
return to their homes, and 12 elderly residents were taken to residential homes.
Social Services and Housing staff worked closely in providing accommodation and
emergency financial support where needed. They also kept records on the
whereabouts of residents (Dumfries and Galloway Departm ent of Social W ork 1989).
Most residents, however, were able to return to their homes on the day after the
disaster (Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council 1989).

Second, those who witnessed the disaster were in varying states of shock and
needed psychological and emotional support. They were fully aware of how close
they had come to death and some had lost family or friends, others had lost their
homes. Further, Social Services had to work from a different base than usual as the
Town Hall, their normal location, was initially used as a tem porary m ortuary. Those
who survived the disaster were local residents while those who died were mostly
from outside the community. This necessitated two quite distinct foci for the
adm inistration of care and support. The survivors were local yet the bereaved
w ould eventually make contact from all over the world. A helpline was set-up and
advertised by leaflets delivered to homes in the immediately affected area (Dumfries
and Galloway Departm ent of Social Work 1989). Other social w ork interventions
included attending community initiatives and liaison w ith other services.
Community involvement over the longer-term was developed through establishing


                                         49
a Community Support Initiative (Dumfries and Galloway Departm ent of Social
Work 1989; Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council 1989).

Third, the inform ation needs of those beyond Lockerbie, including the bereaved and
the media, required organised and informed responses. By m idnight on the 21
December, 300 queries had been handled at Lockerbie Town Hall, to where some
callers were directed, unable to make contact on other numbers. The Casualty
Bureau in Glasgow, the Incident Control Centre at Lockerbie Academy and the
helpline each provided information. Finally, as bereaved relatives arrived in
Lockerbie their emotional and practical needs required identification and
appropriate response while an unprecedented criminal and medico-legal
investigation was mobilised. The vital importance of forensic evidence resulted in a
massive search for wreckage and remains across nearly 850 square miles, involving
approximately 2,000 personnel (Mitchell 1993:26). The scale of the search contrasted
w ith the intricate detail of the forensic processing. Over four million pieces of debris
were recovered and remains of the suitcase which had held the bomb were found 25
miles from Lockerbie. The crucial piece of a circuit board, allegedly linking the
bomb to Malta and smaller than a fingernail, was discovered in the shreds of a shirt
(Cox and Foster 1992:218). Given the political and criminal contexts of the bombing,
all wreckage and rem ains were part of the investigative jigsaw, requiring meticulous
research and collation.

On the night of the disaster the Regional Council's Emergency Control Centre staff
considered the provision of tem porary m ortuary facilities, but this was superseded
by the decision of the Chief Constable that Lockerbie Town Hall should be used for
this purpose. According to later interviews w ith police officers, however, this was a
decision "alm ost made for us and it was a decision over which we had little control"
(Mitchell 1993:32). It was a decision based on members of the public arriving at the
Town Hall to report the finding of body remains, thus making it "a natural place".
Its size and layout, however, rendered the Town Hall unsuitable as bodies had to be
carried up and dow n w inding stairs. As was stated subsequently, "W hat should
have been done is always clearer in retrospect, but a less suitable place for a
m ortuary than the tow n hall w ould have been hard to find" (quoted in Mitchell
1993:32). The Regional Council was asked to identify more suitable premises, and by
the 23 December a tem porary m ortuary was established at the local ice rink. On 27
December, a further tem porary facility was opened nearby in a factory (Dumfries
and Galloway Regional Council 1989:22).

It was in the context of the crimino-medico-legal investigations that support for the
bereaved was offered. According to the Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council
(1989:19) after the Lockerbie Disaster, it "operated a policy of total support for the
Emergency Services". This included support for relatives on their arrival in
Lockerbie through to their initial interviews w ith the police. Social workers stayed
at the hotels where relatives were accommodated, helping fam ilies to access
information. They were informed by the police when bodies were available for
release p u m fries and Galloway Departm ent of Social Work 1989:3.2-3.5) . Mitchell



                                          50
(1993:30) interviewed police officers involved in the response to Lockerbie.           He
concluded:

       (The relatives)... w anted access to the body. It was im portant that the
       police balance hum anitarian concerns w ith the practical and legal
       issues of body identification and release.

'Balance', however, was not achieved. It was decided that relatives w ould not be
allowed to see the bodies, a decision which, according to official reports, went
apparently unchallenged by Social Services (Dumfries and Galloway Regional
Council 1989; Dumfries and Galloway Department of Social Work 1989). The
response of the relatives clearly caught the police by surprise:

       "W hat then happened was that the relatives arrived and w anted to see
       exactly the spot where their loved ones had been found. Several
       relatives w anted to see the crater and touch it. It was unbelievable. It's
       something we w ould never have expected." (Police Officer, quoted in
       Mitchell 1993:31)

After "some initial difficulties" the police, given prior warning, were w illin g to allow
visits to the major crash sites (Dumfries and Galloway Departm ent of Social Work
1989:3.2-3.7). Despite the policy of "total support for the Emergency Services" there
were "initial difficulties" in reaching agreement between police and social services
over the social work presence during police interviews, visits to the sites and the
wishes of relatives to have more information about the process of body identification
and release (ibid:3.9). Competing interests relating to resources also caused the
cancellation of planned meetings in which social workers were to be addressed
concerning their needs. The rooms which had been allocated for that purpose were
taken over, initially by the police, and then by the Lord Advocate (ibid:8.2).

H illsborough

On 15 April 1989 the FA Cup Semi-Final between Liverpool and N ottingham Forest
was held at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, home of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club. The game lasted for just six minutes, abandoned as initial concern
over crushing on the Leppings Lane terrace, behind one of the goals, turned to the
full realisation that the w orst tragedy in a British sports stadium had unfolded in full
view of the police, the club stewards and the media. It seemed inconceivable that so
many people could die and suffer serious injuries in such a confined and seemingly
innocuous space. The disaster occurred in two seriously overcrowded pens w ith
people hemmed in by high perim eter and lateral fencing. The only access or egress
from the pens was via a 1 in 6 gradient tunnel which led dow n into the pens at the
rear. W ith many people arriving, unstewarded, down the tunnel there was no way
out. Compression of the crowd on the shallow steps of the terrace was gradual and
relentless.




                                           51
Hillsborough was used regularly for semi-final matches, providing a neutral venue
in the north of England. Coincidentally Liverpool had played N ottingham Forest
the previous year at Hillsborough in the same competition. By the late 1980s major
soccer matches had taken the form of a m ilitary operation w ith the police directing
the entire process before, during and after the game. In the wake of the persistent
political and academic debate over soccer 'hooliganism ', crowd control, from ticket
allocation to transport arrangements, had become the m ain priority contextualising
matches at all levels. In contrast, crowd safety received minimal attention or
consideration.

While football teams of Liverpool's popularity draw support from throughout
Britain and Ireland, most of those travelling to Sheffield m ade the journey by car,
coach or train from Merseyside. Motorway delays due to roadw orks together with
police checks m eant that many coaches arrived at their designated destinations after
2.30 pm. Supporters were then faced w ith a police briefing and searches before
making their way to the stadium. The kick-off was scheduled for 3 pm. As people
walked to the stadium , unlike the previous year, there was no police filtering of the
crowd. Consequently a major build-up of supporters occurred at the Leppings Lane
turnstiles in an outer concourse area boundaried by low fences and walls. The old,
inefficient turnstiles could not process those at the front as quickly as people arrived
at the back. The build-up became intense and supporters realised that they were not
going to enter the stadium in time for the kick-off.

Police communications between those outside the ground, those inside and the
match commander in the control box became confused. A request to delay the kick-
off, to enable all outside the ground to gain entry, was turned down. In the control
box the m atch commander and his assistants had a full view of the situation outside
and on the terraces via close circuit television monitors. After several requests from
the senior police officer outside, an egress gate was opened in order to relieve the
pressure at the turnstiles. W ith just eight minutes to the start of the game
approximately 2,000 fans entered the stadium through the egress gate.

       The video evidence shows that none of these fans rushed in, all walked
       orderly and there was no pushing. From the point at which they
       entered, unless they knew the ground well, the obvious access to the
       terrace was directly opposite them. It was the tunnel to the back of
       Pens 3 and 4 ... They had no way of knowing how packed it was at the
       front and those at the front had no way of communicating their distress
       to those at the back. (Scraton et al 1995:20)

There was no stewarding of the crowd as it entered and there was no attem pt by the
police to seal off the tunnel, as had happened in 1988, once the two central pens were
full. Pens 3 and 4, which had been full to capacity for almost half an hour, took the
full weight of nearly 2,000 more people, compressing those at the front to the point
that a safety barrier at the front of Pen 3 collapsed under the strain, bringing people
to the floor piled on top of each other. In the build up police officers on the
perimeter track refused pleas from the crowd to open the narrow gates onto the


                                          52
perimeter track. Their orders were to keep the gates locked. In the police control
box, high above the end of the Leppings Lane terrace, the match commander failed
to identify the crowd management problem, immediately assuming it to be crowd
disorder. It was this sequence of events which led, almost inevitably, to the death of
96 people, the hospitalisation of hundreds and lie eventual traum atisation of
thousands.

The Hillsborough disaster was immediately controversial. Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield was the recently appointed match commander. He had limited
experience of such events and he seriously misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles,
provided no directions for crowd management at Leppings Lane, ignored requests
to postpone the kick-off and m isrepresented the sequence of events that led to the
tragedy. Lord Justice Taylor states:

       At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr
       Kirton also of the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield
       Wednesday, w ent to the (police) control room for information. Mr
       Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities and the game
       was likely to be abandoned. He also said that a gate had been forced
       and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to
       one of the television screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles and said "That's the gate that7s been forced: there's been an
       in-rush." (Taylor 1989:16-17)

W ithin minutes of this statem ent the story was broadcast on national and
international news. It soon became associated w ith other police-initiated allegations
that Liverpool supporters outside the ground had purposefully arrived late, many
w ithout tickets, drunk and aggressive. These allegations, together w ith later
"calumnies" that Liverpool supporters had urinated on police officers helping the
dying, had stolen from the dead and had abused women victims, generated a public
outcry against the supporters. As Lord Justice Taylor concludes, regarding Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield's initial allegation:

      This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation
      against the supporters which caused grave offence and distress ... he
      simply could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates
      and all that flowed therefrom. That w ould explain w hat he said to Mr
      Kelly ... his failure to take effective control of the disaster situation. He
      froze ... the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk,
      and to blame the Q ub for failing to m onitor the pens. (Taylor 1989:50)

From the outset, the issue of blame and responsibility, thereby im plying liability,
was high on the agenda. With the 'lens of hooliganism' fully focused many of the
significant issues were lost.

The 'moment7 of Hillsborough, lasting for approximately 40 m inutes, requires
contextualisation. The poor condition of football stadia, the prioritisation in ground


                                           53
layout and construction (particularly penning) and the policing of access to the pitch,
to the exclusion of appropriate considerations governing safety, set the scene for
potential disaster. This skewed prioritisation was underpinned by long-standing
political and m edia stereotyping, often supported by narrowly focused academic
research, of football fans as 'hooligans'. This constituted a process which itself was
part of broader scapegoating, m arginalisation and criminalisation of particular
groups identified politically as threats to 'law and order' (Coleman et al 1990:26-38;
Scraton et al 1995:17-19). These factors undoubtedly had relevance prior to and
throughout the Hillsborough disaster. Police planning, as illustrated w ithin the
Operational O rder for the event, centred on the prevention of disorder, particularly
the restriction of fans' access to the pitch, w ithout regard to possible overcrowding
(Taylor 1989:31-32). The effect of the 'lens of hooliganism' was also evident in the
failure of police officers close to the pens to recognise w hat was happening only a
few feet away. Even when distress was recognised, officers were inhibited from
acting responsively and appropriately by their understanding of police orders and
priorities. This was illustrated during the Taylor Inquiry. An officer giving
evidence:

      ... said that it had been so drum m ed into officers not to open the gates
      that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" w ith himself before
      opening the gate thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right
      bollocking for this." Naturally, one w ould hope that common sense
      and hum anity w ould make some officers cut through the rules and
      open a gate if fans were clearly in distress ...This is w hat happened, but
      not until officers recognised the distress and even then not
      immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut
      again before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to
      climb out over the fence were pushed back. (Taylor 1989:43)

Even when the dimensions of disaster emerged, w ith bodies of dead and injured
carried onto the pitch:

      Many used their own initiative to help those laid out on the pitch, to
      assist in getting others over the fencing and to comfort the distressed.
      But some stood in groups near the perim eter fence not knowing w hat
      to do. They had been summoned in response to what was thought to be a
      threat to public order (Taylor 1989:15, emphasis added)

The significance of assumptions about crowd disorder and their implications for
recognising and responding to the disaster is described by Coleman et al (1990:35):

      The initial reaction of the police officers at the Leppings Lane End to
      requests for help and the persistent denial by senior officers that w hat
      they w ere witnessing was anything other than crowd disorder
      provides a clear example of the effect of the "lens of hooliganism" in
      viewing crowd management.
The prioritisation of crowd control at the expense of crowd safety was also evident
from tiie physical layout of the stadium. Lateral and front fences were a reflection of
this priority. Additionally, attem pts to rescue people from the crush were seriously
hindered by the narrowness of the gates (which the police Operational Order
emphasised should be kept closed) w ithin the perim eter fence. As one officer stated:

       The whole problem was the narrowness of the gate through which
       people had to pass. There were sufficient officers on the pitch to pull
       people away, but only two at a time could actually stand in the
       gateway. (Police Sergeant Don Hill quoted in W eightman 1996:135)

In contrast to the inaction of many police officers, the responsiveness and
resourcefulness of survivors and other spectators was swiftly apparent, as they
assumed the roles of rescuers and helpers:

       There was no call for doctors and nurses on the public address system
       until nearly 3.30pm. Nevertheless, as the m inutes ticked past, some of
       them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord when they saw
       tiie casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
       situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attem pts to revive
       tiie dead and the dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends ...
       There was an urgent need to get casualties off the pitch and to hospital.
       There were six stretchers in the first aid room and three in the St John's
       ambulance. They were quickly brought into use. Then the fans
       improvised by tearing dow n the hoardings around the edge of the
       pitch and against the stands so that lengths of board could be used as
       stretchers. Improvising in this way, parties of fans and police ran
       repeatedly the length of the pitch bearing casualties to the north-east
       comer. (ibid:16)

The response of the emergency services, however, also remains controversial. While
criticising the slowness of the police in raising the alarm, the Taylor Inquiry found
no fault w ith the response of the emergency services. Yet, while evidence was
subm itted to the Taylor Inquiry suggesting that personnel from South Yorkshire
Ambulance Service (SYMAS) took control of m atters behind the Leppings Lane
Stand, conflicting evidence from two doctors and a nurse claimed that nobody
assumed control, and triage was not employed until a Liverpool doctor at the game,
John Ashton, took charge (Coleman et al 1990). Additionally, it was found that
ambulances had difficulty gaining access to the ground, and then onto the pitch,
although Taylor concluded that this did not affect operations (Taylor 1989:53). The
Fire Brigade was also delayed in reaching the people in need. Fire officers arriving
at Leppings Lane were initially informed that they were not needed. An emergency
tender, arriving at the opposite end of the ground, was unable to progress along the
back of tiie South Stand due to its height and had to retreat before progressing to the
Leppings Lane entrance (Taylor 1989:17). Dr John Ashton, by this time giving
medical attention behind the Leppings Lane stand, stated:



                                          55
       An anaesthetist arrived from somewhere and fire-engines came w ith
       resuscitation equipment, but all of this was really too late. By 4.25 pm
       it was all over. (Ashton 1989:5)

The emergency personnel and equipm ent available at the ground were inadequate.
According to Lord Justice Taylor this is partly explained by the dimensions of the
disaster:

       It w ould be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium , medical
       facilities capable of dealing w ith a major disaster such as occurred. To
       have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, other
       equipm ent and medical staff sufficient to deal w ith over 100 casualties
       is not practicable. (Taylor 1989:53)

Others, however, have been more critical in suggesting that the size and context of
tiie event should have implied a greater preparedness:

       Here was a highly profitable event, involving 50,000 spectators in a
       venue offering a range of accommodation ... (yet) there was no fully
       trained and thoroughly briefed medical presence at the ground. The
       equipm ent for rescue, evacuation and treatm ent was minimal and the
       plan for meeting an emergency was unclear and inoperable. (Scraton et
       al 1995:24)

While preparing for a disaster of Hillsborough's scale in advance did not seem
practicable to Taylor, it is clearly unacceptable that so little attention was given to
the possibility of such an occurrence. Hillsborough is not comparable to Lockerbie,
where an aircraft, completely unpredictably, was blown out of the sky, making it
impossible to plan for rescue and medical resources 'on site'. Hillsborough was a
major, planned event. Tragedies at such large-scale events were not unprecedented,
and such events dem and consideration and contingency planning for a significant
number of injuries. There were of course, first aid resources on site, but the
imbalance created by prioritisating order over safety is well illustrated by the fact
that while 1,122 police officers, nearly a third of the South Yorkshire force, were
present, 25 adults and 5 junior cadets from the St John's Ambulance represented the
full medical contingent.

The official responses during the immediate afterm ath of the disaster, and in
particular the treatm ent of the bereaved, have been severely criticised in
independent research (Coleman et al 1990). Much of the concern centres on the
gymnasium situated at the back of the N orth Stand, which, as a designated
'emergency area' in the Major Incident Plan, was used to accommodate the injured
and dead. The circumstances, however, in which the decision was taken to use the
gymnasium as a tem porary m ortuary are contested. According to die H ead of South
Yorkshire CID, directing the post-disaster operation, it was his decision. It has been
suggested by the South Yorkshire Deputy Chief Ambulance Officer, however, that
this was a reversal of a decision previously taken, which was in the process of being
implemented, to move the bodies to the nearby purpose built and fully-equipped
Medico-Legal Centre. In his opinion the change of plan was instigated by the
Coroner, on his arrival at the ground (ibid:222-225). Between approximately 5.00 pm
and 9.15 pm, the gymnasium was organised to receive relatives.

The gymnasium was divided into three sections by draw ing nets across the w idth
and hanging sheets from them. At the end furthest from the entrance the bodies
were laid out in body bags. The central section was used as a police rest area and the
section closest to the doors was arranged for statement-taking. In the entrance area
to the gymnasium notice boards were used to pin Polaroid photographs of the dead.
Each photograph was given a num ber corresponding to the bodies on the
gymnasium floor. Each body was allocated a police officer who was given a bucket,
water and a flannel to clean the faces of the dead. Those who were dead on arrival
at the hospital or who died there were returned to the gymnasium.

A disused boys' club, close to Hammerton Road Police Station which had become
the police centre of operations, was opened up as a reception centre for relatives and
friends seeking information. It was an old, dam p and unwelcoming place w ith no
adequate amenities for receiving people. At the hospitals, survivors and those
looking for their loved ones were accommodated in the canteen areas. These key
sites became the route that many people followed over and again as the evening
wore on and they searched for friends and relatives. As the police-led process began
to operate, after 9 pm, people were bussed from the Boys' Club to the gymnasium.
They w aited in the car park before being called to the entrance. There they looked
through the full range of photographs of the dead. On recognising a face the
number was called and the body was wheeled to the gymnasium door on a trolley.
There was no time allowed for contemplation, touch was restricted and privacy
denied. Relatives and friends of the deceased were then taken to the police officers
at the tables where statements were taken.

Relatives had faced a long and uncertain wait. Although the bodies were quickly
laid out in the gymnasium it took over four hours to operationalise the 'tem porary
m ortuary'. Many of the bereaved w aited for over seven hours before they were able
to make an initial identification (ibid:270). The identification procedure also has
been the focus of sharp criticism. Relatives had already been searching hospitals
an d / or waiting at the disused Boys' Club before identification. In some cases they
were given inaccurate information (ibid:261). At the N orthern General Hospital a
hospital adm inistrator stood on a table to give information, including descriptions,
to those w aiting in the canteen (ibid:258-259). The identification process was
deficient and insensitive in several respects. The use of poor quality polaroid
photographs, uncategorised by gender or age, was unnecessary and harrowing. The
presentation of the dead in body bags, often in a dishevelled state, was profoundly
distressing. Time and privacy, crucial for grieving, were denied as the police,
pressured by the need to process waiting relatives, were keen to complete the
identification quickly (ibid:241-271). Following positive identification relatives or
friends were interviewed by CID officers. This questioning was considered
inappropriate, as it included details of their journeys to Sheffield, w hether they had


                                          57
attended the m atch and w hether they had consumed alcohol (ibid:253). That the
prim ary concern for police was the taking of investigative statem ents rather than
identification details was a view corroborated by other workers involved (ibid:254).

For most people who witnessed a n d / or survived the disaster, or who had taken part
in the rescue, they left Hillsborough to make their way home. In such a short time,
no de-briefing program m e could have responded fully to the needs of the large
numbers of those present. Additionally, w hether such an initiative w ould have been
welcomed or w anted by many of those involved is unlikely. There were, however,
different levels of exposure to the disaster and involvement w ith the rescue. Fans,
often themselves survivors, were involved in pulling the dead and injured from the
pile of bodies, particularly in Pen 3, and trying to adm inister rescusitation. They had
assisted in the evacuation of bodies from the pens, both back through the tunnel and
onto tiie pitch In both locations supporters tried to revive and comfort the seriously
injured and to assist in moving them on, either to ambulances or to the gymnasium.
Others, some w ith medical training, worked at the gymnasium. The boundaries
between the categories of 'bereaved', 'survivor', 'w itness', 'rescuer' and 'helper7
were blurred. Yet there was no recognition of the enormous contribution from, and
tiie impact suffered by, supporter-survivor-rescuers in formal debriefing. Most fans
who had contributed did not consider asking for help, and those who did were
dismissed (Ashton 1989).

The Marchioness

'The m oment' of the sinking of the pleasure boat Marchioness, in collision w ith the
dredger Bowbelle, on the early m orning of 20 August 1989 remains profoundly
controversial. The repeated refusal by a succession of Secretaries of State for
Transport to hold a public inquiry into the disaster effectively m eant that the hopes
of tile bereaved and survivors for justice, and the safety interests of the general
public, relied on a confusion of different procedures which failed to guarantee that
all available evidence was heard (Christian 1996:27). This was vital given that there
was considerable dispute over the facts of the case. The precise location of the
collision, the courses of the two vessels prior to the collision, and operational
problems, particularly concerning visibility and communications, rem ained subjects
of dispute throughout seven years of legal proceedings. For the bereaved families
the long-term afterm ath developed as a difficult process of investigations, inquiries,
court proceedings and coroners' inquests, the latter being suspended m id-hearing
only to be resum ed from scratch after much legal wrangling (Christian 1996; Bapier
1996). The stress on families, survivors and witnesses was immense.

As a public inquiry into the disaster was not commissioned, the Marine Accident
Investigation Branch (MAIB) of the Departm ent of Transport investigated the events
surrounding the deaths of 51 people. The investigation was conducted in private,
w ith no publication of witness statements. It took two years to publish a report and
this established the official version of events (MAIB.1991). It found that the two
vessels had been heading on parallel courses, which w ould have enabled the
Bowbelle to have overtaken the Marchioness. Shortly before the collision, however,


                                          58
the courses of the two vessels began to converge, w ith the Bmobelle moving slightly
to starboard, and the Marchioness to port (ibid:18.10). The report concluded:

       There was no wilful misconduct in either vessel contributing to the
       collision ... In as much as personal fault was responsible for the
       accident, that fault lies jointly w ith those in direct charge of the two
       vessels at the time and w ith those responsible for both the perpetration
       and the acceptance of their faulty design. It is neither practicable nor
       desirable to identify every individual concerned as the faults go back
       over a period of 25 years. (ibid:18.10)

Crucial to this finding was the reliance on the evidence given by Messrs Blaney and
Quantrill, two Bowbelle crew members in the lookout position. The Master of the
Bowbelle was unable to see ahead of the vessel because equipm ent blocked his view.
Also of significance, according to this account, was the w ater interaction between the
two vessels as they emerged from Southwark Bridge. It was suggested that this may
have contributed to the Marchioness moving to port across the bow of the Bowbelle.
The Inquiry established that the vessels collided between Southwark Bridge and
Cannon Street Bridge.

This official version of events, however, was strongly challenged (Christian 1996).
Specific questions regarding the relative positions and distance apart of the two
boats, when Blaney and Quantrill saw the Marchioness, were not addressed in the
MAIB Report. Further, it failed to include any detailed evidence from other eye
witnesses. The role of another pleasure boat Hurlingham, for example, was barely
mentioned. Subsequently, it was found that several witnesses who had been aboard
the Hurlingham gave a different version of w hat had happened. According to this
evidence the Bowbelle had hit the Marchioness from behind just before it was about to
enter Southwark Bridge, pushing it through the bridge. A Channel 4 television
programme outlined a quite different version of events in which the Marchioness
was hit astern, swinging the vessel round and underneath the Boiobelle (Dispatches,
Channel 4, December 1994). Heroic rescues carried out by passengers aboard the
Hurlingham had gone unrecognised, their accounts not sought and their evidence
neglected. The documentary interviewed those passengers and this evidence
contrasted starkly w ith the findings of the MAIB Report. It also supported
statements provided by survivors. In the years following the disaster it became clear
that the original MAIB Report was flawed. A report into safety on the river,
conducted by the Secretary General of the Law Society, John Hayes, considered that
the specific circumstances of the Marchioness were beyond its terms of reference. It
did reveal, however, a long history of collisions involving the Bowbelle, revealing the
importance of ballast requirem ents if the already restricted view from the
wheelhouse was not to be further obstructed (Christian 1996).

In April 1995, after a six year campaign by bereaved families, an inquest jury
returned a verdict of unlawful killing. The new inquest heard evidence which
contradicted the MAIB finding. The Master and Mate of the Hurlingham agreed with
eight other witnesses that the collision took place as the Bowbelle and Marchioness


                                          59
entered Southwark Bridge. The Marchioness was pushed through the bridge then
swung around by the impact. It was literally 'ru n dow n' by the Boivbelle. Several
witnesses alleged that w hen they had given their initial statem ents they had been
pressured by the police to confirm the official version of where and how the collision
had occured (The Guardian 24 March 1995:9). Although Terence Blaney and Captain
H enderson had declined, on legal advice, to answer many of the questions that were
put to them during the inquest, Blaney adm itted to the jury that he had consumed
four cans and four pints of beer before sailing. Further, he stated that he could not
w arn the wheelhouse w hen he had spotted the Marchioness because of noise. The
jury also heard evidence which contradicted the MAIB findings that the rescue
response to the collision had been appropriate and satisfactory (MAIB 1990:28-30).
According to this more critical evidence, the rescue operation was confused, w ith a
fire service boat sent in the w rong direction, and survivors hit by police boats while
in the water.

As w ith the Hillsborough disaster, the verdicts eventually reached at the inquest and
criminal cases were, to the public, confusing and contradictory. Lawyers acting for
Captain H enderson were quick to state that the inquest verdict of unlawful killing
"cannot and does not relate to Captain Henderson of South Coast Shipping", adding
that "Section 16 of the Coroners Act prevents the jury from m aking such a finding
and the coroner directed the jury to that effect" HTie G u a rd ia n 8 April 1995:7). As
Christian (1996:25) has concluded, however:

      ... the m ost im portant thing to have emerged from the inquest was that
      there had been no change of course by the Marchioness and therefore
      the verdict is likely to have been directed at some person or body
      connected w ith the Bowbelle. It was very m uch a retrospective
      vindication of w hat the families had been saying for years but it ra m p
      too late for any prosecution to be brought.




                                          60
                                  CHAPTER FOUR


   BEREAVEMENT IN THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH OF DISASTERS



Confirm ing Involvem ent in Disasters

 As soon as the first news breaks following a disaster, relatives and friends attem pt to
obtain information to deny or confirm their fears that someone close to them has
been involved. The particular inform ation they seek, and the means by which they
seek it, depends on the circumstances of the disaster, their relationship to it and what
they might know already of the person's involvement. If they are survivors or
witnesses they m ight have been w ith the person, thus having a clear idea of the
circumstances including injuries, and even death. This was the case, for example, for
some survivors at Hillsborough. Yet, for others the confusion of the disaster leads to
separation from friends or loved ones, w ith no certainty as to their fate. At
Hillsborough, there were many witnesses and survivors who experienced a period
of anxious uncertainty, only to be relieved when people reunited at the coach, the car
or the railway station. For others, a frantic search of local hospitals resulted in the
'good' news that their companion was 'only' injured. For some at the match,
however, the search for information was not so happily resolved. Often, their search
entailed visits to hospitals, the ground, the reception centre at the disused
Hammerton Road Boys' Club, and back again. Similarly, some survivors of the
Marchioness disaster witnessed their friends or partners drowning, and others knew
with certainty that the person did not escape the boat as it sank. There were people
who for some time were uncertain as to the whereabouts of their friends or partners.
For them the police and hospitals were potential sources of information.

Beyond the disaster site there are large numbers of relatives and friends who have
reason to believe that a loved one m ight have been involved. Depending on the type
of disaster, simply knowing of a person's involvement will be sufficient in itself to
confirm fatality. Confirming that a person was on a plane which crashed w ith no
survivors clearly confirms the death, providing that both pieces of inform ation are
accurate. Confirming that somebody was at a football match, or at a party on a
riverboat, at which some people died in itself is not sufficient inform ation to draw
any reliable conclusions. Further, the potential sources of information about
involvement are different. There are passenger lists and boarding cards for aircraft,
whereas the prim ary information of presence at a sports or leisure venue is not
recorded in the same way. Such information needs to be obtained from a different
source: personal prior knowledge, a friend, or another relative.

Some relatives may not learn of the disaster immediately, especially if it has taken
place at night, or if they are away from home. Others will not realise at first that
their family member or friend could be involved. A spouse or close relative is likely
to be aware of a relative taking a long-haul flight to a particular destination, even if


                                          61
they are not sure about the flight number. Similarly, the acquisition of a major cup
semi-final ticket is likely to be known by some close relatives or friends. Yet people
living alone are unlikely to inform relatives of the particular social events they
attend or their precise travel arrangements. There can be some delay before the
news of involvement filters through, often some time after the news of the disaster.
W hatever the circumstances, the first outcome is likely to be the same: relatives or
friends will reach for the telephone. In the first instance they will call other relatives
or friends, attem pting to check on the possibility of involvement.

Confirm ing Fatality

Barry Devonside watched the disaster at Hillsborough unfold beneath him. He was
above the Leppings Lane Terrace in the seated area into which many fans climbed to
escape the crush in the two overcrowded pens behind the goal. Barry's son,
Christopher, was w ith his ten friends in Pen 3. Of the eleven, three died including
Chris. W ithin an hour of the disaster Barry was told by one of the group that Chris
was dead. He was escorted by a policewoman to the stadium 's gymnasium, to
which the dead and injured had been taken. Later, and inexplicably given
Sheffield's purpose-built Medico-Legal Centre, the gymnasium was designated a
tem porary m ortuary. Despite the precise description of Chris given to a police
inspector by Barry he was sent away w ith the words "H e's not there".

Sometime after m idnight, approximately seven hours later, Barry was back at the
gymnasium now accompanied by his brother-in-law. They were kept outside in a
bus in the cold until it was their turn to be called. Inside the gymnasium they were
shown polaroid photographs of the dead, and asked if Christopher was among
them. They were required to look at more than eighty poor quality photographs of
faces in body bags. Barry identified Christopher as num ber 17. His body was
wheeled to the door on a trolley. The bag was unzipped and Barry m ade the
identification. Christopher was still wearing his new red, Welsh In te rn a tio n a l rugby
shirt as described earlier by Barry to the police inspector. He had never left the
gymnasium. He died soon after 3 pm, had been laid on the pitch and his friend had
given his name to the police. For the entire evening Barry Devonside had travelled
constantly between the hospitals, the Hillsborough ground and the dam p, disused
boys' club, designated a 'holding area' for survivors and relatives, his hopes fed by
the sure knowledge that Chris was not among the dead at the gymnasium.

      I went back to the hospital two times. I was going round and round in
      a circle. The gymnasium, the hospital, the m ortuary, the boys' club,
      back to the hospital, back to the boys' club. I w ent to the hospital
      canteen and the boys' club twice on two separate occasions. I've never
      seen such sights or been involved in such utter chaos ... There was no,
      no discipline. There was no structured set-up to cater for people.
      People were just left w andering around in their own state of emotion
      and m ixed-up minds ... Nobody knowing anything ... Nobody there to
      help at all. (Barry Devonside, personal interview)



                                           62
The problems of false information did not disappear as time passed. Stan and
Daphne Roberts also lost their son, Graham, in the disaster. They were at home on
Merseyside and, despite frequent telephone calls to the South Yorkshire Police in
which they repeatedly gave a detailed description of Graham, they did not receive
news of his death until 6 am the following morning.

       I was on the phone w hen Sandra (Graham's fiancee) entered this
       house. I was speaking to a sergeant in Sheffield and he was still trying
       to tell me that there was nobody there of Graham's description, and we
       were given that over the phone, three or four times an hour. (When I
       told him) ... the sergeant said, "This cannot be, this is impossible".
       Sandra's two brothers-in-law had identified Graham before they left
       Sheffield. Before they left they pleaded w ith two senior officers to
       phone us before they got home and they prom ised they w ould and
       they did not do. (Stan Roberts, personal interview)

Steve Kelly's brother, Michael, had travelled to the match from Bristol and had not
been missed that evening because his friends assumed he had gone on to Liverpool
to visit his family. Early on the m orning after the disaster, Steve Kelly telephoned
the police to make sure that Michael had not been injured, or worse.

       I gave them his name, I gave them a description and it was a good,
       detailed description (including a distinctive ring and recent stomach
       scar). It could only have been him. The police said not to w orry
       because all the dead had been identified. I said, "Everybody?" He
       said, "Everybody." (Steve Kelly, personal interview)

Growing increasingly concerned, Steve and his wife w ent to Sheffield, arriving late
in the afternoon. At the Boys' Club he m et police and social workers and was told
by a police officer that, "Everyone's been identified". Then, as they were discussing
going to the hospitals, the officer returned and there followed an intense discussion
w ith one of the social workers: "I seen the expression on her face change, and then I
think I knew there was something wrong". At this point Steve feared the worst,
realising that all that had gone before was unreliable and not everyone had been
identified.

Often it is the difficulty of obtaining reliable information from official sources that
leaves families to find alternatives through their own resourcefulness. Pamela Dix's
brother, Peter, was killed in the Lockerbie disaster. She was at home on the night of
the disaster, and although she knew he was flying to the USA that day, she did not
know the details of the flight. On seeing the television news her partner, John, was
concerned but Pamela was convinced that Peter always flew Virgin or British
Airways. John, however, spent several hours trying to make contact via the
emergency telephone line but w ithout success. While he was on the telephone
Peter's wife, Elizabeth, tried to contact them to let them know that according to his
office there was a possibility that Peter had been on Pan Am Flight 103, although he



                                          63
had set off to the airport late, and had left his ticket at the office.      This was
communicated via Croydon police to Pamela and John

Meanwhile, Elizabeth had contacted a journalist friend in the USA to see if he could
establish if Peter had been on the flight. They w aited through the night and
sometime between 3 am and 4 am he rang to say that Peter had been issued w ith a
boarding pass. The family was frustrated that they could not make contact on the
emergency telephone num ber, and that they had received the information via a
friend in the American media. In Dublin Pamela's brother, Ian, also tried the
emergency num bers for a considerable time and was unable to make contact until
about 1 am, w hen he supplied Peter's details. He was called back at 6 am by
Heathrow police who informed him that Peter had been issued w ith a boarding pass.
As Pamela stated:

      So officially it took ... between faying to get information at about eight
      o'clock in the evening ... it took until six o'clock the next m orning to
      have official confirmation.

M argaret Lockwood-Croft, whose son, Shaun, died in the Marchioness disaster had
not known that he was on the boat. She stated that she discovered subsequently that
Shaun's friends who survived the disaster gave his name, address and telephone
num ber in the early hours of the morning. Yet, she was not contacted by the police,
and did not learn of his involvement, until about 5.40 pm the following evening. She
tried the emergency telephone num ber but was unable to make contact. Instead, she
telephoned her local police station, but found that the officer on duty knew nothing
of the disaster. Finally, using directory enquiries she rang Cannon Street Police
Station. She was told to stay where she was:

      They were not very constructive, all I was told was "Stay where you
      are, we can't verify whether he is or he isn't, and how can you be sure
      he was on there ..." I w ouldn't help at all by coming up there, I w ould
      just get in the way ... (M argaret Lockwood-Croft, personal interview)

Although she was told by the police that her call would be returned this did not
happen. She contacted her husband, who was away, and her brother, and decided to
go to London. As she had to arrange childcare for her grandchildren she did not
arrive in London until very early on the M onday morning. She w ent to Cannon
Street Police Station:

      It was just sheer pandem onium ... you had relatives, survivors and
      other (police) business going on all at the same time. Eventually I saw
      a police officer who took me in (and who) very curtly, very quickly just
      wanted to fill in a form: w hat was he wearing, how old is he, where
      does he live, that sort of thing. But no information about me was
      taken. Nobody questioned the fact that I'd arrived at the police station
      on my own ... or w hether Shaun was my only child ... (The last
      question) was, "Which funeral directors are you going to use?" And


                                         64
       that was like a ton of bricks ... that was really the first time that it sunk
       into me. I'm filling out a form here for someone who is deceased, who
       is gone. I can't even begin to describe my emotions, how I felt as I
       walked out of Cannon Street police station ... if I hadn't got my three
       daughters I w ould have ended it.

M argaret concluded, "I walked in and walked out. I could have been reporting a
lost dog." Like others, M argaret had to wait, not knowing whether her son w ould be
recovered. She was told on Thursday night that a body had been found which was
thought to be Shaun. She stated, "My reaction immediately was, I w ant to go and
identify him and bring him home."

Identification, Viewing, and Grieving

M argaret was never allowed to see her son's body, either by the police or by the
funeral directors. She was told, "They're simply not recognisable as hum an beings
let alone as your son." Yet, when eventually she was allowed to see photographs of
him along w ith the pathologist's report, she considered him visibly identifiable:

       Obviously there are certain changes to someone who has drowned, but
       no, his body w asn't m arked and he was very visibly identifiable ...
       Considering the length of time, he was far and above in better
       condition than I had envisaged or prepared myself for.

She remains angry and deeply hurt that she was not able to see Shaun, and that she
was not informed of the post-mortem so that she could have arranged to have a
medical representative present. Further, she disputed the need for a post-mortem to
have taken place at all, arguing that to ascertain death by drow ning a full post­
mortem was unnecessary. She expressed anger at the surgical intrusion involved:

       They had checked hearts, kidneys, stomachs, everything, so major
       surgery w ent on to do this, brains, w hat did they w ant to look, at brains
       for? They drowned. I have a (copy of a) letter from the Home Office
       telling and rem inding coroners that post-mortems shouldn't be
       gratuitously granted, they are solely to find out the cause of death if
       you are in doubt as to the cause of death.

Another mother, Linda Ali, whose only daughter died in the Marchioness disaster,
considered her reception at the police station to be polite and sensitive when she
w ent to give details and a photograph of her daughter (Linda Ali, personal
interview). Along w ith others, she had to w ait for several days until she was visited
by police who informed her that they thought they had found her daughter. Denial
of access to her daughter while she was at the m ortuary was tem pered w ith the
expectation that she w ould be able to see her on release to the funeral director.
Linda bought m aterial for a dress in which she intended to bury her daughter:




                                           65
       It is part of our way in Trinidad to prepare our own dead. We don't let
       people do that. So I was now preparing to comb Julie's hair and put on
       her make up, and the clothes and so o n ...

However, she was denied access to her daughter. Thinking that the body might
have been disfigured, Linda suggested that the funeral director could dress her and
the body be covered while she held Julie's hand. These options were also denied.
To her horror Linda learned that her daughter's hands had been removed. It later
emerged that many of the other Marchioness victims had been placed in sealed
coffins, their hands also removed.

       I said, "This is wrong! This is barbaric! Already she's dead and you've
       gone and done this further damage to her". Preventing me from even
       dressing her or doing anything for her.

Linda was told that Julie's hands had been cut off for the purpose of fingerprinting.
She dismissed this explanation:

       (They) had the Barclaycard, her door key, a Fiat car key. The
       Barclaycard, the name was still there, 'Julie H unt'. "I told you from
       day one that a person called Julie H unt was missing ... You never came
       to me and said, "Could you check this door key? Could you check this
       car key?" No, instead you cut her hands off, barbarically cut the hands off
       and then telling me it was done for fingerprinting".

Linda was put under pressure not to disclose w hat she had learned. It was pointed
out to her that such information w ould upset other families and that Julie was the
only person whose hands had been removed. Thus she kept the inform ation to
herself for many m onths until she could bear it no longer. As w ith other bereaved
families, Linda felt betrayed when eventually she saw photographs of her daughter.
She had been denied access on the grounds of disfigurement and decomposition.
Yet, she stated:

      Those photos, her skin was not in any way shredded up, or bruised up.
      Not a part of her skin was bruised. Her skin was pock-marked, sort of
      flecky because of w ater damage. Now, for Christ's sake I am not
      stupid! If you are in the water for any length of time you do go like
      that and I had prepared myself for exactly that.

She rejected the proposition that the denial of access was for her benefit, to prevent
her from suffering distress:

      I cannot be further distressed than w hat I am already ... W hen you
      produce a child that child is part of you ... how could we consider any
      part of us abominable? Let me tell you that no m atter w hat she looked
      like, having been pulled out of that water, I still w anted to hold her
      close to me. That d en ial... we can never be at peace.


                                          66
Viewing the body, as has been shown earlier, is a sensitive and personal issue. Not
everyone wants to view and it w ould be inappropriate to insist on viewing against
personal wishes.      Sudden bereavement, however, does leave m a n y people
vulnerable to external direction and, therefore, open to dissuasion from viewing.
While such dissuasion can be well-intentioned, often it is for professional
convenience. A m other whose daughter died on the Marchioness was persuaded by
friends not to request access to her daughter7s body. H er description of how she felt
at that time, and the subsequent reinforcement of friends' advice by officials,
illustrates the importance of the availability of effective im partial advocacy in the
immediate aftermath:

         I really w asn't w ith it. I really w asn't capable of making decisions ... I
         asked to see her and (her friend) suggested that that w ould not be the
         right thing to do ... I was steered away from that. I didn't insist, but to
         be honest I didn't feel capable of insisting. And at the inquest, the first
         aborted inquest, a police officer was assigned to me and he was telling
         me not to even view the photographs ... "Remember her as she was,
         remember her in her full beauty." (Anonymous personal interview)

She did not doubt the good intentions of the advice she received but now feels that
the decision was made for her. It is one about which she has profound regrets:

         I feel as if I have probably let her down in many respects in not
         insisting that I viewed that body ... (She) is the only member of my
         family th a t... I have never seen. So yes I found it difficult, very very
         difficult, and I have felt the guilt myself, of my inadequacy in not
         insisting at the time that I view that body or at least send a member of
         my family to view it. I felt that they let me dow n in not taking charge
         of that duty.

She also expressed how the removal of her daughter's hands had affected her:

         I was completely unprepared for it. It absolutely knocked me back in time. It
         certainly prolonged (sic) any recovery from the psychological shock ...1

On learning of London-based information meetings, arranged by Pan-Am for
American relatives, Pamela Dix's family attended on the 24 December. She
remembers a representative of Kenyons, the funeral directors, stating that bodies
"would be reconstructed" for viewing purposes. Some relatives took exception to
the way that this inform ation was framed and their frustration became apparent.




1 Despite the importance of this issue to the relatives, at the final inquest the Coroner ruled that the removal of
hands was 'beyond the scope of the inquest'. Michael Mansfield QC, Counsel for the families asked: 'If they
can't ask these questions in an inquest, what theatre of inquiry can be used, because there has been no public
inquiry in this case?' (cited in The Guardian 18 March 1995:9).




                                                       67
       Now it is very easy to say years later that he was under extreme stress,
       doing an exceptionally difficult job w ith very pushy people, but at the
       time all that m attered to us was that we didn't seem to be getting
       anywhere and that these people didn't seem to understand that.
       (Pamela Dix, personal interview)

This frustration did not diminish. As time passed, Pamela Dix's family found it
increasingly difficult to understand the inordinate delay in confirming her brother's
identification. On several occasions detailed inform ation was provided by the
family to the police in Scotland and to Kenyons in London. It included a dentist's
contact num ber and the assum ption that Peter had a Green Card in his possession,
which included a thum b-print and full-face identification. Elizabeth, and Peter's
company's doctor, offered photographs of Peter and were told that they w ould not
be necessary. The doctor who accompanied the family to Scotland had recently
given Peter a medical examination and he offered to visually identify the body.
Throughout the process it was the family that initiated contact w ith the authorities.
Pamela estim ated that they gave up to six separate identification interviews, either
in person or by telephone:

      Our frustration was grow ing... Every time we telephoned the incident
      centre ... we were always speaking to another person, we always had to
      explain again who we were telephoning about, who we were, and our
      sense at that time was that all the inform ation we were passing on
      about Peter was going into a black hole. We never had a single named
      person to deal w ith any organisation, apart from the airline, who had
      assigned us our buddy ... who m ade practical arrangem ents for us.
      (Pamela Dix, personal interview)

Eventually, after eleven days, Peter was identified through dental records and
fingerprints. Yet, Peter had been "fully recognisable". At the Inquiry they were
shown photographs of Peter and, w ith them, his Green Card. Lockerbie relatives
had been the victims of a "blanket policy" decision to prohibit the bereaved from
viewing bodies, whatever their condition. She stated:

      They took a policy decision at Lockerbie that there w ould be no visual
      identification ... W ith hindsight, I know why they took some of these
      decisions, but the effect of a general policy decision in which there was
      no flexibility was two-fold; the first was to make us feel that they were
      all lum ped-in together, that the dead were all just one big bundle, arid
      that nobody was a single hum an being, and the second was the
      frustration that it was taking longer than it should have taken.




                                         68


                                                                                         i
       The authorities cannot take refuge in individual stories of w hat w ent
       w rong ... They have to facilitate the way in which somebody sees a
       body. Nobody w ould suggest that you w ould go in and see someone
       who has been mangled all beyond recognition as a hum an being, there
       are ways in which this should be done, you know I am talking about
       having no access to a body or a pictu re...

W hen the relatives are perm itted to view the body of their loved one, their emotional
needs can be superseded by official priorities. At Hillsborough the priorities for the
police appeared to be speed, and the gathering of 'evidence'. The officer in charge at
the gymnasium stated, "By 4.30 am 74 of the 94 bodies had been positively
identified. This was first-class" (Coleman et al 1990:128). His self congratulatory
assessment had a major impact on the bereaved and the process of identification
which they endured. The m other of James Delaney, who died at Hillsborough, told
how she and her husband identified him:

      ... inside this green zipped-up body bag, num ber thirty-three. So his
      Dad and I bent down to kiss and talk to James and as we stood up
      there was a policeman who came up from behind me and was trying to
      usher myself and my husband out, straight out of the hall. The total
      attitude was, "You've identified num ber thirty-three, so go!" (cited in
      Coleman et al 1990:251)

Due to her understandable reaction, which she described as 'hysterical', Mrs Delaney
succeeded in having her son's body taken to one side, where she was allowed a little
time w ith him:

      My husband was ushered to a table to be asked questions. At which
      again I started to scream ... I know these questions have got to be
      asked but as far as I was concerned there is a time and a place for
      everything ... I thought it was only right that his Dad should be w ith
      him - we went together to look for our son James, and that was time
      that was owed to us. Because at the end of the day, when you carry a
      child for nine months, and you bring them into the world, it is your
      right to be with your child. We asked if we could possibly - we w anted
      to stay w ith James - we were told "No" that we couldn't. So I asked if
      we could be allowed to come back to see James - we were told "No" it
      was for identification only ... (ibid:252)

Barry Devonside, having toured Sheffield for hours searching for his son, described
the moment at which he finally identified Christopher, in the company of his
brother-in-law:

      They led us to a doorway and they stood us, virtually... I don't w ant to
      be critical ... but they virtually m anhandled us. They sort of grabbed
      our shoulders, grabbed our arms and said "Stay there. D on't move." I
      think I was very strong in coming back w ithout using language. I said


                                         69
       "I'll do w hat I w anna do. D on't speak to me like that" ... and they
       brought Chris round and he was just in, you know, like those sacks
       that you put people in, from an air disaster, w ith a zip right dow n the
       middle. And a copper popped his head through the door and I just
       said "Yeh, OK" and he said ... he sort of held on to my arms, and I just
       said "Get off" ... If I was going to see my son I didn't need a copper
       hanging on my arm and ... I walked through, and they hadn't
       unzipped it then, and they unzipped the bag and Chris had his, like ...
       his head was here ... And they were just unzipping him and he just
       said, "W ould you look dow n ..." I just said, "No, on your bike, shut
       your m outh for two m inutes ... I'll deal w ith this." And I walked round
       the side and knelt down and then I kissed him on the head ... (Barry
       Devonside, personal interview)

Like Mrs Delaney and many other of the Hillsborough relatives, however, Barry was
not allowed the time that he wanted:

      The police didn't w ant me to stay there for a second longer than was
      necessary. A copper leaned dow n and put his hand on my shoulder
      and I shrugged him away. I think I told him to "piss off". I leant down
      and kissed him again and patted him and they whisked him away.

Barry was then asked to sit at a table and make a formal statem ent of identification.
It was a process he felt that was less to do w ith formal identification and more
concerned w ith investigating his movements and behaviour throughout the day.
There was a heavy emphasis on pubs, off-licences, superm arkets and the crow d's
behaviour. The controversy over the identification process and access to the bodies
of loved ones was not confined to the G ym nasium Janet Spearritt was at the
hospital bedside of her unconscious husband, Eddie, when she was informed by her
brother-in-law that her son, Adam, was dead. This news, in the early hours of the
morning, was a massive shock as Adam 's name had been announced earlier by the
police as being 'alive and well'. Janet's reaction was to go immediately to see him.
Following identification Adam 's body had been transferred to the Medico-Legal
Centre. She recollected:

      Robert hadn't long identified him at the Gym. From the Gym he'd
      come straight to the hospital, so it w ould be about half an hour after ...
      Adam had already been taken to the Medico-Legal Centre, which is
      where I w ent to see him and, of course, he was behind a glass screen.
      My reaction was I w anted to hold him and they w ouldn't let me. I
      cried and I begged and I pleaded and everyone else who was there did,
      but this tall chap said, "No, it's not possible". He said that I w ould
      have to go through an area where there were lots of other bodies. I
      said "It doesn't m atter, I'll walk through and I w on't look. Just let me
      go through, guide me through to the room where Adam is." "No" he
      said. "W hen you get him home you can hold him." (Janet Spearritt,
      personal interview)


                                          70
For Janet this was not w hat she wanted. She felt a real need to have dose contact
w ith her son just hours after he died and the denial of access had repercussions later:

       It's just instinct to w ant to hold them in your arms. It's as if once
       someone's died they no longer belong to you, they belong to someone
       else and it's up to them to decide w hat you're allowed to do w ith them.
       It's something that will always haunt me, really, something I should
       have done ... I think now I should have kicked and screamed and I say
       to myself that it was my own fault, I pleaded but I should have gone on
       and on and o n ...

Janet's account is a clear illustration of how bureaucracy and the lay-out of the
Medico-Legal Centre combined to frustrate a deeply-felt need to be physically close
to her son. She knew that the 'm om ent' could not be reclaimed on Adam 's return to
the family for burial. W hatever she had done, access w ould have been denied yet
she was left w ith a sense of guilt that she should, and could, have done more to
persuade those w ith the discretionary power to enable access. Her experience
provides strong testimony towards the case for advocacy. For others, the Medico-
Legal Centre created a different problem. On the following day, after finally hearing
of the death of their son, Graham, Stan and Daphne Roberts w ent to the Medico-
Legal Centre in Sheffield, where Graham's body had been transferred during the
early hours. Stan stated:

      We were treated like Saturday night drunks. We were told just to sit
      there. There was no help given to us.

While they were waiting another family left the viewing area. A young boy,
distraught, commented that their loved one looked as if he had been "battered". On
witnessing this distress, Daphne felt that she could not cope w ith seeing Graham's
body. Stan, his daughter Sue, and Graham's fiancee Sandra were taken to view the
body:

      ... there was a closed door and this fellow w earing a white smock said
      to us, "Are you ready?" We said, "Yes." He drew the curtains open
      and there was no body there. There was then an argum ent between
      the two blokes in the white smocks. They closed the curtains again and
      then we heard one of them say, "Well you better go and find the
      body". How I kept my cool I'll never know. Minutes passed and then
      we were again asked if we were ready. The curtains opened and
      Graham was there. Then they just ushered us out and that was it - no
      physical contact. We were like zombies, we didn't know w hat was
      going on. (Stan Roberts, personal interview)

On asking a social worker about the arrangements for the return of Graham's body
to their home, Stan and Daphne were told, "They'll all come home in the back of a
wagon." "No way is my son returning in the back of a wagon," replied Stan, "he left
home w ith dignity and he'll return w ith dignity."


                                          71
The level of discretion assumed and used by the police during the immediate
aftermath, and the power that it reflects, is well illustrated in the experiences of
Trevor and Jenni Hicks as they attem pted to gain accurate inform ation on their two
daughters, Vicki and Sarah. Having been told, against Trevor's explicit instructions,
that Vicki had died, Jenni was desperate to see her. Trevor spoke to a police officer
at the hospital to persuade him to allow access for Jenni. The officer told them that
Vicki was "N othing to do w ith you any more." Jenni dem anded to know Vicki's
whereabouts and on whose authority she had been moved from the hospital. He
replied "She is no longer your property" (Jenni Hicks, personal’interview). W ith one
daughter dead, the other missing, it was made clear to both Trevor and Jenni that
they had no rights and they were given no official inform ation or support. On being
driven to the gymnasium the words "they are no longer your property" were
reiterated by a police officer on duty. It was not until 9.30 pm that they were given
access to the gymnasium and they discovered that Sarah had died along w ith Vicki.
They were brought on low trolleys, both in body bags, to an area by the gymnasium
door. After a statem ent-taking session w ith CID officers, which seemed to Jenni and
Trevor like an interrogation, they left Sheffield and drove home carrying Vicki's
personal possessions in a bin bag and Sarah's leather jacket.

It was on the Sunday afternoon, the day after the Hillsborough disaster that Steve
Kelly, realised that his brother may be dead. He and his wife were asked to go to the
Medico-Legal Centre as contrary to w hat Steve had been previously told, two bodies
rem ained unidentified. It became clear that a mistake had been made: "I actually
tried to get out of the chair and I couldn't". At the Centre they were shown
photographs:

      ... that was the only preparation we got. They did n 't say, "There's a
      m an w ith a scar" or "There's a m an w ith a ring on his finger" or
      anything. There was nothing like that. There was no w arning that it
      could have been him. (Steve Kelly, personal interview)

While Steve praised the social workers who interviewed him at the Boys' Club,
particularly as he had been very agitated, he considered the police to have been less
sensitive. He was given a cup of coffee but, he said, "only just". He concluded:

      I still think it came dow n to ... I still felt as though I'd been treated ... as
      a football hooligan, and (Michael) was a football hooligan. I still felt
      that barrier w ith the police. But if I was honest I'd have to say that the
      police are bred to be more aggressive than social workers, I think its
      part of police training to be aggressive towards people.

Michael was identified through a glass screen:




                                             72
       It w asn't even a case of "There's a body behind there", or being
       prepared, it was just "Stand there, stand in front of that window".
       Swish. "There he is". It was as cruel as th a t... I looked at him for like,
       it seemed like a minute, then I got this choking feeling and I just
       collapsed and I was choking for breath on the floor.

He judged the entire process of identification as lacking in sensitivity, resulting in
frequent flashbacks to the experience. He considered the police to be untrained in
the skills necessary for handling the bereaved w ith sensitivity, stating that social
workers w ould be more appropriate in facilitating the process. He was particularly
critical of, and hurt by, the decision to prohibit him from touching his brother:

       ... w hen I said later on, before I went, could I see him again, again it
       was through this glass screen, because I actually said, "I w ant to go and
       touch him." "No." The next m orning when my friend drove me back
       to Sheffield, and I saw him again, again through this glass screen. They
       w ouldn't let us go in, because I did ask, I wanted to go in. I w anted to
       go and just give him a kiss, he was my brother, you know. I just
       w anted to hold his hand or something, let him know I was there,
       because he had been on his own all that time.

Eddie Spearritt regained consciousness on the day after the disaster. He learned of
Adam's death from a doctor and his first reaction was to see Adam. It was agreed
that he could make the journey to the Medico-Legal Centre w ith his wife Janet on the
Monday.

      W hat a fiasco that was. H e'd come off the ventilator but he still had
      drips ... But he just wanted to see Adam again. He w ent in these
      hospital pyjamas, odd top and bottoms, no slippers, no socks, nothing
      on his feet, w ith a drip still attached to him. They got him a wheelchair
      ... wheeled him down, not to an ambulance as w e'd expected but to a
      car ... the male nurse came to set the drip up. He d id n 't put the
      wheelchair in the car so when we got to the Medico-Legal Centre, and
      he was shivering by this time, there was no wheelchair. So we had to
      get out of the car and walk into the Medico-Legal Centre w ith this tatty
      old blanket round him, it was like cobble stones, w hat a sight he
      looked. Anyway, we sat and w aited while they got Adam ready ...
      again we couldn't touch him (Janet Spearritt, personal interview)

This episode dem onstrates how easy it is to neglect even the m ost basic hum an
needs of those suffering both physically and emotionally. Eddie recalled a vicar
commenting that it "was one of the m ost remarkable sights he'd ever seen, walking
across this rough ground, covered in loose chippings, a drip attached and no shoes
or socks" (Eddie Spearritt, personal interview). Yet this was two days after the
disaster. Eddie had nearly died and was still considered too ill to be transferred to a
Liverpool hospital. The lack of appropriate support for the family at w hat was their
most vulnerable time is clear in the conditions that they were forced to endure.


                                           73
The Disaster Site and Personal Effects

At the Kensington H ilton meeting in London for relatives of those killed at
Lockerbie, the feeling am ong many of the relatives was that they wished to visit the
town. Other relatives were not so sure that they wished to go, but w ent w ith the
others after all. Although the visit was not, in Pamela Dix's view, encouraged by
Pan-Am, the airline agreed to provide transport. The following day, Christmas Day,
relatives flew to Scotland. Eight of Pamela's family made the trip, including Peter's
twenty-two m onths old son. They had one objective, to bring Peter back. Pamela
described the flight to Lockerbie as:

       ... the most extraordinary experience of my life, being in a plane full of
       bereaved relatives heading up to where an air disaster had taken place.
       Of course we didn't think about it at the time but the cabin crew were
       deeply upset, they had lost friends and colleagues ... It was a very
       liberating experience, though, on that flight because nobody put their
       seat belts on, everybody smoked if they w anted to, we really had gone
       beyond ordinary safety measures. (Pamela Dix, personal interview)

On arrival, the Incident Centre at Lockerbie Academy seemed chaotic and full of
people. They stated that they wished to see the disaster site. Some relatives were
put onto coaches. Pamela, her family and an American relative used a mini-bus,
hired for them by Peter's company doctor. They were accompanied by a social
worker who "sort of attached himself" to their party. The tour of the site was
considered crucial by relatives, and relevant inform ation was a need as "emotional"
as it was "rational":

      The social worker explained in very careful detail, exactly where we
      were going, w hat we were seeing, where the engines of the plane had
      fallen, and we absolutely hung on his every word. Any inform ation
      that we could glean about the disaster was of param ount importance to
      us. We also took a camera w ith us and took some photographs
      because we w anted to have very strong recollections of w hat we were
      seeing. We knew the importance afterwards of having ... something
      tangible to show w hat had happened.

The transparent needs of relatives, however, were not understood by those in
authority. W hen the relatives reached the site where the nose-cone had fallen, which
had become symbolic of the disaster, they were confronted by police who wanted
them to rem ain on the buses. The social worker who was accompanying the
relatives discussed the situation w ith a police officer. The atm osphere was
confrontational:

      ... there was a bit of pushing and shoving between the police officer
      and the social worker, just a little, and my brother recalls that the
      police officer said to the social worker, "You're in deep shit. Get those
      people out of here".


                                          74
The social worker7s persistence prevailed and the relatives left the buses, still feeling
pressure to leave the site quickly. Police officers repeatedly approached the social
worker instructing him to leave the site w ith the bereaved. W hen Pamela tried to
walk along the farm path adjacent to the crash site, officers attem pted to prevent
access. She pushed them aside and continued. By coincidence, Pamela m et one of
the police officers involved in this incident some years later:

       He talked to me about how they felt about us. They were just
       trem endously nervous that we w ould go completely hysterical. They
       didn't know w hat to expect, and of course they were there to protect a
       scene of crime, so they thought we w ould jum p over the wall, take
       pieces of the p lan e...

Yet such fears were unfounded:

      In the event people just stood and looked and felt the most profound
      silence. There was no hysteria, which is not to say that there w ould not
      be on another occasion. It was a tremendously restrained experience.
      But it was very im portant for people, I think we felt, certainly my
      sister-in-law felt a very strong sense of attachm ent to that place. And it
      was so im portant for us to get the physical reality of it. I didn't w ant to
      go when they'd cleaned it up and sanitised it. I know now that I
      w anted to see it as it was, as it truly happened. The real difficulty
      arose because there was no attem pt to tell us w hat they were trying to
      do. For a living the police protect life and property ... and they were
      still doing that to such a degree that we felt they had no understanding
      of w hat we were.

On returning to the Incident Control Centre, Peter's wife, Elizabeth, was interviewed
again, this time by a police officer. During the interview she was asked for Peter's
seat number, which she did not have. Pamela approached the UK General Manager
of Pan-Am to request this information. He took her into his office, m ade a telephone
call, and then told her that the information was confidential.

      Basically, I hit the roof ... We were deeply frustrated by this, I mean
      when I think about that in retrospect, I mean the police w anted the
      inform ation and the airline said, "You can't have it". So we w ent to the
      First Secretary of the American Embassy and said "Please can you help
      us, can we complain about the airline, w hat can we do about this?" So
      he said he couldn't do anything about it, and in fact he came back w ith
      us into the main hall of the incident centre and lunged across the room
      at my sister-in-law and said "Your relatives are in my office causing a
      ruckus". I've never forgotten him, or his words, and again he and John
      (Pamela's partner) practically had a fist fight, and we eventually got his
      card from him which stated that he was the First Secretary ... A piece of
      information that is, in itself of no very great consequence, except to us,



                                           75
       because we w ould like to know where he was sitting on the aircraft ,is
       blown out of all proportion by the response.

As noted earlier, the return of personal possessions to the bereaved, is of great
importance. It is particularly significant when the body is not available for viewing.
Although m ost of Michael Kelly's property was returned a few days after the
Hillsborough Disaster, one of his training shoes and a distinctive jacket, which his
brother Steve had bought for him, had been lost. Steve, wishing to minimise distress
to his m other who was ill, asked that all "business" be handled directly w ith him.
He came to regret his request:

       They persecuted us really. They were turning up every other couple of
       bloody days w ith jackets or trainers. (Steve Kelly, personal interview)

One evening he returned home to find two cars in front of the house. In one were
officers from the South Yorkshire Police, in the other were officers from the West
M idlands Police. They had arrived independently to ask him questions. Steve
invited them into his house, when he noticed that an officer was carrying a bag:

       ... and he just lay this bag over the couch, and it was a coat w ith vomit
       stains all dow n the front, and he said "Is this your brother's coat?" ... It
       w asn't our M ike's c o a t... Another one was standing there and he had a
       box. I said "I presum e you've got a trainer in there?" He said "Yeah".
       I said "Just get out" ... For months afterwards I just kept picturing that
       coat, and thinking, w hat happened to the lad whose coat it was? I
       remember the actual coat. It w ouldn't even have fitted (Michael), you
       know, it was very small.

Steve was brought a succession of items of property, all in a dirty, dusty state, before
he stopped the police visiting the house. Pamela Dix, on the other hand felt that she
and her sister-in-law did not w ant items of property to be cleaned, or 'sanitised'.

      Certainly my sister-in-law w anted everything back as it was found, so
      that you understand, and you get the smell of it, and you understand
      it. Other people have very much an opposing view, that they w ant
      things cleaned...and I know for health reasons some things have to be
      cleaned up, but the fact is that people should be given a choice, instead
      of which after Lockerbie the townspeople, I mean they worked like hell
      to clean everything, and the huge pats on the back that everybody gave
      themselves, and then the ungrateful hum an beings at the receiving end
      who said "Well we w ant it back dirty, don't clean it up!" You know
      that's very hard for them to understand. It's very similar w ith going to
      the disaster site, I don't just w ant to see the hole in the ground, I w ant
      to see the oil, I w ant to see the debris, I have to know w hat it was that
      was there, to get your head around w hat it was that happened.




                                           76
While opinions were varied over the return and treatm ent of personal effects, the
disaster bereaved interviewed were universally critical of the official response to the
disasters in which they had been involved. It was clear that these responses served
to accentuate and prolong their distress. As Pamela Dix concluded:

       Oh there's no doubt that it increased it tremendously. The thing about
       being involved in a major disaster, when someone in your family dies
       in it, is that you don't have any time for grief. You don't have any time
       for the norm al process of faying to get to grips w ith the fact that
       somebody has died. We spent all our time faying to get information,
       and we felt, being blocked from getting information. It did two things:
       one was to increase the distress that we will carry in our heads for
       always. We will never forget some of the things that were done and
       were said after the disaster. And this has nothing to do w ith the actual
       loss of my brother, the hum an being, that was a separate thing. And
       the other thing that it did was to prevent us from having that time
       when families come together, and they laugh and cry together about
       the person who is gone ... we couldn't do that, and because you can
       never have that time again, it is just removed from you ... I'm not
       suggesting that they could have made it absolutely okay, but ... the
       things that happened after the disaster m ade it worse than it was,
       worse than it necessarily should have been. That's w ithout any doubt.

Responding to the Bereaved

As has been stated previously, bereavement is a profoundly personal and private
experience. Even w ithin close-knit families or communities individuals rarely reveal
fully their true feelings, concerns or regrets. O utward indications of coping and
dealing w ith the continuing dem ands of everyday life can mask the reality of grief,
pain and suffering.       The rituals and ceremonies attached to death within
communities and cultures can, and do, provide strength and support, especially in
the short-term. Sudden death, however, particularly when it is projected into a
highly publicised and broadly public arena, brings exceptional and difficult
dimensions. Disasters which involve m ultiple deaths, or those which result in few
deaths but which impact on established communities, by definition combine
suddenness, shock, publicity and intrusion. Inevitably, they also generate, almost
immediately, the question of causation; w ith this come issues of responsibility,
liability and investigation.     The media, reflecting the controversy of the
circumstances surrounding the disaster, relays competing accounts of what
happened, why and to whom as a 'rush to judgem ent' ensues.

W ithin this escalating context the privacy of grief is denied. Often through the 'best'
of intentions the w ider community or the general public, their elected and non­
elected representatives soon visible at the site or at the hospitals, become directly
involved. While a broader sharing and outpouring of grief can illustrate the depth
of feeling, providing a more general support for the bereaved and survivors, there is
a fine line separating such expressions from a form of 'public ow nership' of a


                                          77
disaster or traum atic event. The Dunblane m urders are sharply illustrative of this
point. Support for the bereaved families was, and remains, universal, including
international tributes. A successful and well-mobilised political lobby concerning
gun ownership emerged and consolidated as a result of the killings. In the
immediate afterm ath the media was w arned off from over-concentration on the
community and the bereaved. Yet, the enormity of the tragedy, and its political
consequences, m ust have implications for the bereaved, particularly for their
grieving.

The experiences of those bereaved in the Lockerbie/Flight 103, Hillsborough and
Marchioness disasters provide clear evidence that the processes and procedures
which contextualise the immediate afterm ath prioritise medico-legal and
investigative priorities over psychosocial needs and their identification. In the
immediate afterm ath as the bereaved, some of whom themselves are survivors,
attem pt to come to terms w ith the weight and circumstances of their bereavement,
little attention is given to identifying and meeting their needs. As the research
shows, there is a m arked distinction between the pre-planning and efficiency
associated w ith rescue and evacuation, although there is evidence of how easily such
processes can fail, and that associated w ith the immediate aftermath. Even those
local authorities whose 'second-phase' planning includes detailed preparation for
after-care, target provision at the short-term, rather than the immediate, aftermath.

The undeniable evidence is that whatever decisions are taken by the lead agency, the
police, in association w ith the coroner, they rarely go beyond securing the site,
m ounting the investigation and, accordingly, m anaging the bereaved and survivors.
This functional, mechanistic approach is based on the routine of investigative work.
It has a kind of developmental logic in which each stage of inform ation-gathering is
m apped and prepared for. It is an inevitable consequence of sound investigation
procedures and intelligence gathering. But it has no easy correspondence w ith the
psychological, social and emotional needs of those realising and addressing the
consequences of their bereavement.

What occurs is a clash of professional priorities supported by quite different
professional cultures and ideologies. At present, the lead agency at the rescue and
evacuation phase becomes the defining agency throughout the immediate afterm ath
and beyond. While this situation obtains, and the status quo remains unchallenged,
there will continue to be conflict between agencies and their workers in the
immediate aftermath. It is vital that informed, well-integrated crisis support
develops strategies and principles for effective inter-agency co-operation as part of
their routine disaster preparation and emergency planning. As the research shows,
this includes crucial issues around communication systems, inform ation flow,
identification processes, viewing bodies, site access and well-briefed advocacy
provision.




                                         78
                                             CHAPTER FIVE


      SU RV IV IN G IN THE IM M EDIA TE AFTERM ATH O F D ISASTERS



Surviving D isaster

In the immediate afterm ath of disasters the experiences of survivors often are
neglected and marginalised. The priority is investigation and, understandably,
sympathy is focused on the bereaved. Survivors of a disaster in which there has
been substantial damage to property or to physical infrastructures often have their
physical needs identified. Usually, if the numbers are not too great, they will have
access to social workers, other 'caring' professionals or volunteers at reception
centres or via helplines. When disasters involve m ultiple survivors an d /o r
witnesses, however, it is unlikely that official responses will meet their needs in the
first hours, or even days. The fact that survivors often disperse, unrecorded,
accentuates the difficulty. W ith or w ithout official help, isolated or supported,
survivors begin their processes of adjustment, seeking to comprehend and make
sense of w hat has happened to them, how it relates to their pasts and futures. These
are processes which m ight take months, years, even a lifetime. While m any people,
including professionals, rem ain sceptical about post-traumatic reactions, urging
people to "pull themselves together" or "get over it", it is im portant that survivors'
experiences are recounted and taken seriously1.

The Ordeals of Survival

It is im portant to emphasise that there is no hierarchy attached to degrees of
suffering, but also to recognise the diversity of experiences encompassed by the term
'survivor'. Some people witness the deaths of others from a position of helpless
safety, perhaps knowing that loved ones are among those whose lives are
threatened. Others experience a direct, personal threat to their lives, escaping death
narrowly. Many of those who survive disaster are 'rescuers' or are bereaved, or
both. For these survivors not only are they caught in the fight for personal survival
but also they become active participants in the unforgettable anguished confusion of
rescue, resuscitation and evacuation. Some people will have knowledge and skills
that are valuable. Such skills and experience, however advanced, cannot prepare
them for the horror of the experience. Those w ithout such skills help as best they
can, often subsequently torm ented by recollections of their helplessness as people
died in their presence. It is not unusual for survivors to feel both a 'guilt7 of survival
and a 'guilt' that they could or should have 'done m ore' to assist those who died.



1 This section focuses on the experience of those who survived Hillsborough. Those in Lockerbie who survived
the fall of the fuselage of Flight 103 on their town, or who escaped or witnessed the sinking of the Marchioness,
have similar experiences to recount The focus here on Hillsborough reflects the research data.


                                                        79
Surviving a disaster is, inevitably, a life-changing experience, and the establishment
of post-disaster psychosocial teams represents a recognition of the support necessary
for survivors in the longer-term afterm ath of disaster. In large-scale disasters,
however, it is often the case that in the immediate afterm ath, survivors, w hatever the
traumatic dimensions of their experience, simply 'go hom e', leaving the site; their
suffering, their needs and their contributions unrecorded and unrecognised.

Paul Taylor's wife, for example, woke during the night of 14 April 1989. She told
him that she did not w ant him to go to the football match at Hillsborough the
following day as she had an unaccountable feeling that he w ould be hurt. On the
way to the match, Paul joked about her 'prem onition' w ith his friends, Steve and
Jimmy, and his brother-in-law, Eifion. They laughed that on the terraces maybe
somebody w ould step on Paul's painful in-growing toe-nail (Paul Taylor, personal
interview).

Arriving at the stadium , accompanying two children, Sue Swift found herself caught
in the crush outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles. It was:

       ... just mad. There was no control, there was no queueing, there was
       nothing. I just pushed the kids in front of me, trying to get in ... It just
       got tighter and tighter. I remember there was a pregnant wom an in
       front of me, she was screaming. It just got worse and worse. (Sue
       Swift, personal interview)

She managed to enter the ground, noticing several police officers, just inside the
turnstiles. W hen she shouted angrily that they should be doing something and that
people outside w ere going to die, she was threatened w ith arrest if she did not move
on. She took the children to their seats and w ent to her own, at the w est end of the
N orth Stand, overlooking the Leppings Lane pens to her right side. She noticed the
emptiness of the side pens compared w ith the pens behind the goal, "I looked down
and you could just see that things w eren't right in there. There was no movement,
like there usually is, it was just a block."

By 2.40 pm behind the goal on the Leppings Lane terrace, Paul Taylor thought that
the crowd was becoming "compacted". Ten minutes later he and another fan locked
their knees against the fence so that other fans could use them to climb over the
radial fence to the right of Pen 3, accessing the virtually em pty terrace alongside.
Ten minutes later he noticed that some of the people he was helping over were wet
w ith urine, some smelling of faeces. The last person he helped out was his brother-
in-law. Paul declined to be helped out. A big man, but shy, he recollected saying,
"No, knowing my luck I'll be dangling off the railings and everyone'll be laughing".
He reflected that his concern to avoid embarrassment m ight have cost him his life.

Peter Power had followed Liverpool since the 1960s. He once knocked on the front
door at the home of famous Liverpool Manager, Bill Shankly, to request an
autograph and was invited in for tea. On 15 April 1989 he struggled for his life in
the same pen as Paul Taylor. The pen became so full that it was "just like being in a


                                           80
vice". He was against the barrier that eventually collapsed and could feel it moving
under the w eight of bodies compressed from the back of the terrace.

       When that barrier was moving I really thought I was going to die. I
       thought, if this goes over, it's not just going to go over and we can get
       out, they're all going to just pile on top of me, I've just got to get out.
       (Peter Power, personal interview)

He did not remember how, but he managed to climb into the em pty adjacent pen.
Others, like Bob Jones escaped to the rear of the pen, from where they w ere pulled
up into the West Stand by other fans. From there he reached down to assist others
who were trying to escape into the stand:

       There was nobody shouting orders or nothing, but for some reason
       something just clicked into gear w ith everyone. I pulled this girl up
       and she was shouting to pull up her boyfriend but I didn't know who
       he was ... You were just putting your hands down and shutting your
       eyes and whoever grabbed you, you was pulling them up like. And it
       turned out it was her fella, and they were just like hugging and kissing,
       and I remember thinking it was like something off a film. (Bob Jones,
       personal interview)

He recalled w ith anger that while the fans were trying desperately to help, some
police officers were doing the opposite:

       All the other stuff was going on, w ith the coppers at the front. You
       know the way the railings come ... and as people w ere getting over the
       coppers were throw ing them back. I even seen someone w ith his
       truncheon hitting someone.

In the N orth Stand, Sue Swift was also witnessing the fans' escape from the pens:

       ... people were just coming over the top, and getting onto the pitch. All
       hell let loose then. It was distressing being there and not being able to
       do anything. You could see the police putting people back in ... You
       could just see this disorganization. The police just standing round all
       the time, and then I remember the ambulance coming on ... People on
       the pitch, you could see them just dropping, and people trying to
       resuscitate them.

For those still in the pens, struggling for their lives, the personal fear and the deaths
of others surrounded them. Peter Carney tried to manoeuvre himself into a position
to the front of a barrier. He remembered vividly the sights and sounds of the crush:




                                           81
      Listening to a fella who was apologising, and I can remember that as
      clear as a bell, he was apologising for bringing his kid ... Time and time
      again, "I'll never bring you again, w e'll be all right once we get out of
      this lad, w e're not coming to the football no more." (Peter Carney,
      personal interview)

Once in front of the barrier Peter discovered:

      There was no way I could use my arms. My arm s were at my sides. I
      was on my tip-toes m ost of the time, and I made a conscious decision
      to concentrate on my breathing ... Seeing the colours on the faces, one
      lad, I know he died, stood next to me so I gave up on watching people
      around me and I concentrated on my breathing.

Peter felt that he lost consciousness, and remembered looking dow n on himself,
before the thought of his partner and baby son brought him "back again". In severe
pain and unable to see, he was carried back up the tunnel at the back of the pens. He
fell into unconsciousness.

Eddie Spearritt entered Leppings Lane through a main egress gate on the direction
of the police. He was w ith his son Adam and had stood back from the crowding
outside the ground so as to avoid the crush. Together they walked through the gate,
down the central tunnel beneath the stand and into Pen 4. It was m inutes before the
kick-off and they managed to move down the terrace to a position close to the
perim eter track.

      The crush came, and I have heard this w ord several times, this w ord
      surge, It w asn't a surge. It was like a vice just getting tighter and
      tighter and tighter. I turned Adam round to me. He was obviously in
      distress. There was a Police Officer just slightly to my right about five
      or six feet away and I started begging him to open the gate. W hen I
      say in my statem ent that I was screaming, I literally mean screaming.
      Adam at this time had fainted and my actual w ords, although they are
      not on a statem ent were, "My lovely son is dying", and begging him to
      help me and he didn't do anything. He just stood there looking at me.
      I realised he w asn't going to do anything so I grabbed hold of Adam ...
      and I tried to lift him over the (perimeter) fence, and the fence is 10 feet
      thereabouts w ith spikes coming in. I couldn't lift him. So I then
      started punching the fence in the hope that I m ight punch it d o w n ... all
      I managed to do was to make my hands double in size and full of holes
      where I had actually punched the fence. No one opened that gate.
      Right at the beginning w hen I was begging the Officer to open the gate,
      if he w ould have opened it then I know I could have got Adam out. I
      know that because I was there and know w hat the situation was.
      (Eddie Spearritt, verbal evidence to the Inquest)




                                          82
Adam was pronounced dead soon after his arrival at the N orthern General Hospital,
Eddie regained consciousness the following day. His hospital records begin at 5 pm
on his admission to the Intensive Care Unit. He has no knowledge of his
whereabouts between 3.05 pm and 5 pm.

Paul Taylor was unsure exactly w hat was happening, even though he had helped
people out of the pen. Unable to move, he was crushed against the right hand radial
fence, while fans on the other side tried to push him back away from it. He saw a
young m an in front of him change colour, but still the realisation that people were
dying around him did not sink in. He recalled speaking through the fence to a
police officer:

      ... I said to the copper who was like on the railings "W hen you're
      going blue doesn't that mean you're dying?" And he said something
      like "D on't be alarmed, don't be stupid". And he was going even
      brighter blue. I said "H e's blue! Doesn't that mean you're dead. I
      thought you were dead w hen you were blue." He said "D on't be
      stupid." ... After that I lost track of the lad, and it was only later on
      when we were picking people off the floor, he was on the floor. H e'd
      obviously died standing up. (Paul Taylor, personal interview)

As fans escaped, Paul felt the crush abate. Then, seeing a pile of bodies at the front
of Pen 3, he realised w hat had happened. The horror of that sight still lives w ith
him. He compares it to newsreel film footage of Nazi concentration camps w ith
"body on body".

      They w ere about eight or nine deep on the floor, people stacked up.
      W hat I was doing was tilting their head back and if they looked like
      they were breathing and just num b ... then you'd just physically drag
      them o u t... and threw them behind you, because there seemed to be a
      gap that had opened up between the people who were just standing
      there, and couldn't believe w hat was happening and the people who
      were actually helping.

Bob Jones, also looking down from the West Stand, remembered the sight as the
crush eased:

      When it quietened down in the pens they were all just
      standing...Everyone who could get out took a few yards back and then
      the ones at the front, you could see them like ... falling like. (Bob Jones,
      personal interview)

Understanding the gravity of w hat had happened, Bob w ent dow n into the pen to
see if he could help. He was shocked by w hat he found:




                                          83
       You w ere getting people like, and you were thinking like ... these are
       ju s t... like dead ... You thought they're not breathing like, they're not
       even moving, and the colour of them like. And there w ere more and
       more of them being taken o u t...

Frantically trying to save their fellow fans, survivors were well aware of their lack of
first-aid skills. Yet, in the absence of experienced help and assistance, they tried
desperately to help. One survivor remembered trying to help a "young lad":

       ... I tilted his head back and I was trying to give him the kiss of life, and
       he was sick in my mouth. So I started being sick, and then w hen I w ent
       to help him again his tongue had gone right down and I couldn't get
       his tongue out because my fingers were wet. I didn't know that if I'd
       turned him on his side at the time that his tongue w ouldn't have gone.
       I didn't know. Someone said then, "H e's dead", and I took his anorak
       off that he had tied around his w aist and put it over his head, and just
       helped a few more, (personal interview)

From the stands people witnessed the tragedy. For many it was clear w hat was
happening but they felt powerless to intervene. They could see those on the terrace
and on the pitch trying desperately to save lives. Sue Swift recalled:

      The fans were just organising themselves, getting onto the hoardings
      and pulling them down. They w ere actually working quite w e ll... But
      w hat w ould you have done on there? There was nothing you could
      have done ... They were pounding each others' chests and doing
      m outh-to-mouth. But unless you know w hat you are doing ... I mean
      there w ere plenty of people doing it, but w hether they w ere doing it
      right or wrong, I mean they couldn't have known either. I saw this
      little lad coming off with, it m ust have been his dad. And I just
      remember him, the copper m ust have said, you know, there's nothing
      doing here, and it was the kid's dad. They had to pull the kid off and
      cover this fella's head up. (Sue Swift, personal interview)

Realising the extent of the deaths and feeling unable to help, Sue decided to leave.
She could not cope w ith the scenes unfolding before her.

Doctors, nurses, paramedics and others w ith first-aid skills who were at the game
went onto the pitch to help. Eileen McBride, an accident and emergency nurse, was
in the West Stand w ith her partner. Leaving the stand at the rear, she approached
police officers, but was told that w hat was happening was a "public order problem".
She insisted that people w ere dying, and was taken by an officer to the opposite end
of the ground, from where she entered the pitch area. She checked people who were
laid out on the ground, gradually moving tow ards the pens where the crushing had
occurred. There, she helped lift a m an out of Pen 3. He was dead. She recalled
being asked by a police officer to check w hether a m an he had covered was actually
dead:


                                           84
      This really got to me. The idea that he'd actually covered someone but
      w asn't sure if he was dead. As it happened, he was. (Eileen McBride,
      personal interview)

She m et up w ith a doctor, who had gone to the match w ith some medical students,
and together they w ent to the gymnasium. There were two ambulances outside and
she saw a young boy who was "alive, but he w asn't very well". He subsequently
died. At first Eileen and the doctor were not adm itted to the gymnasium. The
doctor insisted that he and Eileen could help, and they pushed through. Inside the
gymnasium she helped examine the "walking w ounded", and immobilised a child
who was suffering chest pains. Her frustration mounted. W hen she asked for a pair
of scissors she was told that the first-aid equipment was, "three quarters of the way
round the ground", and she was given a pen-knife by a police officer. Although
oxygen was needed the cylinders in the gymnasium were empty. At one point the
doctor considered performing a tracheotomy on the child; Eileen "just thought, how
do you do that here?"

Behind the West Stand, Peter Carney recovered consciousness. He was lying in the
recovery position to the right side of the tunnel entrance in a row of people who
were dead. His vision slowly returned, but he remembered that initially all the
colours were of extreme intensity. Next to him someone placed a jacket over the face
of a dead man.

      The thought that kept going through my m ind was "I'm here, I'm
      here". I was just thankful, looking at that fella, and probably
      subconsciously thinking, "That's me". And the coppers who were
      standing there were neither use nor fucking ornament. They were
      literally just m inding the dead ... (Peter Carney, personal interview)

A friend emerged from the tunnel, and w ent over to Peter. He tried to shake him, to
bring him around:

      The pain was just unbelieveable. Well I could feel my arm s and upper
      body again, but I couldn't feel my legs, I didn't have no legs as far as I
      knew.

He was examined briefly by Dr John Ashton, and although he was not put into one
of the first ambulances, this did not bother him. Despite his condition he felt
relieved to be alive. Even in these dire circumstances survivors gave each other
w hat support they could.

      There was a fella next to me and I had a little thing w ith him, not that I
      could talk, but where we were squeezing each other and that. He was
      badly injured. I didn't feel like I was badly injured, you know.

Peter was full of praise for those trying to help, and for the ambulance and hospital
staff he m et subsequently:


                                          85
       From John Ashton on, they were so in control, and there's no way they
       deserve any stick, because you've got to imagine this courtyard, it was
       like three walls, it was like a triangle, and one wall I know for a fact
       was lined w ith the dead, and the other two walls were lined w ith the
       injured in varying degrees.

Yet still the prim ary medical help was not part of an official response:

       It was only survivors or people who had come from the stands. That
       was how John Ashton came to be there. It was spontaneous and
       intuitive, and it was in no way organised by the authorities.

Peter felt that the police showed no consideration of survivors' experiences or needs.
They gave the survivors no support. He noted that while several police officers were
"m inding" a relatively few dead people, about 150 injured survivors lay against the
other walls, "recovering from the m ost traum atic thing that they're ever going to be
asked to encounter in all their days on the planet." Eventually Peter was put into an
ambulance and taken to Sheffield's N orthern General Hospital. He was convinced
that he had lost the use of his legs.

Still in the pens, Paul Taylor helped to carry the last bodies from Pen 3. His
emotions were surging and he refused to hand over one dead young m an to the
police:

       I didn't w ant the police to have him. I remembered back to before the
       game had started, the policemen when people were trying to climb up
       on the fence and they were hitting them w ith their sticks on their
       fingers ... I thought "No you're not having him", but eventually I had
       to let him go. (Paul Taylor, personal interview)

He was reunited w ith his brother-in-law, Eifion, and they stood holding each other
for a while. A num ber of fans rem ained in the pen. Sitting on the steps, in the rear
right comer, a group of between 10 and 15 talked over w hat had happened, in their
own informal 'debriefing'. Paul left, sometime after 5 pm, by the Leppings Lane exit.
Peter Power, who had been sitting on the ground since his escape from the pen left
at about the same time. Bob Jones had also decided that he could do no more. He
was glad that he was alone, as fans around him were searching and calling for
friends or relatives they had lost. He left the stadium and walked away along a row
of ambulances, "bum per to bum per".

In the gymnasium, Eileen McBride found it increasingly harrowing, and difficult to
cope. She remembered a m an who drifted in and out of consciousness: "He kept
saying 'D on't worry, please look for my boy'". She noticed two "kids" from the St
John's Ambulance, taking names of the missing and compiling a list of those already
dead. She helped two police officers who were searching the dead for evidence of
identification, but then she decided "'I can't do this' and left them ... I'd just had
enough".


                                           86
Survivors in the Im m ediate Afterm ath

As Eileen left the gymnasium, she realised that she had no knowledge as to the
whereabouts of her partner, w ith whom she had travelled to the match. She had no
tickets for the return journey to Liverpool, and no money. She w ent back towards
the pitch and was challenged by a police officer who asked her where she was going.

      I said to him "I've got no money, no ticket home, I'm on my own". He
      said "W hat do you w ant me to do about it? The ground's been empty
      for ages". I walked away and onto the pitch. A kid came up ... he was
      screaming that he had lost his mate. I started walking towards
      Leppings Lane and then I heard the shout "Let's go!". It was ... (her
      partner). H e'd been looking for me.

Those fans who were able to leave Hillsborough and begin their journeys home were
left to comprehend the enormity of w hat had happened. Many, like Peter Power
and Sue Swift, tried to telephone their families, realising that they w ould be worried.
Although queues were long, local people allowed fans to use their home telephones.
Many rem ained uncertain as to the fate of friends or family who had gone w ith them
to the match. Bob Jones, walking back to his car alone remembered the atmosphere
around him:

      It was just unbelieveable. A lot of people were just running around,
      mad, looking for someone else. There were fellas just sitting there on
      walls, stunned. (Bob Jones, personal interview)

At the coaches people w aited for others to return, growing increasingly anxious
about those missing. Peter Power was the last to arrive at his coach, bringing delight
and relief to those waiting. Nobody from his coach had died. On other coaches the
uncertainty was not so quickly resolved. Sue Swift remembers one fan returning to
her coach w ithout his brother:

      He was completely manic, no shoes or nothing. Then we were like
      trawling around the hospitals ... We found him in the hospital (at about
      7.30 pm). H e'd broken his arm. (Sue Swift, personal interview)

Peter Carney was one of those who had been taken to hospital. Although he had lost
the use of his legs and his powers of speech, this did not strike him as im portant at
the time. He was alive. When he reached hospital he was examined and x-rayed
and the feeling began to return to his legs. He felt extreme pain in his chest. He
praised the hospital staff, describing the scenes as:

      Madness ... no, not madness, and not panic, but people flying
      everywhere. The doctor came in and his eyes were so big, and his head
      was all over the place, bouncing around you know, not that he rushed
      treating me, you know, he gave me a full examination. But it was busy.
      (Peter Carney, personal interview)


                                          87
Despite the fact that he was allocated a bed on a w ard, Peter was determ ined to
leave. He "chased" his mate to go back for the car and to find out w hat had
happened to their three friends. Peter felt that his injuries did not w arrant him
"wasting" a much-needed hospital bed. He explained his thoughts:

       How do I get out of here? I've got to get out of here, I can't stay here.
       Because I knew that there was people dead in there. I knew that there
       was people badly injured and I knew that whatever injuries I had, they
       w eren't nothing compared to no-one else.

At first he was told that he could not leave the hospital for at least twenty-four hours
but he consciously tried to relax himself. An hour later he asked to see a doctor. His
blood pressure had dropped, and he told the doctor (falsely) that his pain was no
longer intense, and then he was allowed to go home w ith his friend.

For many survivors the journey back to Liverpool had an unreal, dream-like quality,
punctuated by the radio reports of an ever-increasing death-toll. Paul Taylor, unable
to cry, was told by a friend that he spent the whole journey staring at the window.
Sue Swift was "gone" by then:

       From getting in that ground and looking at the terraces it was like my
       head had gone in a bubble. I couldn't break out of it for days, weeks. I
       was just sitting there on my own. I m ean I knew m ost people there but
       I was on my own. I was just like angry you know ... devastated ...
       everybody was just ripped apart. (Sue Swift, personal interview)

Even in the hours that immediately followed the disaster some of those who
survived already w ere thinking about how they w ould "manage" the impact of the
experience on their lives. Bob Jones drove over to his partner's parents in
Manchester, before returning to Bristol w ith her. On M onday he was starting a new
job in Bristol as a m anager and it was to be their "big break". The significance of the
change had been heightened for him by the news that morning, that Jill, his partner,
was expecting their first child. As he drove to Manchester he thought:

       I've just got to put it behind me. That's where things started going
       wrong because I knew that Jill couldn't handle i t ... I don't think that
       she could have looked after me, if I had opened up to her. I bottled it
       up because I had to start this new job on the Monday. I did n 't even
       know if anybody I knew was dead, because we had to drive back to
       Bristol on the Sunday. Shutting it off, it seemed so easy at the time.
       (Bob Jones, personal interview)

Paul Taylor returned to Liverpool to a "hero's welcome". From the stands his
friends had seen him pulling people out of the pile in the pens and trying to revive
them. In passing on the news that he was safe they had described his actions. When
the taxi pulled up outside his house a crowd had gathered.



                                          88
       When we got home the street was, well, people from dow n the street
       who I'd never seen, they were all standing outside our house as we
       pulled up in the taxi, and me m ate's wife said "H ere's the hero". And
       I, I didn't feel like the hero, I just w anted to come into the house. I just
       sat on a chair in the kitchen and they said at the time that I was starting
       to "go", rocking backwards and forwards, and they were trying to
       calm me down. And it was only when Julie came in w ith Michael (his
       son, aged six weeks) that I reacted, bursting out in tears that had been
       held back. And they said that I w ent uncontrollable, holding onto the
       baby, and they had to call the doctor to knock me out, put me to bed
       and put me on Diazepam, and for nearly nine m onths after it was like
       one big buzz ... My own doctor w ent m ad when he found out ... For
       about two weeks after I couldn't really remember anything about
       Hillsborough. (Paul Taylor, personal interview)

Eileen McBride, despite having helped amid the chaos of the gymnasium, left
Hillsborough unacknowledged. It was a silent train journey back to Liverpool,
where they were met by police officers asking people to ring home to let relatives
know that they were safe. She and her partner w ent into a packed pub, where the
television was on.

       John Smith (Liverpool FC Chairman) was going on about Liverpool not
       getting back into Europe. People w ent berserk:"Tum that shit off!"
       (Eileen McBride, personal interview)

She recognised that her partner was in shock. She told him not to drink too much
and to eat something. On their way to collect their baby they stopped at a chip shop,
but they could not eat and w ent on to her m other's house. Her partner:

      ... sat w ith the baby ... he never spoke ... he was going into shock. We
      left at about one in the morning. He sat in the chair w ith the baby until
      5 am then put the baby to bed. He was up again at 7 am. He w ouldn't
      answer the phone to the family and he left at about 11 am ... He
      functioned on: "It didn't happen".

Peter Power arrived back in Liverpool, leaving the coach at Priory Road, near
Anfield football ground. There seemed to be thousands of people waiting for
coaches to return. After reading the latest estimates of the dead in the Liverpool Echo
Pink he made his way home. It "hit him" on the Sunday. His brother came to the
house to see if he was well. Later he saw his mother. Her cousin had been killed in
the disaster and she had visited the family.

      (Peter's brother) ... burst out crying and then I burst out crying. I was
      going worse then. I was crying my eyes out on the couch, and my
      m am 's crying, it was terrible. (Peter Power, personal interview)




                                           89
The next day he w ent to work where a colleague showed him the Daily Mirror. He
was in the two page photograph of fans being crushed. He was shocked by how
close he was to those being crushed at the front of the crowd. He felt that he could
not stay at work and was allowed to leave, going w ith his boss to Liverpool's
ground at Anfield. Peter found his w ork colleagues and boss very supportive in the
following weeks. He did not seek counselling nor other help in the immediate
aftermath, although he was aware that others did. Further, he did not speak to the
police, claim compensation or approach the disaster fund. As far as he was
concerned, "I was lucky to be alive, that was my rew ard".

While all survivors were outraged at the m edia coverage of Hillsborough, it was
particularly difficult for those living away from Liverpool. In Bristol, Bob Jones felt
that people did not understand; it was not "their" disaster. His only contact w ith
Hillsborough was through the media, and he collected all the new spapers as they
covered the disaster. Despite this he tried to take his m ind off his personal
experiences through work:

      I was working twelve hours a day ... trying to keep myself busy. And
      Jill, of course, she was w orried about me. I remember she said things
      like I should stop buying all the newspapers, because I was buying
      every new spaper ... I just felt so isolated dow n there ... I'd be at work, or
      I'd be out and just through talking, som ebody'd find out I was there.
      And they'd ask "Did people really piss on the (dead) fans?" "Were
      people really going through their pockets?" And that put a different
      angle on things, a different edge. Then it became frightening that.
      You're thinking like, "Hold on, everybody is believing this". (Bob
      Jones, personal interview)

In Liverpool, on the M onday after the disaster, Peter Carney bought a football w ith
the intention of placing it on the penalty spot at Anfield which he had heard was
open to fans. This he did, w riting a message on the ball:

      I was doing something that I thought was of use to the dead, you know
      w hat I mean, or paying my respects, or something like th a t... Although
      taking a ball and putting it on the penalty spot, it doesn't seem like a
      norm al way to m ourn the dead does it? It's just spontanaeity isn't it?
      Just responding in the way that you think at the time. (Peter Carney,
      personal interview)

On the Tuesday, returning to the ground he decided to make a banner, a tribute to
the dead, which he completed by the Friday.

Sue Swift m anaged to ring home before her family had seen the news of the disaster.
After a quiet day on the Sunday, she returned to work at a local university the
following day. She later learned that the university had arranged counselling for
those employees affected by the disaster. Unfortunately, the person in her
departm ent who took the telephone call about the initiative told the caller that


                                           90
nobody in the departm ent had been involved. It was seven m onths later, finding
herself increasingly irritable and emotional, that she contacted Liverpool Social
Services.

Surviving: Epilogue

Although Peter Power continued working, he had frequent flashbacks to the
disaster. He found that they happened particularly if he was on his own in the
house. He could feel the barrier moving. The flashbacks m ade him realise that he
needed to talk to someone about his experiences and, having heard of the Centre set
up by Social Services, he called in after a Liverpool match. An evening group for
survivors was set up and he was invited to attend. Although he felt that it was a
necessary process to go through, the prospect scared him:

      The funny thing was I actually got there early and w aited by the
      church on the comer. And I'm saying to myself "If nobody goes in, I'm
      not going in, I'm not going in on my own" and I couldn't see anyone
      going in. When I w ent in it was packed. They all had cars and they'd
      come round the back! (Peter Power, personal interview)

According to his partner, Paul Taylor became w ithdraw n in the weeks following the
disaster, sitting around "like a zombie". He w ould not wash, whereas normally, as a
m an who worked in dirty jobs, he was meticulous over personal hygiene.

      I started smashing things. If I had a cup in my hand, next m inute it
      w ould be going at the wall ... I just had a cob on for nothing. These
      doors are solid now, because it was costing us a fortune w ith the
      panels. It got that bad in the end ... there was a wood shop up the
      road, he actually cut me an eight by four sheet of ply into squares to fit
      the panels, because I was doing it regular, every week I was smashing
      doors and pulling them off walls. I had never done that in my life. I
      knew I was doing it but I just couldn't stop it I was so angry ... We had
      a dinner table, and I just punched and split that up w ith my f is t... the
      baby's high chair, I just wrecked that one day ...' (Paul Taylor, personal
      interview)

Eventually he was persuaded to go to a church for a memorial service for someone
who had been killed in the disaster. This made m atters worse:

      When they started playing "Walk On" I just w ent m ad and I went
      outside and I was shaking. And by the time we got home, me and this
      other lad ... we were so w ound up that they actually got an ambulance
      and took us to hospital and I spent the night being spoken to by a
      psychiatrist. They had to tie my hands onto the wheelchair because the
      nurses said they were frightened. I w ouldn't walk anywhere, and by
      now I think I had shot up to about eighteen stone from my original
      twelve and a half because I used to eat all the food in the house, even


                                          91
       baking p o w d er... Anything that was in the cupboard I w ould just get it
       out and eat it, flour, you know, it was fucking stupid.

Although he felt he had to give up his job, he later obtained casual work as a
bricklayer and a labourer. He became depressed, crying for m uch of the time.
Visited by a local social worker on a daily basis eventually he agreed to attend the
newly established Centre. He was led in by the hand by another fan feeling "like a
little kid going to school on the first day".

While he found the service at the Centre generally helpful, his distress was made
worse by his agreem ent to help the police in their investigations. He remembered
somebody checking one young fan's pulse as he tried to help her and later recalled
that the hand that had come over his shoulder had been gloved. W hen he
mentioned this to the deceased girl's parents they told the investigating police. The
police officers then visited Paul.

       He said "Well you never mentioned (the glove) in your statem ent you
       gave to the first police officers ... (or to the psychiatrist)". I said "Well,
       I'm remembering things now, that I'd blanked out of my m ind ..." He
       said "Well do you know if you say this and it is proved not to be true it
       is perjury and you could be fined or even (go to) jail". Well me and
       Julie, once he left we spoke about it and we thought it was best not to
       say nothing about it again because at the time, Julie w asn't working, I
       was on a crap wage, and Michael was only young and she was saying
       "I don't w ant you to go to prison and leave me and Michael". So when
       (her) parents got in touch again, I said it was a mistake, and I don't
       think they was very happy.

Bob Jones felt that the after-effects of the disaster cost him his job, and his family's
big chance:

      (Hillsborough) was always on your m ind ... and th at'd stop you, you'd
      forget to put an order in, or set the machinery a certain way and you
      lost your management skills. You w ent to extremes, so you were
      (either) narky and nobody could talk to you ... or you'd let them do
      w hat they wanted. So instead of getting things running smoothly,
      sometimes I'd just be in the store-room where I knew I could be on my
      own. (Bob Jones, personal interview)

Feeling that taking leave w ould have been difficult at the firm for which he worked,
he never went to see a doctor, nor took time off for illness. There were no teams of
disaster social workers in Bristol. His only involvement w ith official agencies was
when the police interviewed him after he called their advertised telephone line.
Even this caused problems, however, as they called at his home on a day different to
that arranged, and he received a telephone call from Jill while he was at work.
Feeling that he could not tell his new boss that he had to go home to meet the CID,
he left work w ithout telling anybody. He w orked u n til 1 am the next m orning to


                                            92
make up the lost time. When he returned home, he was unim pressed w ith the police
questionnaire. At the time he considered that it was comprised largely of 'yes' or
'no' answers that could be easily m anipulated. When he replied to a question
concerning violence, that he had seen police officers hitting fans and pushing them
back into the pens, he was told that this was not w hat was m eant by the question.
Subsequently he was not called to give evidence at the public inquiry or the
coroner's inquests. Eventually, the difficulties he was experiencing at work came to
a head:

      The job was pretty straightforward but if the results w eren't there, it
      stopped at me. And my m ind w asn't on the job, and (my boss) asked
      me to step down from the position but I ended up leaving altogether...

Watching other survivors on television he related to the anger that they were
expressing, and felt he was missing out on something by staying in the South. The
family returned to Liverpool. Their 'big break' had ended.

      I felt like I'd missed out on so much. They had like a m inutes silence in
      the city, I missed out on that. I never w ent up to the ground, to
      Anfield. It's like someone who has been away at sea, or in the army, or
      in jail even and everything just seems different.

Eileen McBride's partner w ent back to work two days after the disaster, and carried
on working for about four years. He suffered from flashbacks while he was
working, and began drinking to stop them.

      He was w orking sixteen hours a day, no sleep, then "crash" ... he was
      sacked from work. He w ouldn't agree to work seeing his medical
      notes. (Eileen McBride, personal interview)

Eileen considered that w ith her nursing experience she w ould be able to cope.
Hillsborough, however, was not the same as a bad night in the Accident and
Emergency Department. She found that she could not get up in the morning:

      Twelve m onths minimum of feeling numb, robotic. Things I did felt
      outside myself, just mechanical. I was angry at people, telling them to
      leave me alone but doing things that, when I think back/w ere just
      bizarre. I was terrified that anyone w ould stop and speak to me.
      Going to the shops I'd run and just rush back. Do they really w ant to
      know how I feel? I was weighing up all the time w hat they wanted to
      h e a r... I taught myself to give the 'right' response.

Eileen never w ent back to nursing. She was unable to face the thought of casualty
work, or of being questioned about Hillsborough.




                                         93
Responding to Survivors

While the above accounts of survivors' experiences focus on the 1989 Hillsborough
disaster they are not unique to that event. People respond in different ways to the
chaos and confusion of the 'm om ent'. There is much conjecture and, more recently,
some lim ited research into why certain individuals survive while others perish.
Given the chance involved in surviving as opposed to dying, it seems a misdirected,
if not callous, task to attem pt to discover w hat may be 'key factors' in certain
personalities that aid survival. Hillsborough survivors' accounts, along w ith the
testimonies of many others, clearly indicate that they believed that survival was
dictated prim arily by luck rather than judgement. W here people are located on
ships that sink or aircraft that catch fire; where people find themselves in crowds or
on underground platforms; how proximate people are to explosions or points of
impact; rarely are these calculated judgements taken purposefully to reduce or
minimise risk.

Survivors not only experience the full, personal horror of the struggle to live in
terrifying circumstances, they also endure the full impact of the death of others. As
the accounts show, people are typically unselfish in their attem pts to help others.
Survivors often are the first rescuers, doing their best to resuscitate and to revive,
trying to lessen pain and minimise injury. These are heroic and life-saving acts
performed in the w orst imaginable situations. Personal anguish, including the
sights, sounds, smells and emotions of disaster, is deep but not realised fully in the
immediate aftermath. While the emotional impact happened w ithin hours of the
event it was preceded by a kind of 'num bness' or vacant period. There is no
blueprint or all-inclusive agenda for dealing w ith the full range of emotions and
responses present in the immediate afterm ath, but it is clear that as m uch attention is
required for responding to the emotional or psychosocial strain as is required for
physical injury. All of those interviewed, and this is consistent w ith survivors'
accounts from other disasters or traumatic events, subsequently experienced
flashbacks to the disaster. Im portantly, however, the flashbacks were not confined
to the 'm om ent' or the circumstances in which people struggled to live. They
included strong images of the immediate afterm ath, the period post-evacuation
when the actual disaster had ended.

For many survivors, guilt is a heavy burden carried long-term through their lives.
There is a guilt, well-documented, attached to survival but also there is a guilt that
whatever the quality of personal intervention, it was not sufficient or it could have
been better. One of the rescuers on the Hurlingham remembers only a woman he did
not save rather than those that he did. At Hillsborough those who gave resuscitation
invariably cannot remember how many people they helped recover but they
remember vividly those who died. This range of experience and, accordingly, the
emotions and traum a accompanying it, is now established. Just as the processes for
handling the bereaved require sound preparation, planning and delivery so crisis
support m ust put in place appropriate frameworks for identifying and meeting the
needs of survivors and witnesses in the immediate aftermath.



                                          94
                   KEY FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS



The research raises a range of complex and inter-related issues concerning the
organisational and adm inistrative responses to the immediate afterm ath of disasters
and other traum atising events. From the above accounts, and the in-depth
interviews w ith the bereaved and survivors of three disasters, there is little doubt
that after the rescue and evacuation phase has ended, the structures and processes
mobilised fail the bereaved. Given Lord Cullen's comments in his investigation of
the Dunblane shootings, there is recent evidence that the institutional failures of the
late 1980s have yet to be addressed effectively. While there is some evidence that in
certain local authorities emergency planning extends to include a comprehensive
response to the immediate aftermath, the reality has been one of spontaneous, ad hoc
decision-making w ithin contexts of understandable confusion.

Ironically, it is the very dynamics of such highly-charged situations that create the
necessity for w ell-prepared agency interventions and effective, negotiated and
appropriate responses to the needs of those caught up in such tragedies. W hat this
research dem onstrates so starkly is that the needs of the bereaved, of survivors and
of rescuers, are often neglected. If identified, such needs become subordinated to the
professional priorities of agencies charged w ith the responsibility for establishing
systems and processes once rescue and evacuation has been realised.

W hat is also evident from the research is that on reflection the bereaved and
survivors have a considered position on w hat their needs were during the
immediate afterm ath but that the circumstances inhibited their judgements at the
time. It is im portant that such reflective understanding is utilised in the construction
of future policy and practice. Significant here is the flow of information, the
provision of choices and the support of advocacy. These guiding principles apply to
all developments which occur in the course of the immediate afterm ath including:
the known circumstances of the disaster; the known numbers of dead and injured;
the process of identification; the viewing of bodies; visiting the site; statement-
taking; return of the body and personal effects; crisis support. These principles
should be established and realised not in a context of benevolent provision but as
part of a broader acceptance that the bereaved and survivors have rights as well as
personal needs. The recommendations that follow represent a framework within
which such rights can be recognised, provided for and safeguarded.

Responding to the Needs of the Bereaved

The research concludes that the consequences of the institutional subordination of
needs (the bereaved, survivors, rescuers) are several. There is a marked failure to
provide the bereaved w ith information, both general and specific. While the
circumstances of disasters often create difficulties for agencies in gathering and
disseminating reliable information, there is substantial evidence that even when such
evidence is gathered there remains a marked reluctance to share it w ith the


                                           95
bereaved. Further, the research finds that facilities provided for the bereaved on
their reception at, or near, the site and the sensitivity shown to them, is regularly
lacking. Accurate and reliable systems of record-keeping and consideration and
understanding of personal circumstances are often absent. Often, universal
judgements are m ade concerning the 'protection' of survivors and the bereaved
which lead to the w ithholding of inform ation and the denial of access to the
deceased. These are m atters for negotiation and should not lead to blanket policy
decisions.

Inappropriate facilities are often used for the purpose of holding bodies and their
identification. While the concept of 'tem porary m ortuary7 m ight be expedient in
planning for body-holding in the immediate afterm ath, the actual identity of the
facility rem ains the same. At Hillsborough, for example, the Sheffield W ednesday
gymnasium rem ained a gymnasium, not a tem porary m ortuary, for those who
attended to identify their loved ones. Adequate location and arrangem ents for
viewing are im portant priorities and appropriate facilities m ust be provided quickly,
sensitively and efficiently. In the disasters studied, and there is evidence recorded in
the literature review that this is commonplace, the bereaved considered that their
rights to view and have contact w ith the deceased were denied or curtailed.
Inevitably, following a disaster where bodies are difficult to recover or are severely
damaged, delays will occur and time will be necessary to identify individuals.
Relatives are aware of this and have an obvious interest in ensuring the accuracy of
pathological and forensic investigations.

However, bereaved relatives in this study were concerned that they were given
insufficient inform ation and, in some circumstances, were misinformed about the
nature and progress of official procedures. This was particularly the case over
identification. Significant here were examples of lack of access coupled w ith lack of
knowledge of decisions taken concerning the bodies. The removal of hands in the
case of the Marchioness disaster is a particularly disturbing example of the denial of
information and the denial of access. The issue of access is not straightforw ard, as
official guidelines suggest that it is preferable for viewing to take place after bodies
have been rem oved to undertakers. Yet many relatives expressed the desire for
immediate access and delays, which can am ount to several days, can cause deep
anxiety and frustration. N ot only did relatives find that in some cases access
continued to be denied by funeral directors, but there was also evidence that many
relatives wanted access early in the process. W hat has to be achieved here is a
procedure which maximises choice, which enables early access and allows the
bereaved to take informed decisions about viewing, proximity and contact. The
presentation of bodies, however, should always take account of environment,
appearance and the dignity of the deceased. As a policy based on inform ed research,
the blanket denial of physical access to bodies in unsustainable.

W hat the research suggests is that even when bodies were easily recovered and
viewed for identification purposes, the authorities failed to take account of the
significance of viewing and touching the deceased as part of the grieving process.
The lim iting of access on the basis of 'ow nership' was both insensitive and offensive.


                                          96
Technically, coronial jurisdiction m ight define bodies as the 'property7 of the coroner
but this m ust be sensitively handled. At the heart of the problems surrounding the
processes adopted in the immediate afterm ath is professional convenience in the
context of medial a n d / or crim inal/civil investigation. It is vital that those involved
in the procedures of investigation are rem inded that the bereaved are dealing with
the death, and the lives, of loved ones rather than w ith 'bodies'. It is a m atter of
necessity, as it is of hum anity, in death as in birth, that relatives and close friends are
provided w ith the opportunity to view, touch, caress and kiss the deceased. The
recommendations reflect the range and complexity of these issues.

Recommendations

       The reception and accommodation of the bereaved should incorporate an appropriate
       physical environment with necessary emotional, psychosocial and material support.

       The bereaved, from the moment of first contact, should be kept fully informed and
       accurately briefed on all developments relating to the disaster and its aftermath.

       All agencies involved should undertake to provide accurate information and to uphold
       ihe bereaved's right to privacy in being given information relating to the death of their
       loved one.

      Information specific to the deaths of individuals, including notification of the death to
      the bereaved, should not be delayed or withheld until all o f the identities are known.

      Information concerning the circumstances and details of the deaths should not be
      shared betiveen agencies or their workers to the exclusion of the bereaved.

      Reception centres and mortuaries should be staffed at all levels by trained crisis
      support teams deploying appropriate skills necessary to deal with the diverse demands
      of sudden bereavement.

      If photographs are used as part of the identification process they should be of good
      quality, sensitively reproduced and presented according to categories such as sex and
      age.

      Procedures of body identification should be established and administered with care
      and sensitivity prioritising the identified needs of the bereaved and enabling privacy.

      Body identification should be considered a crucial element within the grieving process
      and it should provide the bereaved with time and opportunity to be with their loved
      one.

      The bereaved, other than in exceptional circumstances, should be allowed to touch,
      hold or caress the body o f the deceased.




                                             97
       The dead should be presented to the bereaved with dignity, fully recognising and
       endorsing the significance of this moment within the context of grieving.

       Body bags should not be used in the presentation of the deceased to the bereaved.

       Proper facilities, including medical and crisis support, should be provided for the
       bereaved before and after identification.

      Temporary or makeshift body holding areas, however professionally convenient,
      should be provisions of last resort.

Responding to the N eeds of Survivors

The research shows that surviving disaster does not create a universally applicable
category of 'survivors'. They m ight also be bereaved, they may have been rescuers
and, by definition, they will be witnesses. As w ith the bereaved who arrived 'on
site', survivors in the study found themselves caught between conflicting
psychosocial and investigative or security agendas. Further, many survivors left the
site and became difficult to trace after the event. Part of the organised response to
the immediate afterm ath should be the recording, wherever possible, of survivors'
details for future contact. They should be informed of, and given access to, crisis
support as soon after the disaster as possible. Careful consideration should be given
to how support agencies offer services to survivors traum atised by their experiences.
It is not acceptable that rescuers from emergency services are offered debriefing and
follow-up counselling while rescuer-survivors are left to walk away alone. Crisis
support for survivors in the immediate afterm ath, however, should not be conflated
w ith the processes of investigation.

Recommendations

      It should be recognised that survivors zvill generate a diversity of needs in the
      immediate aftermath relating to a combination of personal experiences, material
      circumstances and their relationships to others involved.

      Crisis support provision should be adaptive and flexible in identifying and responding
      to this diversity of needs among survivors.

      There should be recognition of the part played by survivors in the rescue and
      evacuation phase o f disasters.

      A reception centre or area should be established in which survivors can be
      accommodated and provided for; it should be staffed and administered by crisis
      support teams.

      Survivors should be encouraged to leave their names and addresses and, if requested,
      be given the opportunity to discuss any issues zvith support workers in private and in
      confidence.


                                            98
       Provision should be made, where appropriate, for survivors' accommodation, travel,
       transport and communication with relatives orfriends.

       Survivors should be kept fully informed on all details relating to the disaster, its
       aftermath and agency responses including planned investigations and inquiries.

       No formal statements should be taken from survivors by investigating agencies in the
       immediate aftermath.

       Survivors should be issued with contact telephone numbers to enable further advice
       and support if and when necessary.

Inter-Agency Cooperation in the Im m ediate Afterm ath of Disasters

It is a m atter of serious concern that substantial suffering among the bereaved,
survivors and rescue workers resulted from organisational responses to the three
disasters studied. It is of further concern that in the immediate afterm ath of
Dunblane, which occurred as recently as March 1996, a similar pattern emerged. Yet
this tragedy occurred several years after the publication and w ide dissem ination of
official guidelines concerning psychosocial support. W hat the repeated institutional
failings dem onstrate is an organisational, structural and professional disregard for
effective m ulti-disciplinary support work informing crucial decisions in the
immediate aftermath. The research finds, in accordance w ith some of the literature,
that the relevance of powerful and conflicting professional agendas is not
understood. Exclusion or denial of the bereaved and survivors is not purposeful but
occurs because in the bureaucratic and political afterm ath of disasters their interests
are not adequately represented. Agencies, and officials charged w ith investigative
and order/security responsibilities, dominate post-disaster inter-agency
relationships and the decision-making process. It is a dominance derived in, and
underpinned by, a combination of factors including m aterial and personnel
resources, statute and guidelines, perceived expertise and 'custom and practice'.
The coroner and the police together represent a formidable alliance in ensuring the
primacy of investigative interests. They are supported by far-reaching discretionary
powers informally reinforced by the deference of other agencies.

The overwhelming evidence shows that crisis support agencies identify their role
primarily as supporting the police. This is compounded by the relative slowness in
mobilising effective and informed crisis support in contrast to the police whose role
as part of emergency services has consolidated as the 'lead agency' before other
agencies are present. This is not to minimise the work of those who volunteer their
services and support immediately after a disaster. The ad hoc psychosocial responses
in the immediate aftermath, however, often reduce the effectiveness of interventions
on behalf of the bereaved and survivors w hen set against the priorities of the
investigative agencies. Further, an over-reliance on the increasingly popular belief
in 'disaster counselling' underm ines the significance of assertive advocacy in
securing the identified needs of the bereaved and survivors. Agencies m ust
recognise the implications and consequences of their operational decisions,


                                           99
particularly the im pact of imposed medico-legal priorities, on the psychosocial well­
being of the bereaved and survivors. Such psychosocial needs cannot be m et unless
detailed planning for the immediate afterm ath has taken place between agencies in
preparation for disaster. For the interests of those affected by disaster to be
effectively represented in this process the agencies providing psychosocial expertise
m ust be properly resourced, and appropriately oriented. 'Cooperation' and 'm ulti­
disciplinary' approaches should incorporate all foreseeable interests and
'stakeholders'. Clearly, those who are bereaved in disaster cannot be identified in
advance and cannot participate directly in disaster planning. Professional groups
w ith responsibility for psychosocial care in the locality should be centrally involved.
Further, the perspectives of those bereaved in previous disasters should be sought.
Conflicts between the different priorities should be open and constructively
addressed.

Recommendations

      The guiding principle in responding to the immediate aftermath o f disasters should be
      the provision o f appropriate facilities and support; identifying and prioritising the
      needs of survivors, the bereaved and those who work with them in a caring capacity.

      There should be full cooperation between all agencies concerned with the immediate
      aftermath o f disasters with designated crisis support agencies/teams taking the lead
      role in assessing the needs of the bereaved, survivors and others affected.

      Inter-agency cooperation should be established to guarantee a coherent, planned and
      fully negotiated approach to the immediate aftermath o f disasters and related,
       traumatic events.

      Crisis support, as part of its preparation, should involve regular meetings and
      consultation with 'opposite numbers' in other agencies, particularly the police.

      Second-phase planning should involve detailed strategies for organising,
      administering and processing the aftermath thus minimising the potential for
      inappropriate decisions taken in the 'heat o f the moment'.

      All agencies involved in post-disaster provision o f services should be required, as part
      o f second-phase planning, to submit a thorough overview and evaluation o f their
      response and performance to the heal authority.

      In the immediate aftermath the demands o f policy or other agency investigations
      should not necessarily take priority over the identification process and the rights of
      the bereaved.




                                            100
Responding to the Immediate Aftermath: Local Authorities

It is clear from the research that in securing inter-agency cooperation and effective
crisis support local authorities are the key bodies in terms of planning, co-ordination
and resources - as well as responsibility. The recommendations are:

Recommendations

       Local authorities should assume the lead role in preparing for the aftermath of
       disasters, in establishing crisis support teams and in ensuring that effective inter­
       agency partnerships and 'second-phase' procedures are operational within their
       emergency plans.

       Local authority-based crisis support should incorporate workers from social services
       (the lead agency), statutory and non-statutory and voluntary agencies within a
       programme of integrated training and regular review.

       Local authorities should receive funding and resources from central government to
       develop and maintain provision for second-phase planning.

       Local authorities should be guaranteed central government grant-aid to meet the costs
       o f developing post-disaster crisis support.

      Local authorities should ensure that all departments are conversant with the disaster
      plan, are adequately briefed concerning roles and responsibilities and have a clear
      understanding o f the rationale and strategies adoptedfor crisis support.

      As part of disaster planning local authorities should establish provision for intensive
      media coverage including centralised facilities, close liaison with agencies and
      consultation with local press officers.

Crisis Support in the A fterm ath of Disasters

Within the above context of local authority responsibility for co-ordinating effective
inter-agency cooperation, specific plans and priorities for crisis support can be
established. Such planning m ust accept that each disaster is different, and that the
unpredictability of disaster will demand efficient, imaginative and flexible
mechanisms for planning in the immediate aftermath. As the afterm ath develops
feedback between agencies should be central to this process, along w ith the
recognition that one agency's actions will affect others, and members of the public,
directly involved. This is not to imply that nothing can be planned beforehand. On
the contrary, contingency planning, and the organisational and personal
relationships forged during inter-agency planning, will be crucial to effective
responses.




                                           101
It is im portant that local authorities give careful attention to their responsibilities for
the preparation and resourcing of crisis support. It is w rongly assumed that workers
can be expected to transfer easily into post-disaster work simply by virtue of a
professional qualification and there is evidence of inter-professional rivalry in the
expanding field of post-traum a and traum atic loss. The reality is that day-to-day
work in relevant occupations does not necessarily provide com petent post-disaster
workers. The indiscrim inate use of the term 'counselling', w ithin a variety of
professions, obscures the frequent lack of specific counselling qualifications actually
held by personnel. Further, the skills and qualities needed vary both across post­
disaster phases and between individual service users. Sensitive listening skills, or
even psychotherapeutic skills, may be needed in one situation, while practical and
knowledgeable assertive advocacy may be needed in another. The occupational
background that m ight be helpful after a disaster involving children m ight be
significantly different from a disaster involving the elderly.

W hatever the range of personnel available, and the variety of skills, considerable
attention should be given to training. The role of crisis teams needs to be clear, and
should go beyond supporting activities of the investigative agencies. Teams should
seek to be aware of, and to promote, the rights, needs and interests of those who are
affected by disaster. Familiarity w ith the roles, discretionary powers and key


It is a m atter for serious concern that many local disaster plans do not envisage crisis
teams being in place w ithin 24 hours. It is not acceptable that up to that point the
only balance to the institutional priorities of police and coroner should be an ad hoc
and unprepared collection of variously qualified volunteers. Social services
emergency duty staff ordinarily are not equipped for disaster response. Usually,
only a handful of staff are available for out-of-hours work. It is clear that any serious
attem pt to prevent future m istreatm ent of the bereaved and survivors requires
immediate response by appropriately prepared staff.

Recommendations

      An essential part of second-phase planning should be agreed principles for assessment
      of the needs of the bereaved, survivors and others in the immediate aftermath.

      As part o f crisis support planning there should be:

      i       a full audit of available professional skills unthin the agencies involved;
      ii      a training or recruitment strategy in response to any skills deficit identified;
      iii     an agreed protocol for the involvement of other 'care' agencies, such as the
              churches.

      A professional skills audit should identify the strengths within statutory and
      voluntary sector agencies, particularly regarding comparable work in non-disaster
      settings.



                                            102
       Crisis support teams, and their providers, should receive full training and regular
       reviews with clear indication of their role, expectations and potential implications of
       the work.

       Crisis support training should include the perspectives of the bereaved and survivors.

      Crisis support teams should be resourced to provide 24-hour cover, across each local
      authority, far immediate deployment.

      Advocacy, in dealing with agencies in the immediate aftermath, should be identified
      as a major element and responsibility of effective crisis support work.

       Crisis support work should also include infarmed advice, such as that provided by
       Disaster Action UK literature, concerning the investigative and legal processes which
      fallow on from the immediate aftermath (eg police inquiries; inquests; legal
       representation).

Responding to the Im m ediate Aftermath: Central Governm ent

The failings evident in disaster response cannot be adequately addressed only at a
local level. Many of the above recommendations have resource implications.
Consequently, attention needs to be given to the role of central governm ent in
prom oting good quality post-disaster services. It is also clear that in some aspects
the power imbalance between agencies after disaster is underpinned by statute and
guidelines. While there is much that psychosocial agencies can accomplish, the
systematic subordination of the interests of the bereaved and survivors raises
im portant questions about the role and powers of the coroners and police requiring
attention at central government level.

Recommendations

       Central government guidelines on emergency planning should include an operational
      framework far the provision of crisis support in the immediate aftermath of disasters.

      This framework should provide guidance on nationally agreed strategies for
      psychosocial support, appropriate central funding and procedures for evaluation.

      Through adequate resourcing and review processes, central government should
      encourage local authorities to make consistent provision in their disaster plans far
      recognising and meeting the diversity of psychosocial needs in the immediate
      aftermath.

      A centrally-funded programme far research, information and training is required
      which should be located in an academic institution already associated with crisis
      support, providing a national resource.




                                            103
       Current Home Office guidance and agency guidelines should be reviewed to
       accommodate the lead role of crisis support in the immediate aftermath.

      There should be a comprehensive review undertaken of the statutory role, duties and
      obligations of the police and the coroner in dealing with disasters and other deaths in
      controversial circumstances.

A Charter for the Bereaved

Those bereaved by disaster or other traum atic events have no clear or unam biguous
rights. Unwittingly, and in shock, they enter the chaotic afterm ath not knowing
w hat to expect, often the fate of their loved ones uncertain. They have no experience
of procedures or expectations and find the different roles and powers of those
agencies that they encounter to be confusing. Direction comes prim arily from the
police who take decisions in consultation w ith the coroner. The research shows that
this collaboration has failed to show sensitivity or establish appropriate procedures
in accommodating the needs of the bereaved. Psychosocial workers often have
lim ited knowledge or experience of the procedures which follow deaths in
controversial circumstances. The bereaved, therefore, should receive precise
information concerning their rights at all levels. A Charter for the Bereaved
represents a starting-point for the institution of such rights.

Recommendations

      Central government should initiate the fullest possible consultation, involving
      bereaved and survivor campaign and advocacy groups, with the intention of
      establishing a Charterfar the Bereaved.

      The Charter should provide a clear overview of the statutory role and obligations of
      the police and the coroner, distinguishing between such obligations and discretionary
      practices.

      The Charter should provide a statement of rights for the bereaved concerning:
      information; viewing of the body; identification; post-mortems; return of the body;
      return of personal effects; access to the disaster site; crisis support.

      The Charter should be published and made available to those who suffer sudden
      bereavement in controversial circumstances, in disasters or related tragedies.

      The Charter should recognise that those bereaved, injured or affected by disasters have
      a right to privacy and a right to be protected from further suffering occasioned by
      intrusive journalism.




                                           104
                                     APPENDIX



Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Origins and Definitions

While post-traumatic reactions often affect large numbers of those exposed to
traumatic events, they are not considered abnormal. Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
(PTSD), however, is a psychiatric diagnosis first included in the third edition of the
American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-III) (1980). This concluded an extensive and acrimonious campaign
by Vietnam veterans and psychiatrists following the omission of the previously
recognised combat induced disorder 'Gross Stress Reaction' from the DSM-II,
published in 1968. Its eventual successor, PTSD, was finally recognised in DSM-III
through political campaigning and because:

       ... a core of psychiatrists and veterans worked consciously and
       deliberately for years to put it there. They ultimately succeeded
       because they were better organized, more politically active, and
       enjoyed more lucky breaks than their opposition. (Scott 1990:307-308)

Although the defining criteria for PTSD have changed since 1980, its essential feature
remains the linking of a range of psychiatric symptoms, of which the num ber and
nature are defined, to the existence of a psychologically traumatic 'recognisable
stressor'. This stressor, in the revised DSM-III R (1987) had to fall "outside the range
of usual hum an experience" and "m arkedly distressing to almost anyone".

In the DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association 1994:427-428) the concept of the
stressor was tightened and further developed:

      (1) the person experienced, witnessed, or was confronted w ith an event
      or events that involved actual or threatened death or serious injury, or
      a threat to the physical integrity of self or others (and)

      (2) the person's response involved intense fear, helplessness, or horror
      (note: in children, this may be expressed instead by disorganised or
      agitated behaviour)

This traumatic experience has to be directly related to a minimum num ber of
symptoms out of each of three categories: one (or more) symptoms of the event
being re-experienced; three (or more) symptoms of avoidance or general numbing;
two (or more) symptoms of increased arousal (ibid:428).




                                          105
                         Diagnostic Symptoms of PTSD (DSM-IV)

Re-Experience Phenomena          Avoidance/Numbing                 Symptoms of Increased
(1)                              Phenomena (3)                     Arousal (2)
Recurrent and intrusive          Efforts to avoid thoughts or      Difficulty in falling/staying
distressing recollections of     feelings associated with the      asleep
event                            trauma
Recurrent distressing dreams     Efforts to avoid activities or    Irritability or outbursts of
of event                         situations     that      arouse   anger
                                 recollections of the trauma
Sudden acting or feeling as if Inability to recall an              Difficulty in concentrating
the event were recurring, important aspect of the
including a reliving of the trauma
experience,           illusions,
hallucinations,     flashbacks
etc.
Intense psychological distress Markedly diminished interest        Hypervigilance
at exposure to events that in significant activities
resemble or symbolise an
aspect of the event
Physiological reactivity on Feelings of detachment or              Exaggerated startle response
exposure to internal or estrangement from others
external cues that symbolise
or resemble an aspect of the
traumatic event
                                 Restricted range of effect
                                 Sense of foreshortened future

These symptoms m ust persist beyond one m onth for a PTSD diagnosis to be
warranted. Where symptoms occur and resolve w ithin four weeks, 'Acute Stress
Disorder' is indicated. This can be changed to a PTSD diagnosis if the symptoms
then persist beyond one month.

In DSM-IV, PTSD differs from the DSM-IIIR version in other ways. The fifth
symptom of re-experience phenomena, "physical reactivity on exposure to internal
and external cues that symbolise or resemble an aspect of the traumatic event",
previously was conceptualised as a symptom of increased arousal (ie the DSM-IIIR
w ording was: "physical reactions upon exposure to events that symbolise or
resemble an aspect of the traumatic event"). Currently, the disturbance m ust cause,
"clinically significant distress or im pairm ent in social, occupational or other
im portant areas of functioning".

Although the origins of PTSD lay in the experience of war, the diagnosis has become
widely used. Concern for the prevention of post-traumatic pathology, as well as its
treatm ent, has helped w iden its professional, official and academic scope to include
those who survive disaster and those involved in rescue and support work (Taylor
and Frazer 1982; McFarlane 1987; Alexander and Wells 1991; Mitchell 1990;


                                              106
Duckworth 1991a; Thompson 1991; Thompson and Suzuki 1991; N ewbum 1991;
Paton 1991; Dooley and G unn 1995; Erikson and Lundin 1996). W right et al (1990:37)
emphasise the extent to which people can be affected by disaster, given "... the fact
that our present w orld is linked by the news media and rapid communication".
Consequently, they argue, "Shared values, meanings, roles, and group attachments
define a more global community that may only become clearly evident at the time of
catastrophe". W hat is necessary, then, is a system of classification based not on
direct contact w ith disaster but through "Identifying the participants in a disaster
community based on their 'involvem ent' as m easured by activities, roles,
relationships, and shared meaning of the disaster" (ibid: 41).

This increased awareness of the range of people affected by disaster, has been
accompanied by recognition that their distress may be long-term. Rosenheck and
Fontana (1994) describe the enduring symptomatology of veterans of W orld W ar II,
the Korean War, and the Vietnam War. Recognition and treatm ent of PTSD is made
difficult by particular aspects of the disorder. For example, the onset of PTSD may
be delayed, and the 'pathology' of those fitting the criteria of PTSD is not necessarily
apparent as the sufferers are not always obviously 'dysfunctional'. While the rate of
immediately recognised psychiatric casualties in the Falklands/ Malvinas W ar was
only 2%, a study five years later found in one unit that 22% of veterans still serving
fulfilled the criteria for PTSD, and another 28% fulfilled three of the four criteria for
diagnosis. These were not complainants, but services' personnel who previously
had not been identified as disabled in any way by their symptoms (O'Brien and
Hughes 1991)1. This raises questions concerning the significance of socio-cultural
factors. Rosenheck and Fontana (1994:355), studying clinical samples of w ar
veterans, found that although symptomatology across veterans of three w ars was
similar, "social maladjustment" was not:

         ... (the) contemporary stereotype of the traum atized veteran has less to
         do w ith the specific problems associated w ith combat related PTSD
         than it does w ith the adaptive style of socially marginalised m en of the
         1980s. The vast majority of W orld War II veterans w ith PTSD, for
         example, are m arried. TTiese men, while deeply troubled and highly
         symptomatic, were members of a generation in which divorce was less
         acceptable and families more often stayed together through adversity.

Taken together, this appreciation of the extent of traumatic experience, and the
potential chronicity of distress, has constituted a major development in
conceptualising post-disaster needs.

Awareness of needs associated w ith less large-scale traumatic experiences has also
increased. For example, the concept of PTSD has been used to research the
psychological effects of torture and exile (Ramsay et al 1993; Lavik et al 1996) and of

  The DSM-IV, which was published subsequently, requires that for a PTSD diagnosis to be made the
disturbance should cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational or other important
areas of functioning.




                                                      107
sexual assault on women (National Victims Center 1992; Rothbaum et al 1992; Koss
et al 1987; Russell 1982, 1984; W yatt 1985; Herman et al 1986). According to one
study, 31% of rape survivors develop rape-related PTSD at some time in their
lifetimes (National Victims Center 1992). Although m ost sufferers of PTSD show
some symptom improvem ent over a two to three year period this does not apply
evenly to all symptoms; nor is it universal (Weisath 1994; Duggan and G unn 1995).
One study into PTSD in the community estimates the combined lifetime prevalence
of those w ith PTSD and those w ith sub-threshold PTSD symptoms to be 7.9% of the
population. The seriousness of such findings is underlined by research showing that
of those w ith 'full' PTSD, the disorder became chronic in 46% of cases and was
associated w ith a significant risk of attem pted suicide and a high risk of co­
morbidity for other psychiatric and chronic medical diseases (Davidson et al
1991:719).

 As the debate over definition has developed, the diagnosis of PTSD has not been
 w ithout controversy and problems. First, are issues concerning inclusion and
 exclusion w ithin the diagnosis. Prior to DSM-IV Ravin and Boal (1989) argued that
 the conceptualisation of w hat constituted a qualifying stressor was too narrow,
 wrongly excluding those stressors which were not beyond the 'usual' range of
 hum an experience and which not everyone had found distressing, but which, as the
 last of a series of stressful events, m ight have destroyed a precarious or eroded
 psychiatric equilibrium. Similarly, Scott and Stradling (1992) argued for the
 construction of another diagnostic category: 'post-duress stress disorder'. The
current DSM-IV definition of w hat constitutes a qualifying stressor has specified
criteria to the exclusion of such cases (American Psychiatric Association 1994).
 Another category, 'A djustm ent D isorder', is now suggested for those cases in which
the stressor is not considered to be sufficiently extreme yet the sym ptom pattern is
similar to PTSD; or, where the symptom response to a qualifying stressor is not
sufficiently severe to w arrant a PTSD diagnosis. Definitional changes aside, it is
difficult to conceive the distinction between 'appropriate' and 'inappropriate'
stressors and their application in an objective way. After all, its application occurs
within the context of professional assumptions, prejudices and interests, which
themselves reflect and inform dom inant belief systems w ithin w ider society. The
forced removal of a person from home, followed by prolonged incarceration, for
example, m ight be thought of as an obvious 'traum atic' event. It is unlikely,
however, that patients compulsorily detained and treated w ithin psychiatric
hospitals w ould be considered by their doctors to have been traum atised by the very
processes and institutions managed by them, ostensibly for the 'good' of their
patients. Similarly, a diagnosis of PTSD is unlikely to be considered for prisoners,
whose arrest, detention and eventual incarceration is identified as lawful and
'deserved'. Kruppa (1991:402) argues that perpetrators of violent crimes, as well as
their victims, m ight suffer traum a, but recognises that:




                                         108
       The case of the perpetrator ... involves a clear departure from existing
       usage of the diagnostic criteria of PTSD in that, though a traumatic
       event is evident, the individual is the instigator and not the victim of
       the event. Furthermore, the violence perpetrated by the individual is
       not socially sanctioned as in the case of w ar veterans.

Once an event is acknowledged as a qualifying stressor, the distressed individual
has to display the requisite num ber of symptoms in a num ber of categories. In
clinical work, and particularly for legal purposes, a categorical diagnosis of
psychiatric illness is often necessary, but creates the danger of arbitrariness. Ramsay
et al (1993:58-59), in a study of survivors of organised state violence, found that their
difficulties were better understood as "dimensional" rather than "categorical"
abnormalities. In other words, reactions to different forms of traumatic event
differed because certain symptoms were more or less likely.                   Thus, the
comparatively low "scores" on symptoms of "avoidance" for those exposed to
prolonged isolation and impact torture (possibly because avoidance defences were
deliberately broken dow n in the torture) actually m ilitated against victims receiving
a full PTSD diagnosis because this particular category was not fulfilled (ibid:58-59).
PTSD assumes patterns of post-traumatic response that are straightforward, located
w ithin the categories of 'norm al/healthy' or 'abnorm al/pathological'. A more
realistic conceptualisation is that responses m ight be greater along some dimensions
than others. Ramsay et al also suggest that such a framing of post-traum atic stress
w ould help reduce feelings of stigma among those otherwise categorised as mentally
ill (ibid:58). They conclude:

       For individual survivors, as well as for theoretical understanding, this
       is an im portant point. There may be a considerable difference between
       accepting the concept of a degree of difficulty in processing following a
       traum a and the presence of a categorical psychiatric illness ... Moreover
       it is possible that arbitrarily applied thresholds may have differing
       consequences for diagnostic frequency in different cultural groups and
       following different traumas.

The broader concern over stigm atisation ‘also raises problems w ith PTSD for those
who are not excluded and eventually receive the diagnosis. Hodgkinson and
Stewart (1991) identify the dangers in over-medicalising traum atic reactions thus
running the risk of inappropriate diagnosis leading to pharmacological as opposed
to talking therapy. The danger of stigm atisation through negative connotations of
psychiatric illness is not diminished by the focus of much of the psychiatric literature
on individual predisposing factors (Feinstein and Dolan 1991; MacFarlane 1987,
1988,1989). The stigm atising potential of one suggested diagnostic category, "post-
traumatic character disorder" does not take much imagining (Feinstein and Dolan
1991:91). While the above research places a high importance on individual pre­
disposing vulnerability factors, including exposure to prior traum atic experiences,
other evidence points to the importance of the degree of exposure to the traumatic
event in predicting pathology (Ursano et al 1994; O'Brien and Hughes 1991; Pynoos
et al 1993; W eisath 1994).


                                          109
                                   REFERENCES



ACPO 1991 Guidelines from W orking Party on Emergency Procedures Association
of Chief Police Officers

Adshead G et al 1993 C urrent provision and recommendations for the management
of psycho-social m orbidity following disaster in England. Departm ent of Forensic
Psychiatry, Traumatic Stress Project. Institute of Psychiatry. London.

Alexander D A and Wells A 1991 'Reactions of Police Officers to Body H andling
after a Major Disaster; A Before and After Comparison' in British Tournal of
Psychiatry 159:547-555.

American Psychiatric Association 1980 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mpntal
Disorders. 3rd Edition. W ashington DC.

American Psychiatric Association 1987 Diagnostic and Statistical M anu al o f M pntal
Disorders 3rd Edition, Revised. W ashington DC.

American Psychiatric Association 1994 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders 4th Edition. W ashington D.C.

Ashton J R 1989 W ritten Statement. Unpublished.

Auf der Heide E 1989 Disaster Response; Principles of Preparation and Co­
ordination. Mosby. St.Louis.

Awoonor-Renner S 1993 'I desperately needed to see my son' in Dickenson D and
Johnson M (eds) Death, Dying and Bereavement. Sage Publications. London

Berah E, Jones H, and Valent P 1984 'The Experience of a Mental H ealth Team
Involved in the Early Phase of a Disaster7 Australian and New Zealand Toumal r»f
Psychiatry 18: 354-358

Bergman D 1993 Disasters: Where the Law Fails. A New A g en d a fo r P p a lin g w ith
Corporate Violence. H erald Charitable Trust. London.

Bogie D T (undated) Lockerbie Air Disaster; An EHO's Experience. Annandale and
Eskdale District Council.

Braid M 1995 'Send in the Counsellors' The Independent Section 2,13 December:6

British Psychological Society, 1990 Psychological Aspects of Disaster. BPS. Leicester.




                                         110
Brook R 1990 An Introduction to Disaster Theory for Social Workers. Social Work
Monographs, No. 85. University of East Anglia.

Busfield J 1986 Managing Madness: Changing Ideas and Practice. Unwin Hyman.
London.

Bussutil W, Turnbull G J, Neal L A, Rollins J, West A G, Blanch N, H erepath R, 1995
'Incorporating Psychological Debriefing Techniques w ithin a Brief Group
Psychotherapy Programme for the Treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress D isorder/
British Toumal of Psychiatry 167:495-502.

Carter R 1996 '"The last thing young children need is to be confronted by strangers":
why the professional counsellors m ust approach w ith caution/ The Times 14
March:19.

Christian L 1996 The Seven Year History of the Marchioness Disaster; the lessons for
the handling of other incidents involving mass deaths in circumstances re q u irin g
investigation. Unpublished paper.

Clegg F 1988 'Disaster: Can Psychologists Help the Survivors?' The Psychologist
April:134-135.

Cohen R E and Aheam F L 1980 Handbook for Mental H ealth Care of Disaster
Victims. John Hopkins University Press. Baltimore.

Cohen S 1985 Visions of Social Control. Polity Press. Cambridge.

Coleman S, Jemphrey A, Scraton P and Skidmore P 1990 Hillsborough and After:
The Liverpool Experience First Report. Liverpool City Council.

Comfort L K and Cahill A G 1988 'Increasing Problem Solving Capacity between
Organisations: The Role of Information in Managing the May 31, 1985, Tornado
Disaster in W estern Pennsylvania/ in Comfort L K (ed) M anaging Disaster. Duke
University Press. Durham and London.

Cox M and Foster T 1992 Their Darkest Day: The Tragedy of Pan Am 103. Arrow
Books. London.

Crainer S 1993 Zeebrugge: Learning from Disaster. Herald Charitable Trust. London.

Crawford A 1994 'The Partnership Approach to Community Crime Prevention:
Corporatism at the Local Level?' Social and Legal Studies Vol. 3:497-519.

Cullen The Hon Lord 1996 The Public Inquiry into the Shootings at Dunblane
Primary School on 13 March 1996. The Scottish Office. The Stationery Office.




                                        Ill
Davidson J R T et al 1991 'Post-traum atic stress disorder in the community: an
epidemiological study' Psychological Medicine 21. 713-721

Davidson J R T 1992 'D rug Therapy of Post-traumatic Stress D isorder' British Toumal
of Psychiatry 160.309-314.

Davis H W and Bourhill M 1997 '"Crisis": The Demonization of Children and Young
People' in Scraton P (ed) 'Childhood' in 'Crisis'? Taylor and Francis. London.

Deahl M, Gillham A, Thomas J, Searle M and Srinivasan M 1994 'Psychological
sequelae following the Gulf War; factors associated w ith subsequent m orbidity and
the effectiveness of psychological debriefing.' British Toumal of Psychiatry 265: 60-
65.

Disasters W orking Party 1991 Disasters; Planning for a Caring Response.
Department of Health. HMSO.

Dooley E and Gunn J 1995 'The Psychological Effects of Disaster at Sea.' British
Toumal of Psychiatry 167:233-237.

Drabek T E 1983 'A lternative patterns of decision making in em ergent disaster
response networks'. International Toumal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters 1:277-
305.

Dryden W 1984 'Issues in the Eclectic Practice of Individual Therapy' in Dryden W
(ed) Individual Therapy in Britain H arper and Row. London.

Duckworth D 1991a 'Facilitating Recovery from Disaster-Work Experiences' British
Toumal of Guidance and Counselling Vol. 19. No. 1. January:13-22.

Duckworth D 1991b 'Everyday Psychological Trauma in the Police Service' Disaster
Management Vol. 3 No. 4. 224-227.

Duffy B 1992 'The Mystery Man in the Lockerbie Case' US News and W orld Report 9
March, Vol. 112. 9:44.

Duggan C and Gunn J 1995 'Medium-Term Course of Disaster Victims; A
Naturalistic Follow-Up.' British Toumal of Psychiatry 167:228-232.

Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council 1989 Lockerbie: A local authority response
to the Disaster. Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council.

Dumfries and Galloway Departm ent of Social Work 1989 Lockerbie Air Disaster: The
Social Work Response. Unpublished.

Dyer A 1991 'Police role at major incidents' Civil Protection Spring. 18:11-13.



                                          112
Dynes R 1994 'Comm unity Emergency Planning: False Assumptions and
Inappropriate Analogies' International Toumal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters
August, Vol. 12:141-158.

Dynes R Quarantelli E L and Kreps G 1981 A Perspective on Disaster Planning
Newark, D E: Disaster Research Centre, University of Delaware.

Emergency Planning College 1994 Easingwold Papers No. 8; A Digest of Some Well -
Known Disasters. Home Office Emergency College, Easingwold, York.

Erikson N G and Lundin T 1996 'Early Traumatic Stress Reactions among Swedish
Survivors of the m /s Estonia Disaster.' British Toumal of Psychiatry 169:713-716.

Feinstein A and Dolan R 1991 'Predictors of post-traumatic stress disorder following
physical trauma: an examination of the stressor criterion.' Psychological Medicine
21:85-91.

Fischer III, H W 1994 Response to Disaster: Fact Versus Fiction and Its Perpetuation.
The Sociology of Disaster. University Press of America. New York.

Foreman E 1 1991 'Planning Disaster Response Services: the Role of a Multi-Agency
Steering Group' British Toumal of Guidance and Counselling Vol.19, No. 1:23-29

Garland C 1993 'The lasting traum a of the concentration camps' British Medical
Toumal 10 July:77.

G errard N 1996 'A traum a out of a crisis' The Observer Review Sunday 31 March:7.

Gibson M 1991 O rder from Chaos: Responding to Traumatic Events. Venture Press.
Birmingham.

Gillespie D F and M urty S A 1994 'Cracks in a Postdisaster Service Delivery
Network' American Toumal of Community Psychology Vol.22, No.5:639-660.

Goddard D and Coleman L K 1993 Trail of the Octopus: From Beirut to Lockerbie.
Bloomsbury. London.

Haslum M N 1989 'The Psychology of Disaster7 in Walsh M (ed) Disasters: Current
Planning and Recent Experience. Edward Arnold. London.

Hay C 1995 'M obilization through Interpellation: James Bulger, Juvenile Crime and
the Construction of a Moral Panic.' Social and Legal Studies Vol. 4. No. 2:197-223.

Heather N 1976 Radical Perspectives in Psychology Methuen Press. London.

Herman J L et al 1986 'Long Term Effects of Incestuous Abuse in Childhood.'
American Toumal of Psychiatry 143:1293-1296.


                                        113
Hills A E 1994 'M yth and Method: Co-ordination and Co-operation in Disaster
M anagement' Disaster Management Vol. 6 No. 1:3-8

Hodgkinson P E 1990 'The Zeebrugge Disaster III: Psychosocial Care in the UK.'
Disaster Management Vol. 2 No. 3:131-134

Hodgkinson P E and Stewart M 1988 'M issing, Presumed Dead.' Disaster
Management Vol. 1. No. 1:11-14.

Hodgkinson P E. and Stewart M 1991 Coping w ith Catastrophe; A Handbook of
Disaster Management. Routledge. London.

Holloway H C and Fullerton C S 1994 'The psychology of terror and its afterm ath' in
Ursano R J et al Individual and Community Responses to Disaster: The Structure of
Hum an Chaos Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Home Office 1994a Dealing w ith Disaster (2nd edition). HMSO. London.

Home Office 1994b Dealing W ith Fatalities During Disasters Report of the National
Working Party. HMSO. London.

Hoorweg F P A and Q uint J G H 1994 'Recovery: The Uncharted Pase in Disaster
Relief' Disaster Management Vol. 6 No. 1.

Horlick-Jones T 1990 Acts of God? An Investigation into Disasters Emergency
Planning Information Centre/ALA. London.

Illich I 1977 Limits to Medicine - Medical Nemesis: The Expropriation of H ealth.
Penguin. Harmondsworth. Penguin.

Jackson G 1991 'The rise of the post traum atic stress disorders' British Medical
Toumal 7 September 1991,303:533.

James A 1992 'The Psychological Impact of Disaster and the N ature of Critical
Incident Stress for Emergency Personnel' Disaster Prevention and Management Vol.
1 No. 2:63-69.

Janoff-Bulman R and Morgan H 1994 'Victims' Responses to Traumatic Life Events;
An Unjust W orld or an Uncaring W orld?' Social Tustice Research Vol.7 No.l:47-68.

Jenike A 1995 'Post-traum atic stress disorder in the elderly: A 3-year follow-up of the
Lockerbie disaster.' Toumal of Geriatric Psychiatry & Neurology Vol 8(2):137.

Johnstone J and Beeson L 1993 'Social Work in the afterm ath of the Zeebrugge Ferry
Disaster.' in N ewbum T (ed) W orking w ith Disaster: Social Welfare Intervention
During and After Tragedy Longman. Harlow.



                                          114
Johnstone L 1989 Users and Abusers of Psychiatry: A Critical Look At Traditional
Psychiatric Practice. Routledge. London.

Joseph S et al 1991 'Causal Attributions and Psychiatric Symptoms in Survivors of
the Herald Of Free Enterprise Disaster' British Toumal of Psychiatry 159:542-546.

Koss M P et al 1987 'The Scope of Rape: Incidence and Prevalence of Sexual
Aggression and Victimization in a National Sample of Higher Education Students/
Toumal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 55:162-170.

Kramer L 1995 Reports from the Holocaust; The Story of an AIDS Activist Cassplls
London.

Kruppa I 1991 'Perpetrators suffer traum a too' The Psychologist: Bulletin of the
British Psychological Society 4:401-403

Lammens J and Hodgkinson P E 1990 'The Zeebrugge Disaster 1: Triage, Treatment
and Aftercare' Disaster Management Vol.2 No.3

Lavik N J, Hauff E, Skrondal A, and Solberg O 1996 'M ental Disorder a m o n g
Refugees and the Impact of Persecution and Exile: Some F in d in g s from an Out-
Patient Population/ British Toumal of Psychiatry 169:726-732.

Lewis R G 1988 'M anagem ent Issues in Emergency Response' in Comfort L K
Managing Disaster Duke University Press. Durham and London.

Littlewood R and Lipsedge M 1982 Aliens and Alienists: Ethnic Minorities and
Psychiatry Harmondsworth. Birmingham.

Lloyd M 1992 'Tools for Many Trades: Reaffirming the Use of Grief Counselling by
Health, Welfare and Pastoral W orkers/ British Toumal of Guidance and C o u n s e l l i n g
Vol. 20. No. 2:150-163.

McFarlane A C 1987 'Life Events and Psychiatric Disorder: The Role of a Natural
Disaster' British Toumal of Psychiatry 1987.151:362-367

McFarlane A C 1988 'The Aetiology of Post-traumatic Stress Disorders Following a
Natural Disaster7 British Toumal of Psychiatry 1988.152:116-121

McFarlane A C 1989 'The Aetiology of Post-traumatic Morbidity: Predisposing,
Precipitating and Perpetuating Factors' British Toumal of Psychiatry 154:221-228.

McKnight J L 1984 'John Deere and the Bereavement Counsellor' Fourth Annual E F
Schumacher Lectures Foote School, New Haven, CT. E.F. Schumacher Society.

McLean I 1997a 'H eartless bully who added to the agony of A berfan/ Observer 5
January 1997:12.


                                           115
McLean 11997b On Moles and the Habits of Birds (unpublished paper).

MAIB 1991 Report of the Chief Inspector of Marine Accidents into the collision
between the passenger launch Marchioness and MV Bowbelle w ith loss of life on the
River Thames on 20 August 1989. Marine Accident Investigation Branch.
Southampton.

Mason D 1993 'Social Services after Hillsborough: managing the initial response' in
Newburn T (ed) W orking w ith Disaster: Social Welfare Interventions During and
After Tragedy. Longman. Harlow.

Masson J 1984 The Assault on Truth: Freud's Suppression of the Seduction Theory.
Faber and Faber. London.

Masson J 1993 Against Therapy. H arper Collins. London.

Matthews P and Foreman J 1993 Tervis on the Office and Duties of Coroners
(eleventh edition) Sweet and Maxwell. London.

Mitchell M 1990 'A traum a waiting to happen' New Scientist 10 November:56-57.

Mitchell M 1993 'The eye of the storm; police control of the Lockerbie Disaster7 in
Newburn T (ed) W orking w ith Disasters: Social Welfare Intervention During and
After Tragedy. Longman. Harlow.

M urgatroyd S 1981 'Reversal Theory: a New Perspective on Crisis Counselling.'
British Toumal of Guidance and Counselling Vol.9 No.2. July:180-193.

Napier M 1996 'Post Disaster Procedures: The Legal Traum a' Paper to The First
European Conference on Traumatic Stress in Emergency Services Peace Keeping
Operations and H um anitarian Aid Organisations 17 March.

National Victim Center 1992 Rape in America: A Report to the Nation. National
Victim Center. South Carolina.

Newbum T 1991 'O rganisational Pressures and Role Stresses in the Lives of the
Hillsborough Social W ork Teams' Disaster Management Vol.3 No.4:187-192.

Nilson D 1995 'D isaster Beliefs and Ideological O rientation' Toumal of Contingencies
and Crisis Management Vol.3 N o.l .12-17.

Nilson L 1985 'The Disaster Victim Community: Part of the Solution' Policy Studies
Review Vol. 4 No. 4, May:640-645.

O Brien L S and Hughes S J 1991 'Symptoms of PTSD in Falklands Veterans Five
Years After the Conflict' British Toumal of Psychiatry 159:135-141.



                                         116
Parkes C M 1993a 'Psychiatric Problems Following Bereavement by M urder or
M anslaughter' British Toumal of Psychiatry 162:49-54.

Parkes C M 1993b 'Bereavement as a psychosocial transition: processes of adaptation
to change' in Dickenson D and Johnson M (eds) Death Dying and Bereavement Sage.
London.

Partington M 1996 'Salvaging the Sacred' The Guardian W eekend 18 May:14-23.

Paton D 1991 'M ajor Incident and Disaster Stress in Firefighters' Disaster
Management Vol.3 No.4:216-223.

Pynoos R S et al 1993 'Post-traumatic Stress Reactions in Children After the 1988
Armenian Earthquake' British Toumal of Psychiatry 163:239-247.

Quarantelli E L 1994 'H um an and Group Behaviour in the Emergency Period of
Disasters: Now and in the Future' in 'Crises in a Complex Society; F-asingwold
Papers No.7 Home Office Emergency Planning College, Easingwold:4-20.

Quintyn L de Winne J and Hodgkinson P 1990 'The Zeebrugge Disaster II: The
Disaster Victim Identification Team - Procedures and Psychological Support'
Disaster Management Vol. 2 No. 3:128-130.

Ramsay R et al 1993 'Psychiatric Morbidity in Survivors of Organised State Violence
Including Torture' British Toumal of Psychiatry 162:55-59.

Raphael B 1984 The Anatomy of Bereavement: A Handbook for the Caring
Professions. Unwin Hyman. London.

Raphael B 1986 W hen Disaster Strikes. Unwin Hyman. London.

Raphael B, M eldrum L and O'Toole B 1991 'Rescuers' psychological responses to
disasters' British Medical Toumal Vol. 303,30 November:1346-1347.

Raphael B and McFarlane A C 1995 'Does debriefing after psychological traum a
work?' British Medical Toumal 310:1479-1480.

Ravin J and Boal C 1989 'PTSD in the Work Setting; Psychic Injury, Medical
Diagnosis, Treatment and Litigation' American Tournal of Forensic Psychiatry
Vol.10. No.2 1989/5:5-23.

Robinson R and Mitchell J 1993 'Evaluation of Psychological Debriefings' in Toumal
of Traumatic Stress 6:367-382

Rogers C 1951 Client Centered Therapy. Constable. London.




                                       117
Rogers C 1967; On Becoming a Person; A Therapist's View of Psychotherapy.
Constable. London.

Rosenheck R and Fontana A 1994 'Long-term sequelae of combat in W orld W ar n,
Korea and Vietnam: a comparative study' in Ursano R J (ed) Individual and
Community Responses to Disaster: The Structure of H u m a n C h a o s. Cambridge
University Press. Cambridge.

Rosenthal U 1988 'D isaster Management in the Netherlands: Planning for Real
Events' in Comfort L K (ed) Managing Disaster Duke University Press. Durham and
London.

Rosenthal U et al 1991 'The Bureau Politics of Crisis M anagement' Public
Administration Vol. 69 Summer:211-233.

Rosenthal U, 't H art P, van Duin M, Boin A, Kroon M, O tten M, Overdijk W 1994
'Complexity in Urban Crisis Management: Amsterdam 's response to the Bijlmer air
disaster.' Tames and James (Science Publishers) Ltd. London.

Rothbaum et al 1992 A Prospective Examination of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder in
Rape Victims. Toumal of Post-Traumatic Stress. 5:455-475.

Russell D E H 1982 The Prevalence and Incidence of Forcible Rape and Attempted
Rape of Females. Victimology: An International Toumal 7:81-93.

Scott M J and Stradling S B J 1992 Counselling for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Sage. London.

Scott W J 1990 'PTSD in DSM-III; A Case in the Politics of Diagnosis and Disease'
Social Problems Vol 37. No 3. August:294-308.

Scraton P, Jemphrey A, Coleman S 1995 No Last Rights: The Denial of Tustice and the
Promotion of Myth in the Aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster. Liverpool City
C ouncil/A lden Press.

Shalev A Y 1994 'Debriefing following traum atic exposure' in Ursano R J (ed)
Individual and Community Responses to Community and Disaster: The Structure of
Human Chaos Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.

Shearer A 1991 Survivors and the Media. Broadcasting Standards Council. John
Libbey and Co. Ltd. London.

Showalter E 1988 The Female Malady Virago. London.

Singh B and Raphael B 1981 'Post-disaster m orbidity of the bereaved.' Toumal of
Nervous and Mental Disease 169 (4):208-212.



                                       118
Slapper G 1993 'Corporate manslaughter: An Examination of the Determinants of
Prosecutorial Policy/ Social and Legal Studies 2(4):423-43.

Smith D 1992 'The Kegworth Air Crash: A Crisis in Three Phases?' Disaster
Management Vol.4 No.2:63-72.

Solomon Z and Benbenishty R 1986 'The role of proximity, immediacy and
expectancy in frontline treatm ent of central stress reaction am ong Israelis in the
Lebanon w ar' American Toumal of Psychiatry 143:613-617.

Stallings R A 1988 'Conflict in N atural Disasters: A Codification of Consensus and
Conflict Theories'. Social Science Quarterly September. Vol. 69:569-586.

Stenhouse P 1995 'The Syrian Drug and Terrorist Connection' Australia and World
Affairs Autumn, 24:33-42.

Stokes G 1995 A Witness For Peace Kate's Hill Press. Dudley.

Symonds M 1980 'The 'second injury' to victims.' Evaluation and Change (special
edition):36-8.

Taylor A J 1987 'A Taxonomy of Disasters and their Victims' Toumal of
Psychosomatic Research Vol. 31.5:535-544.

Taylor A and Frazer A 1982 'The Stress of Post-Disaster Body H andling and Victim
Identification W ork' Toumal of Human Stress December.4-12.

Taylor, Lord Justice 1989 The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15 April 1989. Interim
Report. Home Office. HMSO. London.

Taylor, Lord Justice 1990 The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster 15 April 1989. Final
Report. Home Office. HMSO. London.

Thompson J 1991 'The Management of Body Recovery after Disasters' Disaster
Management Vol.3. No.4:206-210.

Thompson J and Suzuki 11991 'Stress in Ambulance W orkers' Disaster Management
Vol. 3. No. 4:193-197.

Thome B 1992 Carl Rogers. Sage. London.

Tombs S 1995 'Law, Resistance and Reform: "Regulating" Safety Crimes in the UK/
Social and Legal Studies Vol. 4:343-365.

Trolley B C 1994 'A Bridge between Traumatic Life Events and Losses by Death'
Omega Vol. 28 (4):285-300.



                                       119
Toolis K 1995 'Death: An Irish wake and Anglo-Saxon attitudes' The G u a rd ia n
Weekend 7 October :14-21.

Tumelty D 1990 Social Work in the Wake of Disaster. Jessica Kingsley Publishers
Ltd. London.

Turner S W 1989 'The King's Cross Fire: Planning a "Phase Two" Psychosocial
Response/ Disaster Management Vol. 2. No. 1:31-37.

United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator 1986 Disaster Prevention and
Mitigation; A Compendium of Current Knowledge Vol. 12 Social and Sociological
Aspects.

Ursano R J, Fullerton C S, McAaughey B S 1994a 'Traum a and Disaster' in Ursano R J
(ed) Individual and Community Responses to Disaster: The Structure of H u m a n
Chaos Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.

Ursano R J, McCaughey B G, Fullerton C S, 1994b 'The Structure of Hum an Chaos' in
Ursano R J (ed) Individual and Community Responses to Disaster: The Structure of
Hum an Chaos Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.

Ussher J M 1991 W omen's Madness: Misogyny or Mental Tllness? Harvester
Wheatsheaf. London.

Weightman G 1996 Rescue: The History of Britain's Emergency Services. Boxtree
Ltd. London.

W eisath L 1994 'Psychological and psychiatric aspects of technological disasters' in
Ursano R J (ed) Individual and Community Responses to Disaster: The Structure of
Human Chaos Cambridge University Press. Cambridge.

Whitham D and Newburn T 1993 'The K egw orth/M l Air Crash: setting up a
helpline and support service' in N ewbum T (ed) W orking w ith D isastpr- Snrial
Welfare Intervention During and After Tragedy. Longman. Harlow.

Whyte D 1996 'The Em peror's New Clothes: Safety, deregulation and cost cutting in
the Offshore Oil Industry/ Paper presented to the BSA Annual Conference Reading,
1-4 April.
                                                             •



Wilby J M 1990 'Lockerbie Aircraft Disaster: Response of the Ambulance Service'
Disaster Management Vol. 2 No.4:192-196.

W ood-Heath M 1992 'The National Casualty Bureau Project' Disaster Prevention and
Management Vol. 1 No. 2:56-62.




                                        120
W right K M et al 1990: 'The Shared Experience of Catastrophe: An Expanded
Classification of the Disaster Community' American Toumal of Orthopsychiatry 60
(l):35-42.

W yatt G E 1985 The Sexual Abuse of Afro-American and W hite-American Women in
Childhood. Child Abuse and Neglect 9:507-519.

Young P 1993 Disasters: Focusing on Management Responsibility. H erald Charitable
Trust. London.

Yule W and Williams R M 1990 'Post-traumatic stress reactions in children/ Toumal
of Traumatic Stress 3:279-295.




                                      121
                              NOTES ON AUTHORS



Howard Davis is a Researcher at the Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at
Edge Hill University College. His research interests include: the consequences of
adult abuse of children; bereavement and sudden death; the definition and
application of post-traum atic stress disorder. He continues to w ork as a part-tim e
social worker and has extensive experience in the areas of child protection,
HIV/ AIDS and bereavem ent and was a member of the Liverpool Social Services'
Hillsborough Disaster social work team. He is a contributor to 'Childhood' in 'Crisis'?
(ed Phil Scraton), Taylor and Francis, 1997 and co-author (with Phil Scraton) of
Failing the Bereaved in Picking Up the Pieces, Bedfordshire County Council, 1997.

Phil Scraton is Professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice and Director of the
Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill University College. With
Kathryn Chadwick he runs the Centre's postgraduate research and Masters
programmes. His prim ary research interests include: the politics and regulation of
sexuality; the rights of survivors and the bereaved in the afterm ath of disasters;
police powers and accountability; deaths in custody; critical analysis and its
application. He is author of The State of the Police, Pluto, 1985 and editor of Law,
Order and the Authoritarian State, Open University Press, 1987 and 'Childhood' in
'Crisis'?, Taylor and Francis, 1997. He is co-author of In the Arms of the Law, Pluto,
1987 (with Kathryn Chadwick), Prisons Under Protest, Open University Press, 1991
(with Joe Sim and Paula Skidmore) and No Last Rights: The Denial of Justice and the
Promotion of Myth in the Aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster, LCC/Alden Press, 1995
(with Ann Jemphrey and Sheila Coleman). He has w ritten extensively on a range of
hum an rights and social justice issues.




                                         122
