NOTE OF A MEETING WITH PETER KILFOYLE MP AND THE
HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP AT THE HOME OFFICE ON
6 MARCH 1997.

Those present: Sue McDougall - Home Office
               Peter Kilfoyle MP
               Trevor Hicks - Chairman HFSG
               Phil Hammond - Secretary HFSG
               Ann Adlington - HFSG solicitors
               Matthew Pyne - Home Office


The meeting was held to clarify the evidence which the HFSG wished the Home
Secretary to consider in reaching a decision on re-opening the inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster.

2. Mr Hicks handed over two bundles of papers together with video tapes and
Counsel’s opinion in support of their case for a fresh inquiry. Mrs McDougall
explained that the Home Secretary would have to be satisfied that there was sufficient
new evidence to justify re-opening the inquiry. There were other issues which would
have to be considered by the Attorney General and Director of Public Prosecutions.

3. Mr Hicks explained that in the Group’s view the inquest had not been fair; that the
evidence considered by the jury was selective; and that there had been a deliberate
conspiracy to withhold evidence from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, which
included police officers telling lies.

4. The Granada drama had brought to light Roger Houldsworth’s evidence about the
CCTV system and camera five in particular. The Group believed that this evidence
had been suppressed because it contradicted the police account that the camera was
not working properly and could only produce poor quality images. The Group was
now in possession of tapes which showed camera five working normally. These had
been obtained from Yorkshire TV who had obtained them from the police for a 'First
Tuesday’ documentary.

5. Mr Hicks said that evidence given by Officers Bichard, Ryan and Goddard
indicated that the camera five was not working properly and that it was not capable of
zooming in to see what was happening to the people on the terraces. The inquest jury
were only shown poor quality images from camera five which would have supported
this testimony. Those responsible for the compilation would have been aware of all
the available footage from camera five but they did not include it in the tape. The
inquiry and inquest were deliberately misled about the camera’s capabilities and this
was pivotal to the outcome of the inquest.

 6. Mr Hicks also referred to the evidence of Dr Ed Walker which had recently come
to the Group’s attention and which had not been considered by the inquest or the
subsequent judicial review. This was significant new evidence which should have
been heard. The Group did not accept the inquest verdict of accidental death and
believed that the coroner had given undue emphasis to this outcome in his comments
to the jury. If all the evidence had been put before the jury, the group believed that a
verdict of death caused by lack of care or even one of unlawful killing would have
been returned.

7. The Group believed that there were elements of the Taylor inquiry which should
now be looked at again in addition to re-opening the inquest. If evidence of a
deliberate conspiracy to withhold evidence was revealed, the Group expected those
responsible to be brought to justice.

8. Mr Hicks asked that the Group should be given notice of when the Home Secretary
intended to make his announcement.




OPPU
March 1997
