 iGJ.8 .31/HILLSUB.PEB                                                            ^    jifLcU.
                                                                           \
                                                                 cc   Mr   Ya'__
 From: P E Bolton                                                     Ms   Adams \
       G2 Division                                                    Mr   Chilcot \
       Ext 3322                                                       Mr   Moriarty
                                                                      Mr   Turney
             31 August 1989                                           Mr   Boyce
                                                                      Mr   Goddard       \
                                                                      Mr   Whalley           \
                                                                      Mr   Mower
                                                                      Mr   Hasl^m
                                                                      Mr   Lidington


           Mr Walters




  THE HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT


  In your note of 24 August you asked for a note for the Home

  Secretary's meeting on 7 September gathering information on the

  way that clubs and authorities have responded to the Taylor

  Interim Recommendations.



  The Taylor Inquiry


  2.        It may perhaps be useful to note that there have been no
  developments with the Inquiry itself because the Judge and the
  Secretary of the Inquiry have been on holiday.                                The precise form
  of the second part of the Inquiry has not yet been decided.
  There will probably be no formal hearings but possibly meetings

  with selected groups and individuals.


       <1          V ^vtj«^        tT*   O v tX       cXa-w -^        JvScfct

Xb                   .      U -e    htf-o                                                S^vwUJU)

JLj    0   -'A '     l 1_    O 'V v jV w A A .    /
     Compliance with the Interim Recommendations


     3.                  In the first week or so the preliminary indications received
     in the Department (from telephone calls and other enquiries from
     clubs, local authorities, the police and the fire service)
      indicated that all the recommendations were being taken seriously
      and addressed as a matter of priority.                There have been a number
      of problems of interpretation which were referred to later.



      4.                 We have since asked for more formal reports from police
      forces and fire brigades on the implementation of those

      recommendations which were particularly of concern to them.
      Reports from individual brigades are being received in the

      office.                Not all have yet replied but those which have indicate
      that relevant recommendations have either been complied with or,

      at the least, addressed and are being complied with.



      5.                 Reports from the police have been coordinated by ACPO.    We
      therefore do not have a club by club analysis but they have

      provided a memorandum to HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary (copy
      at Annex A) which provides a similar picture.
— 'f c . ; -----------




      Particular problems arising from the recommendations


                         Recommendation 4 (on written agreements between the club and
       the police) has caused problems in some cases, largely of

       interpretation.               Taylor clearly wanted to see no misunderstanding
       of who was responsible for controlling particular matters within
       the grounds.               Some police forces are not willing to enter into
specific agreements (Bedfordshire/Luton Town) and in West

Yorkshire (Leeds) lawyers are at present considering whether such
an agreement would create personal liability with the Chief
Constable in the event of an incident.



7.   Recommendation 8 (tbe gates in the perimeter fence\ should
be kept fully open during the period of the match) causes
                           A
practical difficulties in     number of cases. For example at
Millwall, where the perimeter gates are very large and the
reputation of the crowd is poor, the local authority (Lewisham)

is not willing to concede that the gates should be open for fear
of crowd disorder.   In one or two cases, where there is little
space between the perimeter fence and the pitch, leaving gates
open causes obstruction likely to injure players.     In one case
(Derby) the gates have been removed.     Problems of interpretation

also arise where clubs have low perimeter walls and fences rather
than the cages which existed at Hillsborough.


8.   Recommendation 10 (Provision of cutting equipment) has
caused a few difficulties.    Some clubs have acquired
                                                     too IV:
inappropriate equipment (. -T-... niLri cutters) and the Fire

Brigades Union have written suggesting that all cutting equipment

should be in control of the fire service.     We do not agree with
this and HM Chief Inspector of Fire Services has now replied to

the FBU indicating how we think this recommendation should be

addressed.   A copy of his letter is at Annex B.


9.   Recommendation 2(b)   (the arbitrary deduction of 15% from
calculated terrace capacity) potentially is the most troublesome.
We have evidence that some major clubs worked in the past on a

crowd capacity figure on terraces well in excess of the maximum

^reen^uide figure of 54 persons per 10m2 .    The combined effect

of imposing the green guide figure plus the arbitrary reduction
of 15% is causing problems of fans being unable to gain access to

matches.   There is increased potential for trouble outside

grounds and some kickoffs have had to be delayed.    It must be
said that the figure of 54, which has stood the test of time,
provides a "comfortable" terrace.    Tests by the South Yorkshire
Fire Brigade suggest that maximum capacity is in the region of 98
persons per 10m2 .   We understand that some local authorities have

already decided not to insist upon the 15% reduction (which
provides in effect a maximum capacity of 4 6 per 10m2).   We shall
need to watch carefully for the consequences for public order of

 these reductions.


 10.  Two other interim recommendations which have caused
                                              of
 interpretation problems are 19 (on the .•.j. turnstiles) which is

 ambiguous, recommendation 2 6 (which refers to Chief Officers,

 where clearly what is meant is Senior Officer) and 42, which
 appears to preclude the use of Red Cross or St John's Ambulances

 even with the agreement of the ambulance authority.



 Press coverage


 11.   Early press reports includiftff allegations that some clubs

 were dragging their feet (Daily Mirror) and there were letters in

 the Times, which the Home Secretary saw, alleging that he would
 be culpable if there were a further tragedy.    I recommended, and
the Press Office and Mr Patten agreed, that no reply should be

sent to the letters in the Times.    Public interest was iq fact

soon diverted by the Marchioness tragedy.    Mr Bdie'; one of the

Times correspondents, has now written direct to the Home
Secretary and to the Prime Minister.    There is much to be said

for providing an official reply or at most a private secretary
reply.   Separate advice will be given on the letter.



12.  Current press concern is largely devoted to the crowds
                 Im
outside grounds     consequence of restrictions of crowds numbers
                                              to
and more careful monitoring of numbers, and on late kickoffs.


Football Spectators Bill


13.   Mr Moynihan has continued to provide a highly personal and
aggressive defence of the governments proposals for the football
membership scheme, including appearances on the Jimmy Young

programme and "Wogan".     The football authorities continue^to
oppose the scheme and are being more selective and objective in
their approach.



14.   Home Office officials have continued to be in touch with DOE
on the detail of the Bill, including in particular offences and

penalties and the interaction between the proposed powers of the
football Licensing Authority to supervise safety and the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975/£)~There are still difficulties

particularly in relation to appeals.
Summary


15.   All the evidence available to us is that clubs, local
authorities, the police and the fire service have addressed the
recommendations in the Interim Report on Hillsborough, and that

there is no w i l f u l "dragging of feet".   There are however

difficulties of interpretation and application which are
inevitable, given that the recommendations were not tested

against all football grounds before they were made.        The general

advice which we are giving to local authorities, to the fire

service and to the police is that where it is not practical to

apply the recommendations literally, sensible discretion should

be applied with the aim of ensuring that any alternative
solutions to the problems provide at least the same and if
                                             W v M
practicable tiie higher degree of safety than w-ii-i. be achieved by
the Interim recommendations.




                                              P E BOLTON
To:         H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary
Subject::   INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS BY LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

Further to our telephone conversation of 23rd August, 1989 I
caused enquiry to be made of all forces, England and Wales
with regard   to the e x t e n t to which, In b r o a d terms, the
recommendations of the Taylor Report have been implemented
and any areas of difficulty which may have been highlighted.
Consequent upon the publication of the Interim Report and
Home Office Circular 68/1989, police forces and football
clubs have accepted the recommendations and responded with
speed, enthusiasm and commitment in their undertaking^ to
implement same.   Nonetheless.a number of the recommendations
continue to promote discussion and/or reservation and I shall
confine my remarks to those which have elicited most comment.
Recommendation   4 deals with the need for "....a written
agreement between the police and the club setting out their
respective responsibilities for crowd safety and control....
It I s fair to say that there has been a divergence of opinion
on the content of the written agreement and the form it
should take.     Many clubs however have exchanged agreements
with the forces concerned and the remainder have set out
mutually agreed parameters outlining essential areas of
responsibility which will be the basis for immediate use and
be "subject of further scrutiny by the appropriate legal
offices.     It is not anticipated that such scrutiny and
eventual agreement will be resolved immediately and further
liaison will be arranged, as necessary.    At this stage there
has    been   no   intimation that   agreement  will   not  be
 forthcoming.
 Recommendations 8 and 9 which deal with the requirements for
 all gates (in perimeter fences) opening onto the pitch, to be
 fully opened and manned during the course of the match, have
 resource and public disorder implications that have been
 highlighted by a significant number of forces.   Indeed there
 has been a decision at two grounds (Bolton and Millwall) that
 much flexibility will be deployed in this regard. Both these
 recommendations and that at 28       (which deals with the
 orovision of police reserves for immediate deployment) pose
 potentially large increases in charges for police presence at
 the club concerned and significant and continued resistance
 has been experienced by ground commanders in some force
 areas.
 Recommendations 21, 31 and 32 deal with the installation of
 close circuit television, enhanced radio communication and
 operators to handle same and the provision of a separate
 system of land line, have again, cost implications for the
 clubs which have been resisted.
                                                 continued/
Nevertheless it is lair to_report that the *“ ^ " 9
onnpndered    by    the   implications    of   these  interim
recommendations   has not impaired, as I indicated earlier,
relationships between the Police Service and the
rl,.hs   suaaestions have continued to be made by forces and
a r f being99 collated  by   the  A.C. P.O.  General Purposes
?ub-Co^ittee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events, on such
matters^ a s colour-coding for exit gates, national training
videos and a national system of hand signals should radio
communications be rendered ineffective.
T have no doubt that you will continue to be apprised of
developments with regard to these recommendations after the
next meeting of the A.C.P.O. Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at
Sporting Events.    A meeting has been s p e e d i l y arranged for
F?iday, 8th September, 1989 at Greater Manchester Police
Force Headquarters.




 D. Wilmot Esq., Q.P.M. B.Sc.
 Deputy Chief Constable
 Greater Manchester Police


 29th August, 1989




                                    -   2   -
                                     ^       VV-^'                            P0




                                                       HOME OFFICE
                                             Queen A nne’s Gate L o n d o n S W 1H 9AT
                                                       Direct line: 0 l-23f3c     273 -
                                                     Switchboard: 0   1   2   7    ^
                                                                                   273   -
                                                                                         3000

O ur reference:
Your reference:




       Mr D Matthews
       National Officer Health & Safety
       The Fire Brigades Union
       Bradley House
       68 Coombe Road
       KINGSTON-UPON-THAMES
       Surrey KT2 7AE




                                                                   25 August 1989



        Dear
                                         /
       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT

       Thank you for your letter of 16 August in which you voice your
       concern about Lord Justice Taylor's interim recommendation number


       The position is not, in my view, entirely analogous with road
       accidents where the nature of the cutting gear required will not
       be apparent until firefighters have attended and where trained
       people will not normally be available from any other source.

       The way to approach recommendation 10 in my opinion should be to
       raise a number of questions:—

                  1. What is the nature of the perimeter fencing at the
                  ground

                  2. What type of cutting equipment, if any, is
                  appropriate.  (Here we are recommending that clubs
                  should seek advice from brigades and much will flow
                  from the advice given).

                  3. What degree of skill or training is necessary to
                  operate that equipment?


                                                1
         4.    Where will it be located?

  The answer to question 4 will depend entirely on local
  circumstances. As indeed will the answers posed by some of the
  other questions.

  Having said this clubs are private premises and the primary
  responsibility for safety rests with them. If such a solution
  after consultation meets the needs of the ground then it is not
  unreasonable to expect that it will be acceptable to the local
  authority responsible for the safety certificate.

  In conclusion I think what we must bear in mind is that the 43
  recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's interim report were made
  on his analysis of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster and
  inspections of some other grounds. They are short term
  recommendations pending the report of Part 2 of the Inquiry which
  is expected at the end of the year.

                                           Yours sincerely




                                         SIR REGINALD DOYLE
                Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Fire Services




Mr B o l t o n /
HMI Ki lfo rd
HMI Gre en wo o d
Hr L o c k e t t




                                      2
