NOTE OF A MEETING WITH THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS ASSOCIATION
HELD AT 9.30AM ON 28 NOVEMBER AT QUEEN ANNE'S GATE


Present:    Lord Justice Taylor     Mr   T   Davey
            Mr Johnson              Mr   P   Wall
            Mr Whalley              Mr   D   Clarkson
            Mrs Wither              Mr   R   Mellor
                                    Mr   B   Luckhurst


1.   At the beginning of the meeting, Mr Davey handed over
copies of the Association's oral submission which are attached.
However the following additional points were made.


Alcohol


2.   The Association felt that the effect of alcohol may have had
more impact at Hillsborough than was suggested in the Interim
Report.    Lord Justice Taylor remarked that a considerable amount
of evidence and film had been considered and this had led to the
conclusion in the Report.    He said that discussion about the
problem of alcohol would play a larger part in the Final Report.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces


3.   Regarding the issue of division of responsibility there had
been discussion with the Home Office over the agreement between
the club and police set out in Recommendation 4.         Mr Clarkson
said the problem was that some clubs may hold the agreement
against them and, while a Chief Constable may refuse to supply
manpower, was that right rescinded when agreement had been
signed?    Lord Justice Taylor said there should be no indecision
and that it must be at the discretion of the police commander;
he had not intended the agreement to be used as a binding legal
contract.


4.   It was also said that clubs are not willing to pay and in
some circumstances, it would be preferable to use security firms
to replace police.    Clubs found it financially advantageous to
use stewards rather than police but this system could breakdown
at evening matches when stewards might arrive late.
Communications


5.    Lord Justice Taylor asked for examples of inadequate police
control rooms and the Association agreed to send a list.


Philosophy of Command


6.    Mr Johnson replied to the criticisms by the Association that
the match commander should never leave his post by saying that Mr
Duckenfield was not receiving clear messages due to problems with
communications.   The control room was a minute or less from the
problem and Mr Johnson behind Mr Duckenfield should have gone
down to assess the situation for himself and returned to the
control room.


7.    Lord Justice Taylor remarked that there might be a need for
more emphasis on commanders' training for this situation based on
best practice and command experience in dealing with crowds in
this situation.


Football Spectators Act


8.    Lord Justice Taylor pointed out that the Act already catered
for an independent element in the FMA.


9.    The Association had doubts about the technology and the
police resources which would be used in dealing with the red and
amber light situations.   Mr Clarkson said that he had worked with
one of the companies, McDonald Douglas, and they hoped it would
be self-policing inside the ground with proper policing outside.
The main difficulty was that the miscreant was placed in police
hands.


10.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if it would stop hooligans coming
to town to cause trouble and the Association said it would.     It
was suggested that the more ardent supporters would join several
clubs to overcome the problem but Mr Johnson said the national
computer should weed them out.
11.   Mr Wall pointed out that the Metropolitan police have access
to a large reserve easily but it was not so easy in the
provinces.     Lord Justice Taylor asked for suggestions to resolve
the problem.     Suggestions made were:-


      i.    vetting of away supporters by only allocating tickets
             through their club;


      ii.   using attendance centres for offenders with an
            exclusion order against them.


12.   Mr Luckhurst said the attendance centre principle was
available but it would be necessary to enlarge the resource as it
would be necessary to follow up those who do not attend.


Representations made bv letter


13.   The Association felt the biggest problem was the ticketless
fan arriving on the day and the problems they cause if they don't
get in.     It might be possible to ban sale of tickets either in a
certain area or on the day.


Alcohol


14.   The Association felt the ban on the sale of alcohol should
be relaxed in the ground.     Mr Clarkson said at Leeds they sell
low alcohol and no alcohol products which encourages fans to turn
up earlier.     If the clubs provided welcoming facilities this
would also help.


Policing of Grounds


15.   The Association felt that football is a private business and
the clubs should pay for policing both inside and outside the
ground.     If necessary a supplement on the ticket could be charged
to provide for policing.     They felt that, at present, clubs do
not appreciate the cost to society of policing their grounds.
Delay to Televised Matches


16.   The Association felt that the pressures put on a commander
by clubs and TV Companies means that they might be inclined to
compromise safety particularly as they might be subject to
litigation.


Pitch Invasions


17.   The Association felt that fences could come down eventually
if this was coupled with a prohibition from going on to the pitch.
