NOTE OF DISCUSSION WITH MR PRATT AND MR HONOUR (HOME OFFICE) ON
16 NOVEMBER: POOLS BETTING TAX AND THE HORSE-RACE BETTING LEVY


1.   Mr Pratt explained the basis of the horse-race betting levy.
It was a statutory expression of a commercial arrangement. A
levy was made on turnover at off-course betting offices, which
was paid to the Horse-race Betting Levy Board, which made
payments at its discretion to worthwhile causes in racing. This
included improvements to racecourses (stands and all-weather
tracks) and assistance to the blood stock industry. If there had
been no statutory framework, voluntary arrangements would have
been needed.


2.   Mr Pratt did not see the levy, which was not regarded as a
tax, as a valid comparator for pools betting tax. In any case,
its status was questionable: it was disliked by the Treasury as
a hypothecation of revenue, and by the DTI as an interference
with the operation of a free market. The levy was settled each
year by consultation within the racing industry and then
determined by the Secretary of State by statutory instrument and
promulgated by the Board. Although it was a marginal amount of
turnover (.86% currently), the. huge volume of off-course betting
(£5,000 million per annum) made any variation in the percentage
significant. This made any change extremely market sensitive,
and likely to have a disproportionate effect on turnover. 8% of
stakes in off-course betting were returned as winnings.


3.   There was no comparable direct link in football between
raising money by statute and benefitting the industry from which
it was raised. The linkage was a commercial one in that the
pools companies paid the Football League the copyright for the
use of the fixture list: this was not done in racing. The pools
tax was a duty on gambling, whereas the levy was not seen on
that:   in racing, the duty was represented by the 8% duty on off-
course betting. Changes in duty were a matter for the Chancellor
of the Exchequer as a fiscal measure (for example the Home Office
had not been consulted when the 8% duty on on-course betting had
been abolished).
4.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether there was a case for a
football pools levy regardless of the tax position. Mr Pratt
believed that, on the analogy of horse-racing, unless there had
been some voluntary agreement between the Pools Promoters
Association and the Football League, there could be no basis for
a levy: there had to be willing parties. No action had been
taken on the report of the Rothschild Commission on gambling in
1977, which had recommended a reduction of the pool betting tax
for the purpose of establishing a levy board. It might be
possible to persuade them of the merits of that if they realised
that unless there were more injection of finance into football,
many clubs would not be able to meet expensive safety
requirements and would hence go out of business, so that the
viability and attraction of the football fixture list would be
put in danger. However, that argument might not entirely carry
sway, since the Pools Promoters Association could always find
some other focal point for pools competitions, such as Australian
football matches.


5.   On the question of VAT on spot the ball competitions, Mr
Pratt drew attention to the recent pressure on Government to
allow a national lottery for charitable purposes (such as the
NHS, sports and the arts). Ministers had made no decision on
this question. A further potential development was skill ball,
which was likely to be established in thousands of retail
outlets, and would provide a computerised game on the lines of
spot the ball. Government would need to consider whether it
should also be exempt from duty.


6.   Finally, there was a brief discussion on whether a levy on
transfer fees could be devised which would generate money which
could be devoted to ground improvements.
