From: M JPY N E                                                 cc      Mr Howarth
      Operational Policing                                              Mr Omand
      Policy Unit                                                       Mr Lyon
      Room 528, QAG                                                     Mr Pugh
      ©273-2433                                                         Mr Edmundson
                                                                        Mr Butler
         12 February 1999                                               Mr Owen
                                                                        Mr Russell


Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM PETER KILFOYLE MP

Issue

Peter Kilfoyle has written to ask about placing copies of evidence on the Hillsborough
disaster in Liverpool Central Library.

Timing

2.     We understand that Mr Kilfoyle is anxious to clarify the position, so an early
reply would be helpful.

Recommendation

3.     That you reply to Peter Kilfoyle as in the attached draft, explaining that there are
no plans to place material in Liverpool Central Library.

Consideration

4.     Mr Kilfoyle refers to your response to a request from Frank Field in the House
on 26 October to place the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in
Liverpool Central Library. You indicated that you believed this already to be the case and
that you would endeavour to comply with the request. You wrote to Mr Field on 7
December and again on 12 January (copies attached) explaining that you had been
mistaken and that it had not been planned to send the material to Liverpool Central
Library and that it was not practical to do so now.

5.      As well as being placed in the Library of the House, copies of the Hillsborough
police statements were also supplied to the Family Support Group following a request on
their behalf. Mr Kilfoyle points out that there are now about ten families who belong to
an alternative group, the Hillsborough Justice Campaign, and who are denied access to
material held by the Family Support Group. He argues that each family should have the
opportunity to reappraise the evidence, regardless of which group they belong to.

6.     Peter Edmundson’s submissions of 30 November and 8 January explained that
the police statements, which comprise the bulk of the material involved, had been
returned to the South Yorkshire Police archive as they remain the property of the force.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O865.doc
It would be a large, expensive and time-consuming task to recall the statements and to
copy them together with the other material involved. It would also be for the Chief
Constable in the first instance to agree to the release of the statements.

7.      We do not believe there is any reason to reconsider your earlier decision and we
suggest that you reply in similar terms to your letter to Frank Field.

Handling/presentational issues

8.     No additional issues.




                                              M JPyne




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O865.doc
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Peter Kilfoyle MP
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A0AA




Thank you for your letter of 8 February about placing material about the Hillsborough
disaster in Liverpool Central Library.


I am sorry that my reply to Frank Field in the House on 26 October last year gave the
impression that the material from the Hillsborough scrutiny was to be placed in
Liverpool Central Library. I had misinformed myself on this point. There are no plans to
do this and I wrote to Frank on 7 December to apologise for the misunderstanding. A
copy of my letter was also placed in the Library of the House.


Much of the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was already in
the public domain. His report also included the material which he considered relevant to
his conclusions. In my statement to the House on 18 February 1998 announcing the
outcome of the scrutiny, I undertook to place in the Library of the House as much of the
remaining evidence considered by the scrutiny as possible, including all the police
statements. This has been done and the material is available if Members wish to arrange
for their constituents to view it.


As you know, we were also able at the same time to provide the Family Support Group
with copies of the police statements in response to their request. This was possible
because there was minimal additional work and cost involved in producing an extra set of
copies at that stage. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case and it would be a large and
costly exercise to copy all the material again. Also, following the completion of the
scrutiny, the police statements were returned to South Yorkshire Police, whose property
they remain. It would, therefore, be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider whether to release the statements now that the scrutiny which I established has
ended.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O865.doc
We have tried to be as helpful as possible by placing the material in the Library of the
House and providing a copy to the Family Support Group. I realise that there are
families who do not belong to the Family Support Group, although it was the main
representative body at the time of the scrutiny. I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful.
I can only advise you to arrange for the material to be viewed in the Library of the
House.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\ADVICE\mp-O865.doc
                                 PETER KILFOYLE MP




                                                                               CC\              U/

                           HO USE OF COM MONS                                                   K\/
                                L O N D O N SW1A OAA


PK/MB/Hillsb.

8 February 1999                    >■      '
                                                      i
                                                          L rJf    od/V v(Xa
The Rt. Hon. Jack Straw MP
The Secretary of State for the Home Office            a t^L-ziV rog I _
Home Office                                                               »    j            ,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                pU ^                  ,

SW1H9AT                             'j v       Wi J                                     G /Y ^ t^ D ^ C ^ U .
                                                                               0±JX               /v > v -d ^
Dear Jack,
                                                                                                      / Z
re: Hillsborough

You will recall (Hansard: cmn. 3 on 26/10/98) in reply to Frank Field, chat
arrangements would be made to place information in the Liverpool Central Library.
The information is not kept there, apparently. However, thirteen boxes of evidence
have been released to the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

The problem is that approximately ten of the families concerned belong to a quite
different group - the Hillsborough Justice Campaign - and tell me that they are
being denied access to the material. Can you advise me on these matters? My only
wish is to ensure that the family of each victim has the opportunity to reappraise the
evidence, regardless of which group they belong to.


Best wishes.




                                                                                       if
Peter Kilfoyle MP                                                 1C FEB 1999
Liverpool W alton
                                                                                   H        i

c.c. John Glover




        Liverpool W alton Constituency Office: 4 Christopher Street, Liverpool L4 4JX
               Telephone: 0151 298 1148                   Fax: 0151 298 1149
                                                                      r e c e iv e d   - 8   DEC



                                                     QUEEN ANNES GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT



                                    ° ~ l-   Mr Hov\ian-h
The Rt Hon Frank Field MP                    iv\r Orwaod
House of Commons                             H M C IC
LONDON                                       (Mr Busier
SW1A OAA
                                             (w s   u x i^ e r .



                                             H2i-er fedmunason
                                             nnr fia ile/
                                             mr owen
                                              M r    j ^ u s s e if        01 DEC 1998
                   J

I am writing bv way of reply to your letter of 12 October on behalf of your constituent,
Mr Burkett and to clarify the arrangements for the publication of the documentary
material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the course of his scrutiny.

In my original statement to the House of Commons, I undertook to publish asmuch
of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Sm.th as possible Th s has now
been done and the material, which includes more than one thousand police officer
statements, has been placed in the House of Commons Library.

As vou know copies of the police statements have also been sent to ■the Fami,y
Support Group. However, I was incorrect when I indicated recently that the material
had been or was being sent to the Liverpool Central Library {Official Report, 26
October 1998, Vol 318, Col 3). I misinformed myself and I am sorry for the
misunderstanding. Of course, it remains open to you to arrange for your constituent
to view the material in the House of Commons Library.

I am writing to Maria Eagle in similar terms and I am placing a copy of this letter in
the Library of the House.



                                     rrA >     jLV ju '
                                                          /




                                    JACK STRAW
        it Stcnj^
                                                    QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SWIH 9AT
                                                                                12 JAN 1999
                                                                    Cc\ (Y)&

                                                                         H / v \ o <—
    The Rt Hon Frank Field MP                                            ms i & z u -y c ji
    House of Commons                                                     (YVL
    LONDON
    SW1A OAA                                                             (Y\/L &<sU2Z-
                                                                         (YVL CgAiUZY
                                                                          (Y\/L CThfc^S
                                                                          (T\fL (2aa^ 2 jC




    Thank you for your letter of 23 December 1998 on behalf of your constituent,
f   Mr Burkett about the publication of material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    in the course of his scrutiny.

    I am sorry that you were disappointed by my letter of 7 December 1998 indicating
    that we were not placing the material in Liverpool Central Library.

    In my statement to the House on 18 February announcing the outcome of the
    scrutiny, I undertook to place in the House of Commons Library as much of the
    evidence considered by the scrutiny as possible, including all the police statements.
    This we have done and the material is available if Members wish to arrange for their
    constituents to view it.

    At the same time, in response to a request on their behalf, we provided copies of
    the police statements to the Family Support Group. This was possible because
    there was minimal additional work and cost involved in producing an extra set of
    copies at that stage. Unfortunately, that is no longer the case and it would be
    a large and costly exercise to copy all the material again. Also, following the
    completion of the scrutiny, the police statements were returned to South Yorkshire
    Police, whose property they remain. It would, therefore, be for the Chief Constable
    in the first instance to consider whether to release the statements now that the
    scrutiny which I established has ended.

    I realise that Mr Burkett would like to have access locally to the statements but we
    have tried to be as helpful as possible by placing this material in the House of
    Commons Library and providing a copy to the Family Support Group which, although
    I recognise does not represent all the families, has been the main body representing
    the families. I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful and I can only advise you to
    arrange for your constituent to view the material in the Library of the House.




                                       JACK STRAW
