RICHARD JONES



1.   Richard Jones,             the son        cf the     Applicants Leslie             and

     Doreen Jones          was born           cn 5th     October,    1963.          and was

     twenty five          years of age
                                wen he died                         at Hillsborough
                                 A
     football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2.   He     was    accompanied           to    the      stadium     by       his     sister

     Stephanie          and a        woman named       Tracey Cox.            All     thre’e

     entered       enclosure 3           of the      Lepping Lane            end of     the

     stadium.       . Stephanie          Jones became        separated from             her

     brother and Tracey Cox                  after a surge and pressure from

     the crowd in          the enclosure forced her                 forward towards

     the front of the terracing.



3.   During       the     course        of    inquest the     jury           heard     from

     Professor Usher that in his view the cause of death was

     traumatic asphyxia.                Photographic       evi-dence snowed that

     Richard Jones was standing with Tracey Cox in enclosure

     3 at 2.56          p.m.     The only evidence of             what happened to

     Richard Jones after this time came from Police Sergeant

     John     Killoch          who     disclosed that,       some        time        later,

     Police       Constable          Paul     Bromley      joined        a     group     of

     supporters who             were carrying Richard Jones                   across the

     pitch     to the          north     stand on       a makeshift           stretcher.

     Once there          the Constable attempted to                resuscitate him

     but was      unsuccessful-               He then     assisted in           carrying




ANNAAG
                                              -   2    -




          Richard into the temporary                  mortuary where at 4.00 p.m.

          he was certified dead by Dr. Nicholas Seivwright.



          The jury heard no evidence relating to what happened to

          Richard Jones either          between 2.56 p.m. and              the moment

          when he was        carried across the pitch, or                 after he had

          been taken into        the mortuary prior to               being certified

          dead.     The    Applicants         are          extremely concerned     that

          nothing in the evidence that was put before the inquest

          discloses that Richard Jones                 received any medical care

         whatsoever.       The facts         of his being carried across the

          pitch by supporters alone, and resuscitated by a police
 '
Li        officer    point      to     the    opposite          conclusion.         The

         Applicants also believe that such a conclusion would be

         reinforced had the evidence                  of Dr. Glynn Phillips, Dr.

         John Ashton and        Mr. F. Eccleston,              in   particular, been

         put before the jury.           During the course of the resumed

         inquests the Applicants wrote to the Coroner requesting

         that these people be          called as witnesses together with

         a Dr. Burns       (Pathologist), and that their                  evidence be

         put before       the jury.      This evidence, a large               part of

         which concerned events taking place after the 3.15 p.m.

         cut-off point,        demonstrated the               woeful inadequacy      of

         the     organisation and       provision             of emergency    medical

         care.     The Coroner refused the Applicants request-                      Ead

         such     evidence      been    placed             before   the    jury,    the

         Applicants       submit that        good grounds           would have     been




     ANNAAG
                                      -    3    -




     established for a jury       to draw the conclusion that the

     death by    traumatic asphyxiation              of Richard    Jones was

     aggravated by lack of care.



5.   In   addition, that      there       was no     evidence of     medical

     intervention     prior to    4.00          p.m. when   Mr. Jones      was

     certified dead, means that                no conclusions can be drawn

     as   to   when   death   actually occurred             and    hence   all

^    evidence of what happened            to Mr. Jones      after 3.15 p.m\

     is entirely relevant to the question of how he died.




ANNAAG
   HER M A J E S T Y ' S C O R O N E R FOR S O U T H    YORKSHIRE
                        ( W E ST D I S T R I C T )



          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                 ON THE 15TH APRIL,            1989



               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                        RICHARD JONES




                              Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,                      B M , B S , MRCGP

                 (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                                At

               The M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre,
                     W a t e r y S tr e et ,
                         Sheffield.

                                On

                       3 r d May,     1990.




               TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From    t h e N o t e s of J.L. H a r p h a m , Ltd,
             Official Shorthand Writers,
       55,   Q u e e n S t r e e t , S h e f f i e l d SI 2 DX



                          '10     ,
                                                                           li
       J •Li U.        J. i i ' Z r


^•CL-TC:                I             W PWglgwCallGd

       3 v TTT^o C O R O N A ...................

PCLSCV: T?yr^]a;:CTOU irrCFATCL T A Y T O K C a l l e d

       7*v TTr-0 C O R O N E R ............... .




                                                          114
3re1      1?nn


           TT'.ir;Tri''''r' 7'TT 0 ,7vrT~:'.        .''J'TT O p 1T<3TT'.Tyr) J0'~?J3

     I7v, FlIAo'^R:  Sir, the evidence that you will nov;
hear relates to Richard Jones.    R i c h a r d ’s parents aic
in Court wi t h social workers and members of the family.
The parents are represented b y a practice which. is a.
member of n y Group and T. appear on t3ieir behalf as agent
through the usual Steering Committee arrangement.

     TI"? C0RCIT1SR: Now, I think, I-Ir. Jor.es, you vere here
on the first day, wore you not, so you 1-mow th3 general
form so I am not going to go over that ground now and
we vill start s traightaway.

     This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on the
18th April, 1S^S9 • On that occasion I'Teil Anthony Pari:in,
Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

        "The b o d y which, is the subject of this
        Inquest lias been identified to FC 2220
        U r omlc y of the South Yorkshire Police as
        that of Richard Jones by Leslie Jones,
        his father.      He was 25 years of age having
        been b o r a on the 5th October, 1<?63 a-fc
        Liverpool.     He was a single ir.an and he
        lived at |                              .
        lie w a 3 an office i/orlcer b y occupation,
        lie died at Hillsborough Football Ground
        following an incident there on Saturday,
        1 5 th April, I9 S 9 . PC Bromley caused the
        body to be removed to the Kedico Legal
        Centre and there he identified it to
        Detective Constable Simon 1/eigold who
        subsequently identified the same bod y to
        Prof. Usher.      It is the family wish that
        the b o d y should be buried."

     And I ■then adjourned the Inquest and, as was my
normal practice, I wrote and checked whetlier the information
was correct and, in fact, I-Ir. Leslie J o n e s that is
you, T think, is it not ---- you signed the fora and
you confirmed that, in fact, the names, addresses, date
and place of birth, were correct and I think you have now
told me that, in.fact, your son had a 3Sc which I am
happy to acknowledge but it is not one of the registration
criteria whic h we need for the purposes of the Inquest.

     Tilood alcohols were estimated in this case as well
ay, in fact, .'til the others and i)r. Forrest gave the
results for these on the first day, in fact, I think y o u
were here the first day so you heard him, and the result
in the case of Richard was less than 10 m g / 100 r.il.


                                                                                       11
                                     < S >
                                        -   1   -
             /


                                             ?G F .   .'.I..' I'.   C'lJlc'-i




                        "i. Alan Usher,     is it not? - A. Yes, i is 1 3 <

                        Q. rrof. oT Forensic Ilcdicino at Sheffield and Ilor.ie Office
                           FatJ'olog5.st? - A. Y o g .
                    B
                        O.    And you arc going to tell ms about a lad ’./ho was -
                              identified to y o u as liichard Jones and you also had
                              an identification n u mber 6 3 , I believe? — A. Yes, that
                              is r i g h t .

                        0_.    C'Ui you tell r.ie then what the pathological findings
                              arc relating to this man? — A. Yes, sir, the body that
                              T examined t..t . s that of a heavily-built, brown-haired
                              young white nan, 1 7 9 cr.is in height, weighing 37 k g s .
                              There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyxia both
                              externally ?.r.d internally.       There vas v e r y slight
                              dilatation of the hea rt and s o e o enlargement.        I
                              th5.nl: that is prob?„bly physiological because I10 Vas
                              not at an age w h e n hypertension is likely to have
                              caused that.       I n m y viev ho had an average expectation
                    D         of life and was n o r m a l l y developed.  I give the cause
                              of death as traumatic asphyxia.

                        o, And this was a n o t h e r young ma n who had a tricostate
                           valve dilated? — A. Yes, I think that n a y be terminal
                           really in heart failure right at the end.

                        n. In fact, both the valves were marginally dilr.ted but
                           you would say the same for both - that yo u think it
                           is likely to have b e e n terminal? - A. Yes.

                        0. Mot/, we have a l r e a d y heard this but loss of
                           consciousness.      Tfhat would y o u say with regard to
                           that? — A. This y o u n g man died 'essentially because
                           he could n o t move his chest in or out and that meant,
                           of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
                           was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest
                           vas fixed, he w o u l d have be en unconscious ’in a matter
                           of seconds, p r o b a b l y between 10 and 2 0 seconds, and
                           he would be comple tely unknowing of anything that
                           happened subsequent to that, though he would take a
                           matter of minutes, perhaps between k and 6 minutes,
                           to d i e .                          j

                              But once he was unconscious he would not know anything
                              more about it? - A. That is right.

                                              r,v i«ni. FitAs:on:

                        Q. Prof. Usher, can you help a little about the alcohol
                           content.  It is recorded in this young man as "less
                    H      than 10 mg", is that because the level is so small
                           that it is difficult to measure it accurately? -
                           A. Yes, it is.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                              11
                           Thir; youri" -r.c .n m a y hc.vo hac1 r-o. alcohol. at a l l h u t ,
                           u*;i   tT’o appf\xv\t-p.s t h a t t h o y do uso — X ar.> not a
                           biochersist - i t it q u i t e customr-r1/ to e r r r c s c it
                           in that way.        " L e s s tha-* 1 0 ;' r :c .y r.:oa:i ar^-'thing u p
                           to lO b u t i t r.iay 1.10a n n e n o a t all.

                       •1. ytot if it were none at r.ll, presumably it would show
                           as a distinct n e g a t i v e ? T/hat I have in nine’: is the
                   B       evidence that ve hoax'd on the first day about sometimes
                           when sor.'.coody loses thoir life there is almost a
                           spontaneous p r o d u c t i o n of alcohol within the body
                           bjid could the o per a t i o n of that producc a reading of
                           a ver y small a l coh ol level within the body? - A . Yes,
                           — suppose it could but only a very snail level.

                       Q. And that cculd be less than 10? - A. Ch, yes.
                   C
                       'I. Thanh you, P r o f . — A. There is no evidence at all to
                           show that this b o y had. in iiira any amount of alcohol
                           that would have af f c c t e d his judgment or balance or
                           anything lrLho that at all.

                       Q. It certainly p l aye d no part in his death so far as you
                          n.rc aware ? - A. A b s o l u t e l y right.
                   D
                                           Fu r t h e r b y TT-TB COROI-TCR:

                          i'rof. Usher, I do w a n t to just clear this up because
                          Dr. Forrest dealt w i t h the question of yeast
                          production of al c o h o l and in his opinion, m y recollection
                          is, because the h i g h alcohol levels were not present
                          ho sr.id that he was se-tisfiod that indigenous produc­
                   E      tion ofalcohol h a d n o t occurred because he could not
                          find any of the h i g h e r alcohols? - A. Yes.

                       Q. N o v , I want to be quite         sure - do you disagree with
                          ])r. Forrest? - A. Ho.

                       Q, Cr not, with r e g a r d to the possibility .... - A. No,
                   F      I do not disagree wi-th him.      He knows about the higher
                          alcohols.  I did no t lenow that.     I have only been
                          given the figures w i t h regard to ethyl alcohol but I
                          would accept that argument from him.

                          "culd it be right that what you                  ?.re really saying is
                          that it is tx*ue that indigenous                 production of
                          alcohol car. occur in the body? -                  A. Yes, I r.groswith
                   G      that.

                       •). You arc not saying that, in this particular                     instance,
                            + did occur?   A. No, I could not say that.

                         ’./hat you arc sayi ng ic that measuring less than 10
                         might mean a n y t h i n g fron the minutest amount up to
                          1r- basically? — A. Or to nothing.
                   H

                                                                     Ac,
J l Harpharn Ltd
                                                                                                       114S
                                                                                       o u t- Oj   th'i

                                                       -.o   11:
                                                               ■ ■>’■: •'■or:,

                                     TTr. ccncznsn:     Thanh you, . T:rof       Usher.     Vo -..’ill
                        T'.C c f .   "Oi; a.-T-in n't aboui   o *clccl:.         A.          yoTt, cij

                                          T-T-jc;.;                                ■i t ,
                    B
                                                      r-v Tir: C07lCTrC:>.:

                        Too 7 - A. i olicc Serrjeant John           sir     the
                              Midlands Police.    I have p roviousiy taken the oath.

                        C-"ji you trice ne through the surauarj'', plcr.so? —
                        A. At 'thIO hoxirs on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 19^S!»
                        mc.Tin.rd Jones left his ho no in Sheffield with his
                        sister, Itios Stephanie L in d a Jones together with
                        Tracey ;5Xis,abcth Co;:. The Court has alrecx!y hoard,
                        Liir, that T r a cey also lost her life at Ilillsoorou^i!.
                        It was their intention to attend t h e Semi Final football
                        n:atch which ;/c.s to be played, at the Hillsborough
                        Stadium that day. All three persons had tickets for
                    D   the terraces at tie Uest Stand.

                        C-n arrival at the stadium they joined a lar^c crowd
                        outside tha Lepping-s Lane turnstiles.    After, sor-ie
                        minutes they entered, the stadium v i a Gate C and wallced
                        together clonjj the tunnel beneat h the West Stand and
                        onto the terraces.    Stephanie is unable to say which
                        enclosrirc they entered but it has n o w been establiih cd
                        as .Judo sure No. ~ • Stephanie was wit h her .Tothor
                        and Tracey as they entered the terraces and, after j
                        few seconds, Tra cey was subjected t o a stir£C of
                        pressure whic h forced h e r towards the front of the
                        tcrracii:-j. In      crash that followod she was sepr.rr.tcd
                        from both I;or brother and Tracey.

                        Followih." the severe crushing in the '..:est Stand
                        terracing, Police Constable Paul ISromlcy '.:cnt onto
                        th.c pitch and assisted a numbe r of injured persons,
                        Tile officer saw that a num b e r of supporters were
                        carrying* a nan, no:; kno w n to be Ricliard, across the
                        pitch on a hoardi ng which was beinfj used as a temporary
                        strctchor.   The officer assisted to carry nichard to
                        the rear of the North Stand where he attempted
                        resuscitation-but w5.th.out success.    The o f f i c e r was
                        assisted to carry 115.chard into the cymnasiur.i where
                        a temporary mortxiary had be e n set up.

                        At 1600 hours Dr. Nicholas Andr ew Seivcnvricyit . ...

                        I think it is act\ially S e i v e w r i g h t .  J. think it is a
                          *     •ror.  The  ’n* should       not     be there.  - A. 5orry,
                        sir.
                    H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             ©                                            11
                                                                                           VTT T r-jv
                                                                                           t.


                                 . . • • crrai :inocI ?.ic!’.arel in the t cu.-jporc-ry mortuary an<i
                                 csrtifiov; life orrtinct.

                                 At 0 2 ’:-3 hours on Sundry, loth A p r i l , "!?39 2:r. Lcsij.c
                                 Jonos identified the bo d y of his son to I'olicc-
                                 C or.:*table: Zror.loy c.i the temporary '*crti'.ary.

                                 The officer later cscortccl Richard *s 'body to the
                          B      Ilec'ico L o 't .I Centre rur”. confirnoc! that ider-tification
                                 to Uctoctive Constable ".'oigold.

                                 On 17tli April, 1929, following the identification b y
                                 Detective Constable Ueigold, Prof*. Alan Usher carried
                                 out an a\'.top33r and submitted a report giving cause of
                                 death.

                                 jXaOcr.ce is incleaded, sir, regarding the analysis of
                                 the blood sample tclcen from Richard. where the presence
                                 of ethanol ’..ras detected. The ^itncssGS proving
                                 continui ty of that sample are Detective Constable Green,
                                 Dctcctive Sergeant Turner and Detective Sergeant
                                 Fletcher.   The analysis was carricd out b y Dr.
                                 Alexander' Robert Forrest.

                          D      Found in the personal effects of Richard were three
                                 full match tickets.   This supports the evidence,
                                 sir, that he entered the stadium v i a Gate C together
                                 with Stephanie and Tracey.

                                      That concludes cry evidence,              sir.      There is visual
                                 evidence.

                                       T.T-fL' CORONER:      No questions from me.             I-Ir. Fraser?

                                       MT-i. F aASER:       ITo, thank you,      sir.

                                       III. LIMB:         No, thank you,      sir.

                                       IvR. CATCIIPOLE:        Ho, thanlc you,          sir.

                                             POLICE INSPECTOR M I C H A E L LAYTON C a l l e d ;

                                                              B v THE C O R O N B R :

                              0_. Yes? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                                  Vest Midlands Folice.   Sir, an examination has been
                                  made of video .film and photographic evidence and
                                  Richard has been identified alive outside the ground
                                  and also in Enclosure No. 3> and then subsequently
                                  later lying on the pitch.

                                 Sir, a photograph rcfcrcnced T'F.;L10 / 3 ^ A . Richard is
                                 dhown, together* with his sister, Stephanie, and Tracey
                                 Cox about to enter the ground via Gate C and that
                                 photograph is timed at 1^55*
                          H
                                 On a BBC video tape, referenced MAP 1, ti.med at
                                 1^56:31:0*1-, Richard is shown alive in Enclosure No.
                                 3 and, at this point, he is, ^ju^act, together with
J. L. H a r p h a m Lid

                                                               - S   -
                                                               ! • 7• \ V-' P__
                                                               >t            P*




     Tri’.ccy Co.-:.

     Sir, there arc throe pliotcgraphs, including a
     photograph referenced DIZ1 / 6 , which show Richard
     lyin£- on the pitch b e i n g tended to b y supporters.

     Hr. and Mrs. Jones have, in fact, viewed visual
     evidence, sir, and the 3r have been able to assist us
     in confirning thr-t evidence.

     PC Bromley has signed a p l a n of the pitch indicating
     where ho first saw Richard and that plan is referenced
     r.i/1 .

     Sir, if I can, first of all, refer yoti to a plan which
     hr*s been .given the reference number KI/JL 16 7 .

0.    That     will be C22S. —A. A n d then a further plan,
     HTML          which is a p l a n of the terraces.

Q.    That  will be C22 9.-           A. And, sir, PlS/l, which is PC
     Bromley* s plan.

Q. That will be C230. - A. Sir, first of all, in respect
   of the plan MVJL 1 6 7 , regarding the idcntificaticn
   outside the ground, referr ing to this plan, the point
   at wh i c h that photograph is shown is in this location
   h e r o , wli5.ch, as you have already heard, is, in fact,
   vex*y close to Gate C.       I n respect of the video
   identification inside the ground I refer to p3.an
   r?:.\TL 1 13•    This is Enclosure Ho. 3 suid the video
   identification on BBC tape MAP 1, we believe, is in
   this position h e r e . As I have said, at that time,
   .Richard is still alive and with Tracey.

o. Did we use the same p l a n in Tracey's case, do you know? -
   A. ~7c did not use the same plan, sir ....

Q. I am sorry, I meant the same video? — A. They are
   actually together, yes.      Sir, PC Bromley's plan,
   Pil/1» the plan of the pitch, the location shown is
   in this position h e r e , at the Leppings Lane end but
   further down the pitch.

Q. And remind me,         that is a recollection, is it not? -
   A. It is, sir,         yes.   Sir, unfortunately, in respect of
   the photograph         w-here Hichard is shown actually being
   treated on the         pitch, it is not possible to say from
   the photograph         where it is on the pitch.   There is
   not sufficient         detail to identify it.

Q. Yes, there is a p h o t o g r a p h s h o w ing h i m but you cannot
   locutc it because t her e arc no l a n d mar ks? — A. Ko.

             I.'u. FTIAS’CR:     No q u e s t i o n s   for tlic Officer,         thank
     you.

             HR. LIMB:         Mo,   ths.nk you,        sir.
                                                                                          115
                          m . I'TcAo'E7}: oir, T.;ill you just give me a minute
                     bnforo you conclude this particular Inquest?

                                    t:::; c c n c : r z n - .

                                    -»-T-,
                                    l"
                                                 'rT'T' •       OJ.il J

                     concern the family wh i c h do not directly arise from the
                     sumnr.rios which have b e e n p r ese nted but which thsy would
                 B   like, if at all possible, y o u to deal with to satisfy /
                     t i l « Pi .

                                                                 r-ut the first ons then.

                            U pri\ZT.\z    Sir, it is cl cur frotr. the very
                     detailed report of Lor d Just ice Taylor that his findings
                     vera that alcohol played no significant part in the
                     disaster on the 1 5 th April.    That report has boon widely
                     published and this famil y w o u l d like perhaps to
                     understand a little more w h y such emphasis seems to
                     have been placed on the alcohol ar.alysi s . Certainly on
                     the o"/onin5       of these

                            Tim CGTIONT^:      Can I i n t e r m p t you? I thin!: I did
                     say right at the b e g i n n i n g that we were not going to
                 D   deal with the question of h o w and I think it is only fair
                     to say that we have n o t introduced Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s
                     report into this Inqu iry and whilst, of course, that
                     report is public property, so to s p e a k , I would not want
                     it to be put to the Jxiry that that is the conclusion of
                     Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s report.      It ma y be or it m a y not
                     be.    'Then the time conies, if it is relevant, wc will
                     deal with it so I cannot accept as a submission that
                     that is correct.      You n a y put it forward as a v i e w but
                     I ar.i not accepting it as a proposition or as evidence
                     of that fact, that he concluded this or that about
                     alcohol.     I an sorry but I have got to say that.

                          Yoiir second point, I thin!: I have understood your
                     second point.   If I have not, of course, you will correct
                     me.  The second point is th e y say w h y are we dealing
                     with the question of alcohol levels,       ["hat is r5.ght, is
                     it not?

                          I-!H. FTIA373R: Perhaps more why such emphasis appears
                     to have been placed u p o n it.

                           THD CCR0!T2Il:_ The d e cis ion as to what evidence to
                     call, of course, is" n i n e . I do not think we have placed
                     any undue emphasis on alcohol, on the contrary, I think
                     at this starve we have not because all I am doing is
                     recording the fact, not d r a w i n g any conclusions, because
                     that would impinge on the issues of ho w or x/hy which I,
                     as you know, specifically excluded.        Perhaps I ought to
                     just say, Ur. Fraser - and forgive me if I say that -
                     that the issue of alcohol has been a matter of great
                 H   moment to a lot of the families.        They i/anted the figures.
                     They wanted to know it.       If I had srippresscd the
                     information I think I w o u l d have been open to very serious
                     criticis:^ and so I do not actually              the p r o p o s i t i o n   1
L. Harpham Ltd
    that vo are giving it unduo cr^h'njia but X do '.'-ccc;,t
    that, within each and ■.•very cr-.yo, we jive the fi./ar*:
    ijejcause that ic part of the cvidenc:.      '."hat relevance,
    if any, ±t has -.;o will deal i:ith whe.: wo ccr.o ---
    when I '.'.ocino, if ~:c go t:c :uiy further i’Owri;:"-1, vkat
    further evidence to cr.il and X will the-: call whatever
    vitiieinjos      need to deal with that (;uosticr.. jens
    that ’      y o u or your clients?
B
          1:-1. r ’llSlv':   I hope so, sir, yes.

          The scconc point real ly relates to the condition
    of r.any of the fans who appear to have died.       On tho
    day there were no n mtilated - if I can use th^.t word -
    bodies and vo have hoard evidence that the majority of
    fans had cor.G blue disc olouration but there was no
    apparent accurate diagnosis made at the ground and
    Ilichard's family would like to k n o w w h y perhaps their
    son was not taken to h o spit al and just assumed that he
    was dor.il and resuscitation attempts made at the
    hospital.

           TT'v CCriOISIl: I!r. Fraser, I understand their
    concern behind the qu e s t i o n but I think that each and
D   ever^,'- fan, as you know, every one of the people who
    died, was certified dead either at the hospital er at
    the ground by a propei'ly qualified medical man.       That
    is the first point.      That lias to be appreciated.   It
    is net a cp.icst5.on of people just saying "He's dead".
    > 0 1 7 single one was looked at medically.      Secondly,
    one has to think back to the situation.        In an ideal
    world it :::vy be that everybody should finish up in
E   hospital biit, rror.: a practical point of view - I do
    not want to deal with, this any further becaw.se I do
    not thiiik we can — but fror.: a practical point of vis:.’
    it is, with all due respect to your clicnts, an
    unrealistic expectation in the situation in which
    everybody f cur'd t hems elves on that d a y and it is no
    use uincing words and se.ying anything different.       I
    think that that is the truth of the matter.

             Thirdly, I :annot say what people's judgments
     •/ere at the tine     I f that is a relevant point, and it
    might        when we come to deal with the question of how,
    then pg-.'.in we will deal w i t h it at that stage but it
    is not appropriate to deal with it now.        I ar.i cencerncc,
    in a sense, about the question because I think it shows,
     ■.'zti; the greatest of-respect, a misconception as to
    the practicalities of the situation and also the truth
    of the ratter.      Ve have heard from Frof. Usher and what
     10 said about loss of consciousness, duration, length
    of tir^c that it might take for somebody to die - even
    if they had gone to hospital half— an—hour or an hour
    later it would not have made any difference.          I think
    wo have got to face it.       That is the truth..    I an not
H   very helpful but I thiiik that that is the best I can d c .
     j-iyway we will have to deal with that, if we deal with
    it, as part and parcel of the
                                            f n )                      11
          7'jr. Jones, X know y ou ■.:ow I'.ero whe n v.ro dealt v i t a
    Traccy*s t'crlh and J. appreciatccl your "rcscncc th e n .
    If you roi '.cnbor I said that and, in fact, that :.~a2 true,
    I also !:r.cv/ that you -.'ould Too coming r.^T.in because we
    k^ew ve ;:crc ^;oin^- to have Tiic h a r d 1:j caoe a little bit
    later.     J. q u i t e , quite understand vhat a dreadful blow
    this i::ust b e          — -.veil, I keep on sayin-j I quite
                             I correct r.vyo-clf - hoi; can I por.sibly.
B   understand w] >a t a dreadful blow this must be to you.
    The best I can do is to imagine it were one of ziy'sons
    and I can. then imagine what I would fool like, so I
    undcrstand, to a certain c::tont, the pain and the
    concoiT* w hich yoxx are feeling.

          I have t r i e d to anavrer trie points   you have
    raised fairly firm ly really, I think, becaus e I think
    what J was spying has to be said.        I do not see there
    is any point in do±n{j anything else.       At least that is
    my jurT/j.ient. Subject to that, J. feel for you and for
    the rest of y o u r family in the loss that you have
    snffcrc:'..

           Ladies and centloncxi, we are e°in{j to rise.     I
    tliirJ: we must have a reasonable time.       Shall we say
D   ten-past-two?    ".Jould t7.’
                                .at be all rirfat? Thank you
    very i.:uch.

                         (Luncheor. Ad.i o ur nnen t)




E




F




G




H

                                          (so)                             11
Q@ © ssW lti [pOams p roton @@<3



     Identified Alive.

$    Identified Apparently Dead.

     Unconfirmed Identification

% Identified Alive and Apparently
  Dead in the Same Location.
        f   <•'.
                                                                                                             —       - +         —        J     k   ^    a b   -
                                                                                                                                                           Appendix I:
                                                                                                                                                                                                1Jo
                                                                                                                                                           Sheffield Wednesday Koolbull Club.
                                                                                                                                                           Hillsborough Ground.




                                                                         Q y m rm lu m




                   'f£v-' V°
                                                    Llflhflno
                                                    Tow»f
                                                                            r  #*»aih'
                                                                                      Jyi. L. X
                                                                            r lf i t Aid
                                                                            Room
                                                                                                    Police
                                                                                                    Prw vn
                                                                                                    H00m                   i>v
                                                                                                                                                \ Vd\
                                                                                                                                        nv ' \ » \ * '•>*
                                                                    NORTH STAND
                               OuaA
                                                                                                                                                    v. \ •                '
                                                                                                                                                    &* »•’            * • ’
                                                                                                                                                    v
                                                                                                                                                    \ wUk\'      ***'% \  1
                                                                                                                                                                    *\ *
                                                                                                                                                             '       \'v %Q\\
                                                                                                                                                                         ?v
                                                                                                                                                            $          'MV» \
                                                                                                                                                            kefr'       '*     A
                               0.14C                                                                                                                          \\  v       ' '%   \




                                       ccrv c


                                         LlOhllng
                                         Town                     CCTV          ccrv
                                                                     SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                           DM**
                                                                        I 'Ok»ao»»C
                                                                                  Infrux*                                                                                                        to
                                                                OfttaUI
                                                                      L O a n - C*/P»r«                                                                                                          Co
iCAll                                                                    LloNlnflr-—       ------            ' ' ;     ‘    •        • '• • "
                                                                         TOW*                                    ‘    *•
                                                                                                                       .                  V ......
0
                                   n
                                   tO
    ^\c>.   C^vA ii u ^ vv?>   .
                                   to
                                                 C 230
                0   U   20   30 ft.            ??-l
                                              Pd UL.2. Q




                                      \




                                                           MORTUARY
                                                           (not t o j a U I




                                          /
                                      /




SPION KOP £NO
                                                   S. L. JONKS

     MR. PAYNE:   Before you resume, sir, the lawyers
present would like to thank you for the courtesy in
arranging transport this morning.  Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:    Before I say anything else I would like
to thank Mr. Catchpole and, through Mr- Catchpole, the Club
for making it available, having everything unlocked, having
people there and being more than helpful.    I am most
grateful to you.   I think, although I have seen it before,
it was helpful to see it again.   You must remember that it
has   changed a little bit-  You will   have noticed that. I
do not have to point out      to you that there were no
perimeter fences and so on but one learns a lot, does one
not?

     MR. KING:   Before Miss Jones starts her evidence,
sir, can I tell you something that I have been asked on her
behalf to tell you?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, please.

     MR- KING:   She has     identified    herself on one of the
photographs which has already been produced to the Inquest
which is C-295-

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we will put it up at a convenient
point-

     MR- KING:   I know she wanted you to know that from
the beginning, sir.

                STEPHANIE LINDA JONES Sworn

                      Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Stephanie Linda Jones,   is that right? - A.
   Yes.

                                          in Merseyside,
   that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it mum and dad who are here? - A. Yes.

Q. You are I think a receptionist? - A. Yes.

Q. Or you were at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. You are in fact the sister of Richard Jones, are you
   not, who unfortunately lost his life at Hillsborough?
   - A. Yes.
                                                             6




                                                     S. L. JONES
   /
Q. Of course, technically you were not related to Tracey
   but she was Richard's girlfriend, was she not, and
   she unfortunately lost her life which is very sad
   obviously? - A- Yes-

Q. I want you to tell me as much as you can and as much
   as you feel able.  I will ask you questions like I
   did with all the other witnesses and we will see how
   we get on-  Okay? - A- Yes.

Q. Richard was a season ticket holder I think? - A. Yes,
   that is correct­

ed- Initially he got two tickets because I think it was
    just him and you who were going to go to the match? -
    A. Yes, that is right.

Q. I think that Tracey decided she would like to come as
   well, is that right? - A- Yes.

Q. He got another ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact   he asked you to get a ticket for Tracey? - A.
   Yes.

Q. He was actually living in Sheffield, was he not,
   Richard? - A. Yes.

Q. It was easier for you to go to the club than for him?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You got   the £12 ticket Ithink for Tracey    which is
   for the   stand? - A. Yes, my father got it   from the
   ground.

Q- Somebody in the family went to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. As it happens your mum came home that day and she had
   another one and so you finished up with four? - A.
   Yes, that is r i g h t -

Q.   Hers was a £14 ticket for   the stands? - A. Yes-

Q.    You took them-  Did you have ail four or did you have
     just these two and Richard have the other two? - A. I
     had three and Richard had his own.

Q.    You looked after them and on the 14th April, the day
     before the Friday, in the  evening you came to
     Sheffield by train? - A. Yes.
                                                                                       7




                                                                              S. L. JONES

Q. because you had somewhere to stay, that is right,                              is
   it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Tracey ha d also come or she may have been here
   already? - A. She lived in Sheffield as well.   They
   both went to university there.

Q. You all w en t out that evening. Where did you go as a
   matter of interest? - A. The Broom Hill Tavern pub
   just at the bottom of the road for just one drink.

Q. You had a nice time? - A. Yes.

Q. Looking forward to the match I expect at that time? -
   A. Yes.

Q. In the morning of the 15th you had an extra ticket at
   that point, did you not? - A. We had to swap one of
   them because otherwise Tracey would not be with us.

Q. You wanted her with you? - A. Yes.

Q. So Richard had his breakfast and he went off and
   exchanged the £12 ticket with a friend, is that
 • right? - A. Yes.

Q. This was really a private arrangement? - A. Yes.                               His
   friend obviously wanted to sit down.

Q. He was getting a good deal, was he not? - A. The more
   expensive ticket.

Q. It seems to me the sensible thing to have done.  He
   then came back and so you had three tickets for the
   terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened to the fourth one? - A. Before we went
   to the ground we went and apparently Richard knew
   some friend who wanted the other ticket and he was
   going to sell them the tickets.

Q. He knew somebody,            did he? - A. It was a friend of a
   friend.

Q. Again it was a private arrangement? - A. Yes, it was
   just to get rid of the ticket rather than sell it at
   the ground.
                                                                       's.,



Q.   T h en I t h i n k y o u had s o m e t h i n g to e a c h f o r l u nc h .
     You h a d a l i g h t l un c h . - A. Yes.
                                                               S. L. J O N E S

            Q. A't about 1.15 or so did you set off for the ground? -
               A. No, I think we had lunch about that time.

            Q. I am sorry?   - A. We had lunch at that time.   It was
        B      after that.    Just after two some time.

            Q. Just after two? - A. Yes.

    /
            Q. Did you walk or drive? - A. No, we drove.

            Q. Because it was too far? - A. Yes.

            Q. How long did it take you to drive to wherever you
        C      parked? - A. We drove to meet somebody at a pub to
               give them the tickets which was on the other side of
               the ground.

            Q. I am sorry? - A. It was to the other side of the
               ground, the public house. I am not sure of   the name.

            Q. You do not know which pub it was,   do you? -A. No.

            Q. Did you then park in that car park of the pub or did
               you park somewhere else? - A. No, w e parked in the
               car p a r k .

            Q. When you say the other side of the ground, are you
               saying he was at the Nottingham Forest side? - A. No,
               it was right over the other end ‘of the city really.

            Q. It was a long way away? - A. Yes.

            Q. Were there supporters in that pub? - A. No, it was
               very empty.

            Q. Richard's friend's friend was there and you got the
               tickets? - A. Yes.

            Q. Did you stop for a quick drink? - A. Yes, we had one
               drink.
        F
            Q. What did Richard have? - A. He had a pint of beer.

            Q. That is all he had? - A. That is all.

            Q. What time was it when you got to that pub? - A. I am
               not really sure.  It was only about fifteen minutes
4
               away from the house.

        G   Q. From home and you left about two I think you said? -
               A. Yes.
                                                       S. 1j. JQNKS

Q. So we will say you left about quarter past.  We do
   not have to be to the second.  Then I think you
   stayed at the pub for about another fifteen minutes
   or so? - A. Yes.

Q. So in round terms that would be about 2.30, would
   that be fair? - A. About.

Q. We are not pinning you down to a minute or two or
   anything like.

Q. How did you then get from this pub to the ground? -
   A. It was T r a c e y ’s car and she drove to the ground.
   She d o e s n ’t drink at all really.

Q. How long did it take to drive to the ground would       you
   say? - A. About fifteen, ten or fifteen minutes.

Q. Then you   ha d to park? -   A. Yes, in Far Lane.

Q. Which is   quite close to the ground? - A. Yes,     not far
   away.

Q. You were fortunate then to find a space? - A. Yes.

Q. From where you parked you then walked to the ground,
   is that right? - A. Yes, that is true.

Q. That would have taken you how many more minutes? - A.
   About ten m i n u t e s .

Q.   Again if we add it all up we get   to about ten to
     three? - A. Yes.

Q. Would that- be about right? - A. That would seem about
   right.

Q.   Would you agree?  If you do not agree please    say
     so? - A. Something like that.  I am not sure    but
     something like that.

Q. I am just adding up the times with ten minutes here
   and ten minutes there.  Did you see lots of fans
   first of all on your drive to Farndale Road? - A. No,
   not on the way to Far Lane, no.

Q. When you parked and got put? - A. The nearer we got
   to the ground the more fans.
                          S. L. JONES


Are you a football supporter yourself, generally
speaking? - A. Not on a regular basis.  I have only
been to Anfield maybe 4 or 5 times, and not away at
all.

So you are not really an experienced football
attender? - A.  No.

You had not been to Hillsborough before, had you? - A.
No.

So you were not there in 1988? - A.     No, Richard had.

Richard had but you had not? - A.     No.

As you were walking towards the ground you were
walking down Leppings Lane, or up Leppings Lane, I am
told, is that right? - A. Yes.

Firstly, I want to make sure we have got the right
road.  What is the map number?  Is it 284?  Yes,
C.284.  Just put it up.  I will just make sure I have
not misremembered the road - Farndale. - A.  Far Lane.

I thought perhaps I was getting it wrong.  Do you know
where it is on that map? - A.  I didn't know at the
time.  It was only afterwards I found out where it
was.

It is Far Lane - F-A-R did you say? - A. I think it is
double RR - F-A-R-R, is it?

In that case, I was thinking of the wrong road.  I was
thinking of Farndale.  I do not know where Far Lane is
either.  Is it off the map?

     MR. HALE:   I can show it to you, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Hale, thank you very much.  I
see.  It is what I would call below Wadsley Lane, not
that far from the ground, you are right, but not the
one I had in mind anyway.
You are saying that you walked from that road all the
way to the ground? - A. Yes.

I do not suppose for a minute you can remember the
names of the roads you walked down? - A. No, I cannot.

I will have to go over the ground again.  Were you on
your own when you were walking there, or were there
other supporters walking with you? - A. To begin with
there wasn't many at all.
                                                          11



                               S. L. JONES


Q. ' At one point did you start picking up other
     supporters? - A. I don't know.  After 5 minutes we
     started seeing a few and then it just got more and
     more.

Q.   They were all walking down towards   the ground as far
     as you were concerned? - A. Yes.

Q.   What was their behaviour like? - A.   Happy;  they were
      singing.  It was just normal.  I did think there was
      an awful lot of people but it was just normal.

Q.   Just as a matter of interest, did you see people
     carrying any cans? - A. No, I didn't.

Q.   None at all? - A.   No, none.

Q.   You have told me they were singing and other people
      have described that I think as jolly. Would you use
      that word or not? - A. Yes.

Q.   But you were not frightened in any way? - A. No.   I
      did think there was an awful lot of people but I
      hadn't been to that many matches so I just assumed it
      was normal.

Q.   Nobody did anything to you.  I do not mean in the
     sense of hitting you, but did people swear at you, or
     anything like that? - A.  No, there was no problem at
     all.

Q.   Good.   Then you approached the ground - right? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   As you got towards the turnstiles, which-you had not
      seen before, this was the first time? - A. I didn't
      see them at all.

Q.   You did not see them at all? - A. The whole time.

Q.   Tell me what you saw? - A.   Nothing, just a mass of
      people as they went towards the ground.

Q.   I see, so the nearer you got,   the thicker the crowd? -
      A. Yes.

Q.   And right at the ground it was an absolute mass of
      people? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see any police officers, just as a matter of
      interest? - A. I had noticed I had hardly seen any,
      and then like once I got near the ground I saw one
      officer directing traffic, that was all, and then
      nearer the ground, or once we were in the mass, I saw
                                         S. L. JONES


one policeman on horseback and then further back there
were two more on horseback amongst the crowd.

So what you are saying is as far as you remember, you
saw one officer who was directing traffic?-*-. A. Yes.

Was it near a traffic light, a little bit higher up? -
A. Yes.

Then as you got nearer to the ground                         your recollection
is of a police officer on horseback?                         - A. Yes.

Where was he? - A. That  was more when we got right
into the crowd, right near the gates.

Then a little bit further in there were another two? -
A.No, there were two quite far out, out of the crowd.

Do you mean towards the roadway, that is what I am
trying to find out? - A.   On the outside of the crowd,
where the bulk of the crowd w a s .

I see.  When you saw all this crowd of people there
what did you think? - A. I just wondered why there
were so many people there really.

Was the crowd at that point moving, as far as you can
remember? - A.  Sort ofshuffling.  They didn't seem
to be going in any sort of direction.

When happened?  Did you, Richard and Tracy join in                                  at
the back? - A. Yes, there seemed no other place to                                  go.

Did other people join you behind? - A. Yes.

I think that as the people joined you behind, you
started feeling a push forward, is that right? - A.
The pressure of people, yes.

So there was pressure behind you? - A. Yes.

Which was tending to make you go forward? - A.                                 Yes.

That presumably meant that you were getting closer and
closer to people ahead of you all the time, is that
right? - A.  Yes.

Y o u a n d T r a c y a n d R i c h a r d w e r e t r y i n g to h o l d h an ds
b e c a u s e y o u w a n t e d to s t a y t o g e t h e r b ut p e o p l e t e n d e d
to s e p a r a t e you, is that r i g h t ? - A. Yes.

H o w d i d that h a p p e n ?    J u s t tell m e h o w that h a p p e n e d .
D id they p u s h b e t w e e n you, or w h a t h a p p e n e d ? - A.       It
is just n o r m a l .    P e op l e a r e just m o v i n g a l o n g . You
                                                                               13



                                            S. L. JONES


      'can't seem to stay in a whole bunch together.                       It is
       just impossible.  That always happens.

Q.    When this was happening, can you remember - you may
      not be able to remember - at the ground the outer
      perimeter gates, the sort of blue gates with railings
      on them? Can you remember those at all? - A. No, I
      can't remember going through those.  I did go through
      them but I can't remember.

Q.    What I am trying to find out is when you are saying
      you were being pushed, do you think that you had gone
      through these outer gates, or had you not reached them
      yet? - A.  I think I had probably gone through them by
      then.

Q.     Okay.     Were you going through on the right-hand side?
       - A.     Yes.

Q.    Was that because Richard said, "That's the turnstiles
      that we n e e d ” , or what? - A.  I didn't see the
      turnstiles at all.       It was just the movement.  That
      was the only way sort of thing.

•Q.    But he had been before so presumably you were relying
       to a certain extent upon his knowledge, were you not?
       - A.    I suppose     so.

Q.    Yes.   At some p o i n t I t h i n k y o u s a w s o m e b l u e m e t a l
      gates.   C a n y o u r e m e m b e r t hat? - A.   Yes.

Q.    What sort of gates were they? - A.                  Large like.

Q.    We have called them concertina gates.                   - A.     Yes,    that
      is right.

Q.    I will   just show you a picture of one.  I am not
       saying this is the gate you saw because we have not
       yet established which gate you saw, but I think it is
       259.  I think there are two of them on.   No, it has
       only got one of them on.   This is probably not the one
       that you went through, but that sort of gate, is that
       right? - A.   I would say so, yes.

Q.    If you     look at 261, that is a close-up of this sort of
       gate -    yes? - A.  I think so.

Q.    Something        of t hat    sort?   - A.   Yes.

Q.    I mean         that type of gate.          It was not a g at e w i t h
      r a i l i n g s or a n y t h i n g l ik e that? - A. T h e r e was s uc h a
      m a s s of a crowd, y o u c o u l d n ' t r e a l l y see.
                                                          14



                               S. L. JONES


Q. ' Okay.  At this gate was there a policeman? - A.   Not
     that I saw.

Q.   You did see a policeman on horseback, I think, did    you
     not? - A.  He was in the middle of the crowd, yes.

Q.   He was not at this gate; he was further away from     you
      then? - A. No, I think he was towards the second
     gats, yes.

                      Q.   Which second gate
                                                                                 15


                                                                          L. JOIiES




            0.   which second gate are we      talking about? - A. Gate C.

            0.   Gate C? - A. Yes.
       B
            Q.   That is that gate over t h e r e t in fact? - A. Yes.

            Q.   what was he trying to do as far as you coul'* tall? - A.
                 He was trying to split the crowd.

            0. Was he having any success? - A. No.

            0.    Is that because nobody took any notice of him? - A. i.;o,
                 it was just the sheer amount of people there was.   ile
                 just had no chance on his own, and there was just
                 nobody else around.   It was just it was an impossible
                 task for him to perform.

            |. So the only way he could have succeeded would have been
               if everybody had obeyed him instantly? - A. "o, I think
               if he had had more manpower it would have helped,
               rather than if everyone had obeyed him.
       D
            ). I agree with you there, obviously the more people you
              • nave the easier a task becomes, but are you saying that
                if people had obeyed him he would still not have had
               any success? - A. I can't really answer that.   I mean,
                I tried to get over to the right because you don't want
                the horse trampling on you, but the sheer amount of
                people you couldn't move that far across anyway.

       E|   Q. In fact, did the crowd pressure, if anything, become
               even stronger at tnat point? - A. Yes, it did.

            Q. Did you feel uncomfortable at that point? - A. Yes.
ssP
            Q. Were you a bit worried about yourself? - A. Yes, I got
                 pushed right up against the gate and my arm was
                 trapped.

       F| 0.     So really you were in quite a difficult position then,
                 weren't you? - A. Yes.

            Q. Tracey was still near you and so was Richard, is that
                 right? - A. Yes.

            Q. And I take it they were in tne same sort of condition
               as you were? - A. Yes.

      G|    Q. There were another two Police C f f i c e r s , w e r e n 't tnere,
               wnom you mentioned?  Where were they? - A. They were
               out of the crowd towards the back, I did notice.

                 Could you see what they were trying to do? - A. Uo, I
                 c o u l d n 't s e e .



      TT
                                                                                               16


                                                                          S . L. JOiiES




0. You might not have been able to see because of then
   being too far away or because of the crowd, but you
   just saw them because they were elevated, is that
   right? - A. Yes.  I just noticed because this one was




                                                                                        rr»*
   the first one, was right in the middle of the melee o
   the crowd, but the other two were right outside where
   the crowd was.

Q. While you were approaching this gate, before you had
   actually got hard onto it, had it opened at all? - A.
   It was opened once.  I saw it open once.

Q. You saw it open once? - A. Yes.

Q. On that opening you didn't get through on that
   occasion, did you? - A. No.

Q. That is presumably because you were too far away from
   it, is that right? - A. Well, yes.

Q. And also was that opening - it didn't last very long,
   did it? - A. No, only a couple of seconds.

Q. On that occasion, just help me on this because I am
   just trying to fix the openings, did people come
   through, did people actually go through the gate? - A.
   I think three or four, perhaps, people went through -
   not many though.

Q. Some did - it wasn't opened wide at that tine?                               - A.   No.

0. And I think having got up against this   gate, I think
   Richard said, "If it opens again'we are going in?" - A.
   We had no choice, otherwise it would have been a lot
   worse.

Q. In fact, a little while later that is exactly what
   happened, it opened? - A. Yes.

0. Sut it opened wide out, is that right? - A. It opened
   right across.

0. And you could see              that it was a Policeman who was
   opening the gate?              - A. Yes.

Q. Certainly it was an official person? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did h e o p e n it a l l the way by h i m s e l f o r d id he b eg in
     to open it a n d d i d f an s then a s s i s t to o pe n it
     f u r t h e r ? - A. T h e fans h e l p e d b e c a u s e e v e r y o n e h a d been
     s c r e a m i n g for hint to o p e n it b e c a u s e we c o u l d s ee
     s o m e t h i n g w a s g o i n g to h a p p e n o u t s i d e if he d i d n ' t ,
     b e c a u s e e v e r y o n e w a s s c r e a k i n g for h i m to o pe n it.
                                                                                     17


                                                                    S. L. JOiJES




C. So what you are sayin?, is that the gate began to open
   and you could see it was a Policeman, and then the fans
   started opening it with him? - A. The fans on the
   inside - tnere was fans on the inside.

Q. In fact, what happened then with regard to the fans and
   that gate? - A. They pulled it wide open and we forced
   ourselves sort of to the side and in,, and got into the
   clearing, then I think a whole load ca.*ne right througn
   all together with the force.

Q. There was initially quite a rush in, because people had
   been squashed tight against it, would that be right? -
   A. Yes.  It was like taking a cork out of a bottle,
   sort of thing.

Q. Anyway, you managed to get into what is called the
   concourse area and it was a bit better in there, wasn't
   it? - A. Yes, it wasn't packed at all.

0. Because there was a lot of space, relatively speaking?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. Me and               Richard had both gone
   through together because he had               been just in front of
   me, and we got through together               and then we just waited
   for Tracey and she came through               just in a matter of
   minutes, and joined us.

Q.    Where did you go then? - A. We just - I could only see,
     well, we could all only see the tunnel, and Richard
     said to just go down the tunnel, so we just stood there
     for a minute or so, and I thought everything was okay
     then because it was pretty clear in there, and then we
     just started to walk down the tunnel.

Q.    So bythe time you went down the tunnel, you are saying
     it was reasonably clear, is that right? - A. Yes, it
     was.

          MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, we are having difficulty in
     hearing the witness at this end.

            THE CORONER:        Me or the witness?

            HISS ADLiLEJlAif:      The witness,          sir.

0.           THE CORONER:            C an you sit a little bit f u r t h e r
     f or wa rd ?    Y ou h a v e g o t to get q u i t e c l o s e to these
     eiikes.      Yo u w e r e s a y i n g that w h e n you w e n t into the
     tu nn el it wa s r e a s o n a b l y c l e a r ? - A. Yes, it uas.

0.   But   t here   were   people walking     d o wn ?    - A.   Yes,   n o rm al ly .
                                                                                           18


                                                                               S. L. JJKES




        0. A norroal         walk? - A. Yes.

        Q. In fact,   you did actually see one or two people, not.
    B      that many, who were passing water down the side of the
           tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q. That wasn't something w h i c h you would have necessarily
           approved of but you weren't too concerned at that
           point? - A. I wasn't surprised.

             Can you reneraber - you may not be able to renieraber but
             were you   walking down the    tunnel inthe middle, the
             left side or the right side? - A. I can't really
             reaeiaber.  U'e were probably spread right out.   i/e were
             probably walking together.

        Q. Yes, because there were three of you? - A. Yes.
        0 . When you got to the end of the tunnel, the tunnel goes
            along and then it has got a dip, hasn t it, and you can
            see the pitch, when you got just to exit of the tunnel,
            was that part of the tunnel clear of people? - A. Yes,
            it was.

        Q . S o you were able to get onto the terrace without any
             particular obstruction at that point? - A. Yes.

        0. Tell me, because obviously y o u were interested in the
           match, what was happening on the field at that point? -
           A. I didn't look.  We were just going to try and get a
           place and then look.  As far as I was concerned the
           match hadn't started.

        Q. You don't think it had started? - A. N'o.

        Q. Can you recollect whether any players were on the
           field? - A. Ho, I didn't look at the pitch.

        0. So you don't really know? - A. No.

        Q. You then went on the terraces. I think you can't
           actually remember which terrace you went onto, that is
           right, i s n ’t it? - A. That's right.

        Q. But I think I am right in saying that on the
           photographs you found Richard in Pen 37 - A. Pen 3,
           that's r i g h t .

        Q. And y o u c a n    say   that y o u w e r e w i t h   him?   - A.   Yes.

        Q.   I rciean, yo u e n t e r e d the s a m e   pen   as he did,       that   is
             right, i s n' t it? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                 19


                                                         L. JONES




     Q. So it is a reasonable supposition that that is the pen
        you entered, isn't it? - A. Yes.

 B   Q. You said to me just a moment ago that the tunnel was
        clear, the exit of the tunnel was clear, you aanaged to
        get onto the terrace and you were going into the right
        hand pen.  Did you take up a viewing position? - A. No.

     Q. So what happened? - A. We just started to walk down and
        then there just seemed like an awful lot of people came
        behind us and we started to get slowly moved forward
        then, sore of stumbling down the steps sort of thing.

     Q. So when you initially went onto the terrace, it sounds
        to me from what you are saying that at that point you
        were not apprehensive.  You were saying, "I want to
        find a viewing position” , and you were walking down
        looking for soae convenient spot? - A. Yes.

     Q. That's right, and at that point how crowded would you
        say it was?  Can you say anything about that? - A. Just
D       a noraal amount really.  I wasn't really worried.  My
        worries had gone after we came off the clearing.

     Q. Sorry? - A. My worries had gone when we came out into
        the clear part, and the tunnel, because I was
        frightened outside.

     Q. It was outside that you were scared? - A. I was worried
        that it was going to be the same inside but I didn't
        think it was.

     0. So once you got on the terrace you were relieved? - A.
        Yes.

     0. It looked better than it had been outside the gate,
        that's right? - A. It did.

     Q. And then you say --- was there sone crowd that carae
        frora behind and pushed you, a sudden push, or what was
        it? - A. First of all it was a gradual movement, sort
        of thing, just snoving down as though trtere was a lot of
        people coining in behind us.




G

                    / Q - Behind,   yes ....



                                    ©
TT
                                                                 20


                                              S. L. JONES


       s
Q. Behind, yes. - A. Yes, and then it started to get more
   and more surges, sort of thing.

0. In your statement you have put it a little more
   graphically.   You said:                        —

           "Then I was suddenly shoved from behind and I was
           thrown forward down the steps."

     I haven't said this to you, but I have said it to one or
     two of the witnesses, it doesn't actually matter what
     happened.   All I am trying to find out is as far as you
     can remember what happened and you tell me now so the
     jury can get the picture of what you can recollect.    Can
     we just go over that again?   I am interested to know
     whether this was, as you put it, a sudden shove, that you
     were shoved from behind, or whether it was just a very
     gradual pressure? - A. To begin with it started off
     gradually and then a shove came.

Q. How far down the terrace were you moved, if that is the
   right word, can you say? - A. I have got no idea really,
   probably three-quarters.   I really don't know.

Q. I think this particular surge actually stopped.at that
   point and there was a little bit of relief is that right?
   - A. Yes.   Well, Tracey had fell down behind me and
   there was a gap where she had fallen.   A lot of
   supporters picked her up but she had lost her shoe.

Q.   She had lost her shoe at that point?     - A. Her shoe,   yes.

Q. Can you remember what was going on on the field at that
   point? - A. No, I was turned round looking at her.   I
   really hadn't paid any attention.

Q. Did you look at the field at all at around that time? -
   A. No.

Q. So you can't help me at      all on that? - A. No.

Q. In fact somebody picked      her shoe up, is that  right? - A.
   Yes.   I.couldn't reach      it so they picked it up.

Q. But somebody managed to get down and give it to her and
   so she was pleased about that at the time? - A. Yes.

Q.    Then what happened after that? - A. Really big surges
     came.    I d i d n ’t see Richard or Tracey again after- that.
     In fact I don't even know whether she put her shoe on.

0. You just managed to get it and then there was another big
   surge? - A. Yes.



                              (^00)
                                                         S. L. JONES


That surge split you from Tracey and Richard, of course?
- A. Yes.

You never saw them again after that until much later of
course.   Were you pushed against any barriers? - A. No,
not at all.
                   /
Where did you eventually finish up, you yourself? - A.
Right at the.very front, turned round facing the back.

Facing the wrong way, so to speak? - A. Facing the wrong
way, yes.

When you got down there can you remember what was
happening with the match?   You may think I am being
cruel in keep asking that, but it is a convenient way of
timing things, you see, that is why I am asking you. - A.
No, I can't because I was turned round the wrong way.    I
have no idea.

So really you never saw anything at all of what happened
on the pitch? - A. No.

If you did you can't remember any of it? - A. Well, until
I got out.

At that point you were pretty squashed,                      is that right? -
A. Yes.

Were you calling out at all?                    Were you able to call out?
- A. Yes.

Can you remember more or less what you said? - A. "I've
got to get out."

Was this in a loud voice or in a little-gentle voice? -
A. Yes, I was screaming.

Were you able to repeat it? - A. Yes, a few times.

 How did you get out? - A. There is a bit of confusion.   I
 am not really sure.   I was faced the wrong way.   I was
 literally face to face with another boy, like nose to
.nose.   I couldn't see anything.   I thought I was ^oing
 to faint and I just heard somebody say at my side,  Here
 you are, love," and I sort of stepped on to the pitch, or
 somebody pulled me.   It is not been found exactly how I
got out.

So y ou r r e c o l l e c t i o n   is that you j us t s t e p p e d out? - A.
T ha t is w h a t it f elt          like to me but I t hink s o m e b o d y m us t
h ave p u l l e d me.

In fact      I think we        have    seen you on     the   video?   - A.   Yes.
                                                                 22




                                               S. L. JONES


     Q. Standing near the perimeter fence.    Do you remember
        seeing this young lady?    Having got out did you look at
        the pitch at all? - A. .Yes, I was facing the pitch then.

B|   Q* What was going on at that point? - A. They were playing.
     Q. So all this you have described happened before the match,
        and including your exiting out of...   You weren't pulled
        over the top? - A. No, out of the gates.

     Q. Definitely out of the gates before the match ended, or
        was stopped, rather? - A. Well,   it had probably just
        started as I was getting out.

     Q. You don't know that, of course? - A. Well, all I can
        assume is that it had already started because as I got
        out of the gates I turned round and I was facing the
        television camera and the match was playing.

     Q. Was the television camera looking at the match or at the
        stand? - A. No, it was turned round to me.

D|   Q. It was already taking pictures of what was going on? - A.
        I just looked and it was just right on m e .

     Q- That is why we have got it, of course. - A. Yes.
     Q. So that shot of you which is on the television was taken
        almost immediately after you got out, is that right? - A.
        Well, immediately, yes.

El Q*   That shot is timed so we will be able to look at it
        again.   I can't remember what time is on it but we will
        be able to time what time that w d s , but do you remember
        from your impression how long the game carried on after
        that? - A. Maybe five minutes at the most.

     Q. A short period? - A. Yes.

     Q. I don't want to go into this in great detail, but when
        you were standing outside did you notice some fans come
        past you and go into another part of the ground? - A.
        Yes, that's right.

     Q. Which pen did they go into? - A. The corner one on the
        right.

     Q- Is it the one underneath the police control box?   If you
        were standing with your back to the fence, did they come
        past you towards the right or towards the left? - A. They
        were walking past me from the right.   I think they came
        out of the gate after me because I think I was...
                                       S. L. JONES


Hi'gh up, and they were coming past you going to the south
stand side, would that be right? - A. Well, I am not sure
of the layout of the ground, but the corner.

Can we put the plan of the ground up for a moment. ' It
is not that important but I am just interested.   (C.274)
Mr. Griffiths could you just point to enclosure 3?    That
is gate 3?    That is the one where you... - A. Came out,
yes.

Then point to pen A.   That is pen A.  Are you saying
they came from that part and were walking past you
down...  Is that right? - A. I don't think they were
coming out of pen A.

No, but there were people who were walking past you in
that direction? - A. They were coming   out just behind me,
out of the gate I came out of.

Oh, I see.    I understand you now.   You are saying there
were people coming out... - A. Yes, because I think I was
the first or second person out of the    gate and then a few
more followed and then the police were taking them across
to. the corner.

I just want to go back one moment.   You know the big
gates that opened when you came outside the ground, the
concertina gates.   Can you recollect whether you were
one of the first people to come through on that occasion?
- A. Through the gates?

Yes, through that big gate.   - A. No, not the first
person.

No, I didn't mean the first.   What I meant was were you
in what I would call the first group of people who came
through do you think? - A. Yes, possibly.

You then waited for a little while because Tracey had to
join you, is that right? - A. Yes.

You don't know how long you waited? - A. It was only a
few seconds really.   She just didn't get in with our
surge, sort of thing.

There w a s n ’t any delay. You didn't go to the loo or
anything like that? - A. No.

As far as you were concerned, we know what time that gate
opened, the big concertina gate, you had a fairly rapid
passage right through that? - A. Yes.
                                               S. L. JONES


Irr fact there was a very nice man who came up to you at
some point and comforted you and tried to help and look
after you? - A. Yes.

Are you still in touch with him? - A. Sometimes, yes.

He was a supporter?           A. Yes, a Liverpool supporter.

Shall we give his name, do you think? - A. If you want.

Was he Phil Bickley? - A. Yes.

We are not calling him as a witness but it is nice to
acknowledge what he was doing.   Now what is the number
o f ...

          MR. KING:      C.295, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Can we put C.295 up?   Now this is
the photograph you are on and we will just show it to
you.

     MR. KING:   Sir,         if it helps,   the time of this
photograph is 14.54.

          THE CORONER:     That does help:

Are you able to see yourself on that projection?             - A.
Yes.

Go and show us where you are. - A. That's me,           that's
Tracey and that's Richard.

So you are in fact in line.    You have just heard - in
fact you can read the time on the bottom ofit, that is
six minutes to three, or possibly five.

     THE CORONER:          Is it one   minute wrong?    Which way
is the minute?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the actual time is 14.54.              Printed
on the photograph is a minute too long, sir.

     THE CORONER:          So it is 14.54 - six minutes before
the...:

At that point you were still outside, weren't you?              - A.
Yes.

The gate I can tell you was opening because people were
coming through and presumably this is when you were
following them in, is that right? - A. It seems so.
                                                                             25




                                                                     S. L. JONKS
     ✓
Q. If you look at that photograph you can see it. That
   is exactly the same photograph and it saves you
   turning round every few moments.  That gate I will
   tell you had been opened at 14:48 for a moment or’ two
   for just a short moment and then it had been
   closed? - A. Yes.

Q. Then it had been fully opened at 14:52. That is two
   minutes before this photograph is taken. The
   question -I want to ask you is this;  looking at that
   photograph and thinking about what you told me you
   said that you were pushed hard up against the gate
   when it was shut.   You are sure about that, are
   you? - A. Yes, I was sure.
Q. There was another opening of this gate. This gate
   was shut at three minutes to three-  Do you remember
   we had a schedule.  14:57:40. -At 14:57 this gate was
   shut again and then it was re-opened at about 14:59,
   in other words just a minute or so before kick-off.
   What I want to establish is which opening you went
   through? - A. Yes.

Q. Because if that is where you are on that photograph
   you could not have been right up against the gate at
   14:52 because you did not walk back, did you? - A.
   No. That is right, yes.

Q. So in fact your movement throughout was forward, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q. It was not that you got up against the gate, didn't
   like it, walked away and then re-approached it.  I
   just want to be quite clear? - A. We carried on
   forward, yes.

Q. It was opened for the last time at 14:59:12
   approximately.  Of course you did not look at your
   watch? - A. No.

Q. The reason I ask you this is that by the time you got
   out of the gate at the front the match was still in
   progress? - A. That is right.

Q. If you in fact came through              at 14:59, which you might
   have done because you might              have come through the
   last occasion from what you              tell me, your progress
   would have been even faster              than I would have
   expected? - A. I would have              thought, yes.

Q.   D i d y o u get t he i m p r e s s i o n y o u w e n t t h r o u g h th e
     g ro un d, if I c a n p u t it l ik e this, in m i n u t e s or d i d
                                                                          S. L. JONES

   you have the impression that it took any length of
   time? - A. It seemed like forever but I think it was
   fast.

     MR. MAXWELL:  I have not got any questions, sir, but
on behalf of all of us, that is all the parties and all
those concerned in investigating this appalling tragedy, I
express our sympathy.

     THE CORONER:          Thank you very much indeed.                    That is
very kind of you.
                     Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

Q. Stephanie, can I just follow up the questions which
   the Coroner was asking you about the timing of this
   photograph to see if we can get any further? You see
   in the bottom right hand corner of the photograph in
   red there is the time printed at which it is said
   that photograph was taken which reads 55 and we are
   told that is one minute wrong and it should be 54? -
   A . Right.

Q. We are also told that the gate which on the.
   photograph is just off to the right where the people
   seem to be heading as they go off the photograph do
   you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. We are told that gate was opened at 14:52:06 which is
   just two minutes before the time of the photograph,
   do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. We are told that that gate was then kept open until
   14:57, that is to say another three minutes after
   that photograph was taken? - A. Right.

Q. So it appears those are the times.  I am not
   criticising you at all? - A. I can only presume that
   I went through when it was opened the next time at 59
   because I know I definitely went through and it was
   closed at first and I was pushed against it.  So it
   must.have been the 59 time that I went through at.
   It is not a great deal of time in between, is it? It
   is only four or five minutes?

Q. Yes, but it would not take you three minutes to walk
   from where you are in the photograph to the gate? -
   A. I know, but there was a huge amount of supporters
   there and it took some time to get to the gate.

      MR. PAYNE:          Sir,   I d o n o t h o n e s t l y t h in k   that can    be
t aken a n y f ur th er .
                                                                                     27




                                                                            S. L. JONES


     THE CORONER:   Perhaps Hr. King will be able to take
it further but I do not know whether he will or not.

     MR. PAYNE:             Mr. King may have some ingenious method
of doing it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have a theory which I will put to
the test in a moment.

       THE CORONER:            It is an interesting matter, is it not?

Q.        MR. PAYNE: While that photograph is on the
     screen, you have told the Coroner from what you saw
     you actually only saw a total of three mounted
     Policemen, did you? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. There is obviously a lot more to be seen on that
   photograph? - A. That is right.

Q. But you did not see them? - A. No.

£. I want you to look at another document please, and
   that is the map, 284, and I think you will find it
   further on in your bundle.  I appreciate you do not
   probably know the roads and so on yourself but I just
   want to see how far we can get. First of all, can
   you find Far Lane where you parked the car and if you
   can find No. 2 which is in the black circle? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You parked your car there and then you walked from
   there in the direction of the ground, did you? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

Q. On the map that would take you down to the junction
   of what we can see is Wadsley Lane? - A. I have got
   it.

Q. That is going in the direction of the ground and so
   that is probably the way you walked, is it? - A. I
   cannot honestly say.  I have got no idea.

Q. Whichever way you went it would then take you on to
   Middlewood Road, that is the big road with the black
   writing, above the No. 2 1 have pointed out? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A l i tt l e w a y d o w n M i d d l e w o o d R o a d y o u the n c r o s s   over
   C a t c h B a r L a n e ? - A. Yes.
     I


                                                       28




                                               S. L. JONES
 ✓
Then you are into Leppings Lane and over the bridge.
You can see the river just passing under the e of
Leppings Lane, do you see that? - A . Yes.

And turn right into the ground.  Do you think you
probably did go down Middlewood Road and over Catch
Bar Lane? - A. I really wouldn't like to say.  I am
absolutely hopeless at directions and I have got no
idea.

I am just trying to put you on the map before I ask
you about the crowds because you have said you
thought there were  an awful lot of    people? - A. Yes.

What I want you to  help the Jury about is this;
about how far back  from the ground    was itwhen you
first started to notice? I am not      asking you to be
exact but just give us an idea of about how far away
you were from the ground? - A. Maybe two roads away,
one road.

That was  an awful lot of people all walking in the
same direction as you? - A. Yes.

     THE   CORONER: I am sorry, I missed theanswer.
What did   you say? - A. About two roads away.

     MR. PAYNE:  For instance, when you cross over
Catch Bar Lane that is quite a big junction.  You
must have crossed over somewhere about there from the
direction you came-  So when you crossed over what
was the scene like? Put the Jury in the picture as
to what the scene was like as you crossed over that
big road? - A. There was just a mass of people at the
ground. You could not see the turnstiles or anything
like that.

I am trying to get you a little bit further back from
the ground.  Were there people walking on the
pavement as you approached the ground? - A. Yes.

Were they walking in the roads as well? - A. I can't
recall.

That is as far as I can take that.  The next thing
was that when you got into the ground and were going
down the tunnel there were some people passing water
on the sides of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

You said you were not surprised at that? - A. No.
                                                             2 9




                                                    S. L. JONES
     ✓
Q. Why is that? - A. Because I have been to Anfield
   Football Ground before and it happens all the time.

Q. There., was nothing special about the occasion? - A. -Oh
   no. You just don't look.     You just look away.




                Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

Q. I have got a theory too.   I wonder if we can look
   back at the photograph we had up before, C295, and I
   wonder whether the gates that you remember being
   pressed up against were the blue gates? If you look
   behind you there are two or three chaps have got red
   sweaters or shirts on.   You can see some blue gates
   behind them.  I wonder if those were the gates you
   were pressed up against? - A. I don't think so.

Q.   You do not think so? - A. No.

Q.   Having got through there your way was free to come
     through this gate when it was open? - A. No.

Q. Theory explodedI  Let me take you back to the
   beginning.  You say you have been to Anfield and
   obviously you are used to large crowds at football
   matches? - A. Fairly used to them, yes.

Q.   This was to be a very large crowd.   I think you knew
     it was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not think there is any secret about the fact
   that a lot more people would have liked to have gone
   to the match than there were tickets available? - A.
   Probably.

Q. Were you not a little concerned about the time you
   were actually going to be arriving at the ground? -
   A. Richard didn't seemed concerned and so I wasn't.

Q. Did it not seem to you to be cutting it fine to be
   getting there at ten to three or five to three or
   thereabouts? - A. I really don't know.

Q.    But you were surprised by the numbers of people who
     were still outside the ground at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you aware at all of a Police Land Rover parked
   outside the ground? - A. No.
                                                          30




                                                 S. L. JONES
   ✓
Q. Did you hear any announcements on a PA system of
   somebody saying not to push because everybody would
   get in? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. Did any of the Police Officers that you saw try to
   indicate either by what they were saying or by what
   they were doing that they did not want people to
   push? - A. Not really.  The only thing was the one
   Police Officer on horseback who was telling everyone
   to get to the right and that was it.

Q. That was some effort although you thought that was
  ‘doomed to failure because there was only one of them?
   - A. Yes.

Q. I do not imagine for a moment at all that you were
   doing any pushing? - A. Probably the person in front
   of me thought I was pushing but I wasn't.  It was
   just the sheer pressure.

Q. Because you were being pressed from behind? - A. Yes.

Q. When you came up on to the back of the queue there
   was a moment when, if you like, you were the last
   person in the queue? - A. I don't think so. There
   was always someone behind me.

Q. Was there a moment that you stopped and thought,
   "That is as far as we can go at the moment" as the
   shuffling forward continued? - A. Yes, sometimes you
   were just in a bunch and it wasn't moving but there
   was always people all around you, behind you, in
   front of you.

Q. The pressure at that time was coming from behind you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. That was the pressure of people trying to get closer
   to the entrance points? - A. I presume so.

Q. After that when you got into the ground itself from
   thereon into the tunnel, through the tunnel and on to
   the terrace, all of that is something that you would
   put under the word "normal". What you saw in the
   tunnel, although it is pretty despicable, was
   something you had seen before at football matches? -
   A. I wouldn't call it despicable really.
                                    S. L. JONES


, You have seen      it before and you were notsurprised                 to
  see it again?      - A. No.

 When you got onto the terrace itself, it seemed to you
 that that was anormal scene that you were  seeing in
 front of you? - A. To begin with.

 Until the pushing started? - A. Well, until the crowd
 came up.

               Cross-Examined by MR. KING

 Miss Jones, I was interested in your answer that the
 person in front of you might have thought you were
 pushing, but you weren't;  it was because of the
 pressure behind you? - A. Yes.

 I want you, if you can, to give some idea to the Jury
 of what it is like being in a crowd. I am sure we
 have all had that experience, but you had that
 particular experience that day.  Do you know what I
 mean by an involuntary movement?  I will explain what
 I mean by that.  That is a movement of somebody who
 hasn't said to himself, 'I'm going to make a
 movement', but somebody who is carried along by the
 momentum of everyone else around them.  Do you
 understand? - A.  Yes.

Is that what you were trying to explain to us of being
in that crowd, that that crowd had a momentum and you
were being carried along with it? - A.   That is right.
You have got no choice of where you are going.   It is
just the way the movement carries you.   If you want to
go one way and the crowd is going the other way, you
have got no chance of going that way.

If somebody had put the finger on you and said, "Miss
Jones, wait a minute, what do you think you are doing
pushing forward?" what would you have said to them? -
A. "I'm not pushing".

What was happening to you? - A.  It is just everyone
behind me, and it is just the sheer pressure of the
amount of people.

You described the police officer on the horseback, and
you were asked very properly by the Coroner about
obeying what he was trying to do, and. you gave this
answer, that you yourself tried to get over to the
right, but couldn't.  Why was it that you couldn't? -
A.  Because of all the people on the right and all the
people on the left, and just can't move like that.
Y o u w o u l d v e r y m u c h l ike to if it m e a n s g e t t i n g out of
the way, and also the h o r s e s corning n e a r you.                Yo u
                                                                                    32



                                              S. L. JONES


     ' don't want to be trampled on but you haven't got much
       choice.

Q.    At that stage when the man on the horseback was there,
      what was the depth of the crowd around the horse?
      What was it like around the horse? - A. There was
      just no room at all.  The horse was just enveloped.

Q.   Have you been yourself to a football match, perhaps at
      Anfield, when you have seen a mounted police officer
      putting people into queues? - A. Yes, there are
      always mounted police at Anfield.

Q.   On those occasions is there space for the                           people to
     move into? - A.   Yes, the queues.

Q.   So on this occasion - I am not criticising the
      officer, he was doing his best, I am sure - that
      officer on that horse was in the middle of a mass of
      people? - A.  Yes.

Q.    Do you think that one police officer on that horse -
      could really do anything about what was happening
      around him? - A. No, he couldn't have done .anything,
      he couldn't .

Q.   At that stage when you were there, you are in this
      crowd with its momentum.  I just want to pursue the
      same theory as Mr. Manning about the gates.  I just .
      want to show you, if I may, 258 which is in the
     bundle, C258.

Q.            THE CORONER:         Can you find it? - A.                Yes, I have
      it.

Q.         MR. KING:  Do you see, Stephanie, that before you
      get into the area in front of the turnstiles you have
      to go through what we call blue perimeter gates, do
      you see that? - A.  Yes.

Q.   Do    you seethey have gateposts? - A. That is right.

Q.   Do you see there is a sort of wall or                        fence on the
     left which seems to cut the turnstile                        area into two,
     do you see that? - A.  Yes.

Q.    W h e n y o u w e r e d e s c r i b i n g b e f o r e - a nd I k n o w y o u h a v e
      d e s c r i b e d on a n o t h e r o c c a s i o n w ha t w a s h a p p e n i n g to
      y o u at the time, a n d this is the s t a t e m e n t w h i c h you
      gave to the P o l i c e not l o n g a f t e r w a r d s and,              in fact,
      y o u hav e b e e n v e r y good, y o u k now, y o u have s ai d
      al m o s t w o r d for w o r d w h a t w a s in y o u r s t a t e me n t so it
      is not a q u e s t i o n o f a n y b o d y s a y i n g that y ou h a v e not
      b e e n g e t t i n g it right, y o u h a v e b e e n d oi ng v e r y wel l
                                                                         33




                                        S. L. JONES


     indeed after this length of time.  But I was
     interested in something you said you could see.

          MR. KING:  Can I just remind you, s i r , i t is on
     page 3 of her statement.
Q.   This is before you had got through the blue gates, and
     you say this:

            "I could see some fans sitting on top of the wall
            behind the gates inside the ground."

     Do you remember seeing fans sitting on the wall inside
     the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   Which wall do you think you were referring to? - A. I
     really don't know.

Q.   If you go back to the photograph which is up and have
     a look at that, and then let us go back to the one
     which has you on it, C.295, do you see that behind you
     are those blue gates I have been pointing out to you?
     - A.  Yes.

Q.   People are coming through, and do you see to the
     right, as you look at the photograph, a lot of people
     sitting- on that dividing wall or fence which is
     between the two halves of the turnstile area, the one
     I pointed out to you when we were outside the
     perimeter gates on that first photograph?   Do you
     think those are the fans you could see inside the
     ground sitting on the wall? - A. Possibly.

Q.   To help you, there is no mystery, so that the Coroner
     knows, there was a time on the evidence when those
     perimeter gates were also closed for a short time.

           THE CORONER:        Yes, we k n o w that.

          MR. KING:  Then they were opened and people came
     through.
Q.   I wondered whether you were one of those who was in
     that group immediately pressed against the perimeter
     gates which had been closed at a certain stage and
     then you had got through? - A.  But the tunnel is not
     right in front of those perimeter gates, is it?

Q.   No.  -    A.      T h a t is w h y I am sure it m u s t be the o t h e r
     gate, b e c a u s e w h e n w e came ou t of t h e ’o th er g a t e s the
     tunnel w a s r i g h t in front.       T h a t is the o n l y w a y I ca n
     think of it b e c a u s e I ara not sure of the layout.

          THE CORONER:           So be it,     that   is right.   It is v e r y
     firm in h e r r e c o l l e c t i o n .
                          S. L. JONES


     MR. KING:  Indeed.
Let me just go back slightly in time, so again we can
get the picture when you arrive, because you are
talking about choices the whole time, about the choice
of someone arriving at the ground.  In your original
description, again I say it is so very close to what
you have told us today, you have said this on the
second page:

      "We got to the ground together and I think the
      ground was on our right-hand side."

That would be correct because you were coming from the '
direction Mr. Payne was talking about.  You said:

      "We turned into the entrance to the ground and I
      was quite surprised to see such a large crowd of
      people standing at the front of the ground".
A.   Yes.

Was that the impression you had, that you were coming
so that the ground was on your right and you turned
into’ the entrance? - A. Yes.

Because if we look on our model, you would be coming,
with the help of our friend with the pointer, not from
Leppings Lane, but from the opposite direction.  The
ground would be on your right and you would turn into
the entrance, would you not? - A.  Yes.

You probably came over a bridge but you probably would
not remember that. - A.   Right.

Because, as the Jury will know, you could come from
two directions.  There were people coming down
Leppings Lane from one direction and people were
coming from your direction and everybody converging
from two directions to the entrance to the turnstiles,
do you see? - A.  Yes.

When you arrived, was the picture of a great mass of
people? - A.  Yes, just as we came down, yes.

The moment you joined it, from that moment onwards did
you really find that events had really taken over from
you after that? - A. Yes, because we didn't give our
tickets in, we didn't go through any turnstiles.

No, and you have already described the police officers
you had seen, which to you were few in number at that
stage? - A.  Yes.
                                                                                         35




                                               S'. L. JONES


Q.' Now let me take you through onto the concourse, and
     you got through the big gate and you are relieved and
     you see the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did yo u on that concourse area, that is the large area
     behind the turnstiles when you got through, see
     anybody, be it a policeman or a steward, directing you
     in any way? - A. No, I didn't see anyone of that
     nature.

Q.   Did you see any signs indicating where you should go?
     - A. No.

Q.   So you made for the tunnel as the natural way to go? -
      A. That was the only way I could see.

Q.   I am just finally interested in this.  When you got
     through the tunnel, and you are someone who has been
     to many crowds by the sound of it, were those terraces
     to you empty-looking, the terraces you were going
     into? - A.  No, they weren't empty-looking.  They just
     looked as they normally do.

Q.   In a normal crowd we have heard that there -is swaying.
     You know what I mean by swaying, don't you? - A.   Yes.

Q.   You go back and you go forward, back and forward? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   You have described to us a number of what you have
      described as surges? - A. Yes.

Q.   Am I right in saying that that is not a sway?   A surge
      is when the crowd goes forward and does not go back
      again? - A.  Just gradually forward all the time.

Q.   Because you talked about first it was a gradual
     movement of people coming on from behind, and then
     more and more surges? - A. Yes.

Q.   And the surges are the movement of people forward and
      then stopping? - A. Yes.

Q.   And you were being propelled forward from the pressure
     from behind, and that is what was happening more and
     more to you as you were on the terraces? - A. That is
     right, yes.

            MR.   KING:       I have      no   f ur t he r q u e st i on s ,   t ha nk
     you.

                  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b y MR.   CATCHPOLE
                          S. L. JONES


Miss Jones, please understand I am noc at all
suggesting there is anything wrong with your evidence.
I think I speak for all of us that we are
exceptionally impressed with the way you have given
your evidence today.  I just want to focus on that
photograph that is behind you.

     THE CORONER:   It is the one, I think, in front of
you as w e l l .

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Do you remember that there was a
Preliminary Inquest into Richard and Tracy's death,
and I believe the family may have viewed some video
evidence and some photographic evidence, and you
identified yourself on that photograph, and then
Richard was identified inside the ground on a video?
Do you have any recollection of that? - A. No.   I am
not quite sure which one you are talking about.   We
saw that many photographs and videos looking for them.

If I could just read you a passage from the evidence
that was given by Inspector Layton at Richard's
Inquest.   For your note, sir, it is page 1,150, and it
just says:

     "On a BBC video tape, reference MAPI, timed at
     14.56, 3104, Richard was shown alive in Enclosure
     N o . 3", that is inside the ground at 4 minutes to
     3.

Do you have any recollection of that? - A.     Not
really, no.

It does not matter, but if that is right, you would
agree with me, I presume that whatever gate you were
up against, it looks likely that you were in the
ground along with Richard at 4 minutes to 3,  if that
video reference is right, do you agree? - A.   I don't
think it can be, because we were seen outside at 4
minutes to 3, weren't we?

No, that is 6 minutes to 3.   So it looks as if it took
2 minutes from when we see you on that photograph for
you to get down into the tunnel onto the terraces, or
at least it took Richard that long, and we presume
that you were with him throughout that time? - A.
Well, I would presume so.

                         Q.   Please   understand
                                                           37


                                             S. L. JOi.’ES




Please understand, everyone here has seen enough
witnesses to know that things get very confused,
particularly when you go through something like that.-
There is -absolutely no criticis;n at all - we all know
you are trying to help us as best you can, but it does
seem tnat Richard was inside the ground, and I am right
in understanding that as far as you remember you were
with hint right the way into the terraces? - A. Yes.

Thank you.  Just one other small point that I should
raise with you.   Can I remind you of the evidence you
gave in answer to the Coroner on the question of once
you were inside the ground?   You actually said you
could only see the tunnel, and that Richaru saici, "Just
go down the tunnel", and you went down and it was
reasonably clear.   Is that, in fact, what happened? -
A. Yes.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Exaniined by HRS. McBRIEN

Stephanie, I aa trying to unravel this mystery about
when you actually went in there, and this is how I see
it.  You say when you were in the crowd, when there
were a lot of people around you, that you did see a
large metal gate, a concertina gate? - A. Yes.

So there is no confusion about the perimeter gates and
that gate, that does seem to be the concertina gate.
Now, when you were there you saw it opening once, you
said, and you were too far away at the tiine to go
through it, but you did mention that it wasn't opened
very wide at the time? - A. No, it wasn't.

Just a few feet? - A. Just a few incues really.

       MRS. McBRIEH:    From evidence tnat we have it
seems to me that it was the 2.48 opening, tnat, because
I d o n ’t think the other openings, it was opened wide
the next time, wasn't it, sir?

     THE CORONER:   You are quite right.  2.43 was a
partial opening, more than a few inches but it wasn't
opened very wide, and then at 2.52 it was opened
widely. You are quite correct in your recollection.

     ilKS. HcBRIEN:  So it seems to rae that tnat was
the first opening that you saw.  How, when you saw that
you said that Richard said, "If it opens again we'ra
going in", that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And of course it was opened like you said,   and you do
remember goin^ through it with the crowd.    Froa what I
                                                                  33




                                                    S. L. JONES




     can work out it seems that you vent through on the
     second opening, and maybe the photograph has got the .
     wrong titae on it.

          UHSm McBRIEH:   That is the only thing I can think
     of, if you don't mind ray saying so.  I think Stephanie
     has given very good evidence, absolutely --- it is so
     clear, and yet we have got this    mystery here. That is
     the only way I can work it out.

          TH E COROtlER:  Well, Stephanie can't answer that
     question.   In fact, I can't answer it either.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just a real puzzle.
     Everything seemed so clear, sir, apart from that.

          THE CORONER:    It is highly unlikely actually that
     the tiines are wrong except for this minute, because
     there is a photograph, and that is why one knows the
     tiae, where the time is printed on it and the clock is
     on it as well, so you can time    it twice by the number
     printed and by the clock face,and it is a minute out,
     that is where this minute is coming from. 'It is -an
     interesting thought, I agree, but I " d o n 't think it
     works.

          MRS. HcBRIEN:    I think it is a mystery because
     Stephanie did say that when she went down the tunnel
     and got to the terrace end of the tunnel it wasn't
     crowded.   If she had gone in the final time it would
     have been.   It is not really addiug up properly.

       T1IE CORONER:   I think that we can't take it any
 -further.   I can see that there is a problem here.

Q.        MRS. HcBRIEIJ:   Thank you very much, Stephanie.

          TH E CORONER:    Yes, Hr. Hale.

          MR. HALE:   I am sorry, a crucial point, which
     this witness has to bear because it has been put to
     her, and I would like to ask her about the crowd
     pressure.

               Further Cross-Examined by H3. HALE

0. It has been put to you that with crowd pressure you had
   no_choice, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

Q. But is it right that a crowd like tnat is not like a
   river, is it? A river only goes one way, doesn't it?
   If you were in a river in those circumstances, a strong
   current, you could only ^o the way the river takes you,
   that is right,
                                                                         39




                                                           S. L. JONES




        Q.    But that crowd was made up of individuals like
             yourself, that is right?'- A. Yes.
    B   Q. .All ~having a thinking brain, is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q* Suppose fire had suddenly broken out in front of you,
           which way do you think the crowd would have gone then?
           - A. It is difficult to say, because the people at the
           front who are by the fire are going to-want to go back,
           but the people at the back who maybe can't see the fire
             • • • •



        Q.    No, the people at the back can see the fire, see the
             danger. - A. Well, you are all going to go the other
             way if everyone can see the fire.
w




         . You are all going to go the other way, that's right.
           So the way in which a crowd coves depends upon the
           individual will of the people who make it up? - A. It
           depends on everyone if it is a large crowd.
    D        That's right, but if everybody in the crowd        - A.
             You can't have half and half though.

             Well if you had half and half you might have a
             stalemate, neither going forward nor going backward? -
             A. Exactly.

             That is right. - A. And with the large amount of people
             you find you are having problems.

             In the circumstances there were more people wanting to
             continue pressing forward than there were who were
             afraid for their lives like you, and would have liked
             to stand still or hold back a bit, is that right? - A.
             Everyone was there for the one reason, to go and see a
             match, so everyone wants to go forward.

             Yes, but some of you were getting raither concerned ....
             - A. At tnat time I was slightly worried but I didn't
             think that anyone was going to get killed.

             Yes.  We have heard from other witnesses who would have
             liked to have stopped and to have got out but they
             couldn't. - A. Yes.

             That is because there were more wanting to go forward
             tnan were wanting to stop and co.-ae back? - A. Yes.

                            Further by THE COKOPER

             The problem it is not that anybody is disbelieving you
             - on the contrary everybody is believing you. - A. It's
             okay.

                                     r i f t
                                                               40




                                               S.. L. JOilES




}. But everybody is fitting the account to the tines.   You
   can see vmat I am saying? - A. Yes.

3. Because if it is right that Richard was seen on the
   terrace at 14.56 then it is impossible for you to have
   entered at 14.59, isn't it, because that is three
   minutes earlier? - A. I think that oust be wrong, the
   picture, to be honest with you.   I think the picture
   must be wrong.

Q. Which picture? - A. Of Richard on the terraces.

       T H E CORONER:   That is something that I think ---
  we will have to get the family to review that bit of
  evidence because it would obviously be helpful.    Ladies
  and gentlemen, Mr. Catchpole knows this because he was
  there, and indeed Mrs. McBrien was - the problem of
  identification is a very major problem.    It isn't half
  as easy as we think and I know that many families spent
  hours and hours and hours trying to do it, and
  sometimes they succeeded, sometimes they have done an
  identification and then sometimes they have .reviewed it
  at a later date.    In fact, I think Hr. Traynor was
  mentioned on the first day - we haven't yet corrected
  that - so it is a difficult problem.

Q. Don't worry.  The fact that one has to look at it again
   is neither here nor there, all I am concerned about and
   interested in, if you like, is to try and get the facts
   as near as we can.  Uhat you are saying is you are sure
   that you were pressed against the concertina gate,
   right? - A. Well, yes.

Q. And you based it, because you know that once you got
   through that gate you were in the concourse area? - A.
   Yes, the tunnel was in front.

Q. The tunnel was in front of you, and not 20 or 30 yards
   away and negotiate another huge crowd, that is rignt,
   isn fc it? - A. Yes.  I agree about the fans on the
   wall, it may have been by the perimeter gate, but I can
   only assume that I meant that before, about seeing the
   fans on the wall.

Q. That was, in fact, how I read your statement, that
   there was pressure before, tnat you saw the fans, that
   you then moved in - and in fact, I asked you this, "Did
   you-see the gate open", and Richard then said, "ilext
   time it opens we are going in"? - A. Yes.

Q. And you gradually got nearer to the gate and then it
   opened and you went through, that is rignt, isn't it? -
   A. Yes.
                                                                            41




                                                              S. L. JONES




    (i. Sorry, I haven't quite finished.  There is something
        else I wanted to ask.  Hr. Hale to a certain extent has
        dealt with the point, but it is right, i s n ’t it,
B       Stephanie, you have explained to me that you couldn't
        do anything about it because people were pressing
        behind? - A. No, you couldn't.

         That is right, but you would accept, wouldn't you, that
         a crowd is made up of individuals, isn't it? - A. Yes.

         And if each individual person had stood still - if, I
         ata not saying that they did - if they had stood still
         outside the gates, you too would not have been pushed
         forward, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, but that is
         just not going to happen, is it?

    3.   Okay, that is fair enough, but I am just asking you
         whether that is correct? - A. Yes.

    Q. This is a question which we haven't broached yet and I
       just want to ask you this, did you know, and would it
D      have made any difference to you if you had known, that
       the ground had a licence to hold football matches? - A.
       Had a •..?
          >                                     s'   •   .y         *



    Q. A licence, that it had been licensed for football
       matches. - A. It wouldn't have made any difference.

    0. You didn't know it? - A. What do you mean?

         That is all right, you have answered roy question.  I am
         trying to find out - this ground was licensed, there is
         a procedure for licensing football grounds, and what I
         am trying to find out from a few of the fans is whether
         the fans knew this, and I haven't found one yet who
         did, and you didn't know it either? - A. Ho.

              THE C0R0HER:     Mr. King, yes.

              HR. KING:      Might I ask a question arising out of
         your question?

              THE CORONER:   Which one, the momentum one? Yes.
         I am not trying to undermine you, Mr. King, at all:

              MR. KING:    No, no. It is an important, not only
         interesting but an important point on crowd behaviour
         and expectations.

                  Further Cross-Examined by MR. KI.MC

    0. Stephanie, you ware asked "If everybody had stood
       still, clearly the crowd would have stopped", and the
       answer to that has to be yes, but then you gave this
                                            S. L. JONES



   ✓
answer, "It is just not going to happen".  Could you
explain why you say that? - A. When you want to go
somewhere you are not going to get anywhere if you
stand still, are you?

Yes*  You have been to many football matches.  How
realistic is it, from your experience, to put forward
the proposition that a football crowd going into a
game, shortly before kick-off, it is all suddenly going
to stop still? How realistic does that seem to you? -
A. It is stupid.  It is not going to happen.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I will just follow it up
with another one and I will give you an opportunity
because it is actually very convenient because
Stephanie is (a) a good witness, if I may say so, (b) a
relative.

               Further by THE CORONER

I think as you are so helpful and kind we are taking
advantage.  Have you been to the theatre?  Do you ever
go to the theatre? - A. Yes.

Or the cinema? - A. I go to the cinema all the time.

You do? - A. Yes.

And do crowds go into those areas as well? - A. Yes.

Do you find that the behaviour of those crowds is any
different to the behaviour of a football crowd? - A. I
wouldn't say the behaviour.  I go to the natch more for
the atmosphere, because of the great atmosphere in the
Xop, and that is why I go to the match, so it is
different in that way, I would say.

But for example, you would be surprised if you went
down the corridor in the cinema complex and people were
urinating against the walls there? You would think
that that was a little unusual? - A. There is plenty of
toilets there.

Yes* .Have you found that people when they want to go
in and see a film are also pressing forward in the sane
sort of way as you have described the pressure which
you were experiencing? - A. Hot really.   You don't get
that sort, of people, amount of people going to the
theatre.

You don't get as many, of course, I agree, I accept
that, but of course you have got a smaller space as
well because the stadium seats 55,000 and the cinema
might seat 500, I don't know, so obviously you are
going to have different proportions, I agree. - A. They
have a queuing system at the cineaa so it is different
totally.




            Further Cross-Examined
                                        S. L. JONES



 '        Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

This is probably unfair, but if you had been in charge
yourself, given the task of preparing for a bie fo.otball
match and you were having to say to yourself,   What can I
expect?" - you haven't been yet and you have got to try
and think what it is going to be like.   Do you think it
would be sensible to go to the cinema and say to
yourself, "Well, I will go to the local cinema.    If I
was in London I would go to Covent Garden, because we are
going to find a situation which is roughly the same as a
football match.".  In other words, from your experience
is it a fair comparison - a football crowd and a football
match on the one hand and a queue of people waiting to go
into the cinema - is it the same thing? - A. No, it
isn't.   It's not a comparison at all, I don't think,
sorry.

Let me explore this slightly.  At a cinema, is it right
you have a queue, often just one queue coming out of the
cinema going along the pavement? - A. Yes, normally.

Have you ever known in a cinema 4,000 or 5,000 people all
being asked to go through the same small^ number of
entrances? - A. No.
                                /      y
     MR. KING:      I could develop it, but I won't:

The point being made - and I am not being rude to the
learned Coroner, it is an important point - is is it
sensible -to v-iew matters by reference to a cinema crowd
or .a football crowd? - A. No, it isn't.

     THE CORONER:      I think we will leave this point.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

What if the Rolling Stones were performing at the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. I really don t
know.   I wouldn't go and see them anyway!

But that would be a more apt comparison, wouldn't it? -
A. Perhaps.   I don't know how many fans they have.   Not
as many as Liverpool Football Club have.

      THE CORONER:   This is a very difficult problem, Mr.
King, because the problem is sorting out whether football
crowds are intrinsically different.    You know, are they
made up of a different category of person from other
Jiumans beings and, of course, there are implications
whichever way you answer that.

     MR. KING:      It is very important when one...
                                      S.   L. JONES


      THE CORONER:   This is what I was trying...   I took
thfe opportunity because we had a charming witness and I
thought we would just explore it a little bit.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir, because it goes very
importantly to matters as to what one should expect,* what
one should anticipate.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am not going to intervene in this
discussion, but if that kind of illustration is going to
be put to witnesses, then it ought not to be confined to
cinemas, but it could be applied, for example, to rugby
league matches or to rugby union matches.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, we could go on, and I suppose
you could criticise me for having put it to the witness
and it may not have been entirely fair, but she has given
quite a good account of herself on it.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Mr. Hale mentioned that if you had known there was a fire
in front of you, or the crowd with you that day had seen
a fire, they would have done something about it.   Now,
Stephanie, you would not think there was danger ahead,
would you, that day? - A. Well, if you could not have
Seen it.   He said I could though.

There was only a hidden danger ahead, wasn't there?     A
hidden one? - A. I suppose so.

There has been a lot said about the behaviour of the fans
waiting to go into the football ground.   Now it was
close to kick-off time, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

And it was a semi-final match? - A. Yes.

It could not be compared with a queue at a cinema, could
it?    It was a different thing altogether?   A big
occasion? - A. Yes.

Now the crowd as far as I can make out were not doing
anything unusual really, they just wanted to get in to
see the match.   Wou l d it have made a difference to the
crowd if someone had announced that.the game was going to
be delayed? - A. I don't think so.     I mean, it wouldn't
have mattered really.     It would have given everyone a
lot more time to get in.

You still think they would have pushed forward even
though they had half an hour, for instance, to wait? - A.
WelTl, no.
                                             S. L. JONES


 If you had more time - I was thinking maybe the fans were
 arfxious to get in because they were running out of time.
 That was the reason for their behaviour, not just because
 they wanted to Dush each other?    Do you agree? - A.
 Well, yes.    It s a difficult question to answer.   .1
 mean, if the match had been put back a bit more it would
 have given more time to filter people off to different
 sections perhaps.   As it was the bulk of the crowd went
.in all at once and that just was no good, was it?

So all they needed was time really? - A. Well, more time
would have helped a great deal I should imagine.

                  Further by THE C O RO N E R :

Stephanie, I need to ask you this.   You have already
told me but I need to be absolutely sure about this.
You did not hear any announcements made? - A. No.

You didn't see a loud speaker van or anything like, or a
Land Rover? - A. No.

You heard nothing? - A. Definitely not.

Definitely not.     You are absolutely sure?,- A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very.'much.    Now then,
Stephanie, you have already been complimented up and down
dale, and I am very very grateful to you for coming and
for being here and for yesterday as well.     I am sorry
about that.  I think you have quitted yourself well.
You are a credit to your mum and dad.     I am sure they
were proud of you this afternoon.

     I think we will arrange for this video to be re ­
viewed, if you and the family are "happy, to see whether
the identification on the terrace is confirmed.   We will
just have a think about it.   OK?

     THE WITNESS:     OK.

      THE CORONER:   It is up to you, of course, and your
muni'and dad.   It is not for me to say that they must.
It is just a matter of trying to sort it out:

Oh, Stephanie, we want you to put a cross on the little
plan.    Show Stephanie which is enclosure 3.   I want you
to put a cross where you first exited on to the terrace
where in fact you were, and you were in. fact aiming to go
forward?    In other words, before you felt the - I think
we-have used the word "shove" - from behind.    Can you
put a cross there? - A. I can't honestly say.
                                        S. L. JONES


Can you remember where you finished up after the first
big shove? - A. No.   The only time I can remember, it
was just a constant shove right the way down.  I didn't
really stop.

-You really only remember yourself at the gate, is that
 right?   I'm sorry, what were you going to say? - A. The
 only time I really know is when I was at the bottom by
 the gate before I got out.

Put your cross down there.   So just inside by the gate,
is that right? - A. Yes, when I came out of the gate I
came out to the right of the goal post.

Yes, that is right, I remember that.      Thank   you. We
will give it a C" number.    (C.302)

     THE CORONER:    Stephanie,   thank you very much.      We
have finished.

     Ladies and gentlemen, we have finished today.
Before I let you go we have been thinking about the times
for starting and stopping on Monday and Fridays, not the
other days.    If I were   to say to you that we would start
on Monday at 10.30 instead of 10.00 and an Friday we will
start at 9.30 and aim to finish at 3.30y- you will
realise that "aim" is not quite the isanie thing as
achievement - but aim to finish at 3.30, would that sound
acceptable to you?    If   it sounds acceptable to you, then
I will sort out whether    it sounds acceptable to the
lawyers.    We think it might be easier because* a lot of
people have to travel, including me as well. You
wouldn't mind if I made those changes.

             (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   You heard what I said to the jury.
We thought that might be a bit easier if we start on
Monday at 10.30.

     MR. KING:   I have not canvassed it yet with my
colleagues, but certainly I would have thought that was a
sensible idea.

     THE CORONER:   Is there anybody who feels very
strongly that would be jolly inconvenient?   If we start
at 10.00 on Friday and finish at 3.30 we have actually
lost a whole hour and I thought if we started at 9.30 on
Friday we are only sacrificing half an hour, and aim to
finish at 3.30 rather than A.00.   Whether we make it is
another matter.    Are you happy with that as well?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I haven't consulted any of my
friends on this idea which I am merely floating, sir.
