h s .7.4/football.peb




                                         4 July 1990




Arthur Sandford Esq
Chief Executive
The Football League Limited
City House
Maid Marian Way
NOTTINGHAM    NG1 6BH




We have discussed on a number of occasions the possibility of
setting up a working group of officials which could meet from
time to time to discuss with you and possibly the Football
Association matters of common and current interest.

I have discussed this with colleagues in the Sports and
Recreation Division of the Department of the Environment and also
with people in the other parts of Whitehall with whom you have
had contact over the past few months. The consensus is that an
informal arrangement for discussions of this kind would be quite
useful   but  that   it would    probably   be  unnecessary   for
representatives of all the Departments to be present at all the
meetings. What we have in mind therefore is that my Division of
the Home Office, which is concerned with the safety issues and
the Football Licensing Authority, together with the Sports and
Recreation Division at DoE should provide the nucleus of such a
working group. My colleague Peter Lee and I will be very happy
to meet you and, if he wishes, Graham Kelly, from time to time.
If we can agree a broad agenda in advance of each meeting, we can
then arrange for other officials to attend if their particular
subjects are likely to be raised.

I hope that you will find this a useful and practical
arrangement.   I am sure that we will.     I shall be happy to
arrange our first meeting as soon as you think it is desirable.

Can I use this letter to raise a separate subject.  I have had
an invitation from Messrs GJW Government Relations who tell us
that they work closely with the Football League and with the
Football Association. They have asked for a meeting to discuss
the implementation of the Taylor report, the setting up of the
Football Licensing Authority and the possibility of fresh
legislation dealing with public order offences at football
matches.

I have written back to them to say that since we have a direct
working relationship with the League and the Association I do not
think that such a meeting is necessary. I do not know precisely
what role this organisation plays in relation to the Football
League and the Football Association, but given the pressures
which are on us at the moment I am disinclined to spare time to
meet them unless you or the Association ask us to do so.     I am
copying this letter to Graham Kelly.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
Hidden copy recipients


Home Office

Mr    J Goddard
Hr    A Cogbill
Mr    Yates
Mr    Chilcot
Mr    Boys Smith
Mr    Moriarty
Mr    Angel
Mr    Turney
Mr    Moorey
Mr    Mould
Mr    J D B Taylor


DoE

Mr H Corner            PDC1
Mr P Lee               SARD


Tl^sury
Mr J Mortimer


Inland Revenue

Mr E McGivern


Customs and Excise

Mr Gaw


Scottish Education Department

Miss Margaret McLean


Welsh Office

Mr T M Timlin
