                                                                                   . A t »C

                    15 Jilt i n                          I-HH C l C
                                                         Pk-Qcnt-datk
                                                    H    a
                                                                               g              \AXZrf

                                            Q U E E N ANNE’S GATE L O NDO N SW1H 9AT


                                                              / 5 ~ Ju9.e 1989

                                                                  d   '    /w r -/7 ? < x -(& o g -/4 & e -
                                                                          /W>^~ ^ /^ /Q t^ r 7 v'''*
                                                   4|                 /Z7 / ~ / ^       c l q   ^      ^
                                                        /I?           /7/~

                        J l/^A/VS


        HILLSBOROUGH:   COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


       My officials have been discussing with yours the policing costs of
this investigation and the arrangements which we would like to make, by way
of a special payment, to help the South Yorkshire police authority to meet
the costs.

        The West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an investigation into the
policing aspects of the Hillsborough disaster.     When it was decided that
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry should be established, it was agreed that the
information obtained by the West Midlands Police should be placed at the
disposal of that enquiry.   Both the West Midlands and the South Yorkshire
police authorities have now asked that the additional costs of the police
investigation should be met directly be central government.

        It is clearly right that the additional costs should not fall on the
West Midlands police authority, which has no direct interest in the outcome
of the investigation. I have therefore given an assurance, in my replies to
Members of Parliament concerned about the matter, that wherever the
additional costs might fall, they would not fall to the West Midlands.

        I believe that it is    right in principle that the costs should fall
initially to the South Yorkshire police authority.      The investigation was
initiated by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned
primarily with matters of policing in South Yorkshire.

        South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point.     They have argued
that    the investigations are being dictated primarily by the needs of the
Taylor enquiry and have ceased to be directed towards the needs of their
force. There is some validity in this argument, although I do not accept
South Yorkshire's conclusion.    It is clear that as a result of the decision
to make the results of the police investigations directly available to the
Taylor enquiry, which was obviously a sensible arrangement, there is an
element in the investigation which is, for the sake of convenience, being
conducted for the benefit of that enquiry.       For example, statements were
taken from those from whom the selection of witnesses for the enquiry was
subsequently made;     substantial video evidence has been analysed by the
police for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor;     and the police are urgently
following up at his request specific points arising on the evidence as the
enquiry progresses.
                                      2.




        The additional costs of the investigation were initially estimated
to be running at £1.7 million per month.       This covered both the direct
overtime worked by the 350 or so officers involved and the consequential
overtime worked in the West Midlands to cover for their absence.     It also
includes accommodation costs, transport, subsistence and the like.     There
may be further costs associated with the investigation, such as use of
computer facilities and helplines, which may add to the costs. The scale of
the police commitment is being regularly reviewed by the police and
secretariat   together.   The   investigation   is now being    scaled  down
substantially;   even so, the West Midlands police authority's tentative
estimate of the total additional costs is around £4-£5 million.

        Because of the scale and scope of the police investigation, I am
satisfied that the likely costs could not be absorbed within the South
Yorkshire police authority's budget without serious detriment to the
efficiency of the force. The costs could not have been foreseen when the
authority set its budget and are likely to place a serious strain upon it.
The authority's gross budget is some £85 million, and they had balances at
the end of 1988-89 of around £2 million. They need to keep some of that for
other possible contingencies such as public disorder or a criminal
investigation.

        I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer of a special
payment, in the hope of persuading them to agree to meet the initial costs
of the investigation and thus relieve West Midlands, which is extremely
concerned about the drain on its own policing resources and the absence of
any agreed arrangement for reimbursing its costs.       There is a risk that
matters could come to a head at an early stage. A further complication is
that the Chief Constable of West Midlands (Geoffrey Dear) has told us that
his understanding has always been that he was conducting the investigation
solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor. This may be perhaps a confusion on
the part of Mr Dear which arose because when he was initially approached by
HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might
be an assessor for the Taylor enquiry      as well as conducting theinvestigation
(although it was then decided to separate the        two roles).    The Chief
Inspector has confirmed, however, that in approaching Mr        Dear about the
police investigation, he made it quite clear that the initiative for the
request came from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, a      fact borne out
by the terms of the press statement issued by South Yorkshire Police on 16
April.   Whatever the reasons, it would be very difficult to find ourselves
involved in any public dispute       over the events which      led up to the
investigation.
                                               \
                                           \


        We hope that the South Yorkshire police authority can be persuaded
to accept responsibility.   I believe that our best hope of achieving this is
to make an early offer of a special payment recognising both the financial
burden which this places on South Yorkshire and the extent to which the
investigation serves the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.
                                     3.




        Turning to the possible terms of the special payment, I believe that
it should be based on the formula used in the miners' strike, and later in
the case of the demonstrations at RAF Molesworth, namely that for costs above
a threshold equivalent to the product of a penny rate for the area (i.e.
around £1.3 million), we should meet 90% of the costs (or 39% in addition to
the usual police grant) and that we should place a ceiling on the South
Yorkshire police authority's overall contribution, equivalent to a 3/4p rate
product for the area (approximately £1 million).        The ceiling could be
reached if the costs were to reach around £4.7 million.

        I believe that it would be difficult to justify being less generous
than in the miners' dispute in this particular instance.

        Robin Ferrers is meeting the South Yorkshire police authority on 20
June. We need to be able to say how the Government proposes that the costs
should be met, and how the West Midlands police authority is to be
reimbursed, at the earlier possible date and he needs to make a clear and
reasonable offer at that meeting.   I should therefore be very grateful for
an early reply.

       I am copying this letter to Nicholas Ridley.
