INQUIRY     INTO        THE           HILLSBOROUGH
                                                  25
       S T A D I U M            D I S A S T E R




                       Bef ore


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

                PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (A S S E S S O R S )




                          At

                 The Town H a l l ,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

          Wednesday,    21st June,        1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen S t r e e t , Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                      (MORNING SESSION)




MAURICE KAY called

     Examined by MR. COLLINS
     Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
     Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD
     Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS

ANDREW BYRNE called

    Examined by MR. GOLDSACK
    Cross-Examined by MR. HTTNER
    Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
    Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS
    Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS
    By LORD JUSTICE TAILOR

GRAHAM KELLY called

     Examined by MR. COLLINS
     Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
M \ H ,

                                             1




                                TWENTY-FIFTH DAY'S              P ROCEEDINGS

                                    WEDNESDAY,          21st JUNE,         1989

                                            (MORNING SESSION)

                                           MAURICE KAY,      called

                                      E xamined by MR.          COLLINS:

          Q. Mr.   Maur ic e Kay,     is that      right?        A.         Yes.

          Q.   You are,    I think,    Queen's      Counsel?           A.          Yes.

          Q.   And you attended the match in question on 15th April last
               with your 13 year old son.   A.   Yes.

          Q.   You live in or    near Liverpool                 A.         Ilive in Cheshire,
               about 40 miles    from Liverpool

          Q.   And are you a - I will not say a supporter but do you
               attend Liverpool matches from time to time?   A.   Regularly.

          Q.   With your son?         A.         Yes.

          Q.   Had you been in 1988         to this same match?                    A.     Yes.

          Q. Where had you been in the ground                   in 1988?            A.     Seated
             in the North Stand.

          Q.   Had you observed anything in any way that you considered
               to be amiss in 1988?    A.   No, the only thing I can
               remember outside the ground in 1988 was diffi cu lt y of access
               on the roads, because of roadworks - people were made late
               by that.

          Q.   Can you remember what         time you got there in 1988?
               A.   In 1988?

          Q.   Yes.     A.   At the last minute,             because of the roadworks               -
               about   3 o'clock.

          Q.   What was the policing in Leppings Lane in 1988, can you
               remember anything about it at all?   A.   Not really, no.

          Q.   Was there any crush of any sort at the turnstiles that you
               can recall in 1988 when you arrived?   A.   Not that I can
               recall.

          Q. Did you observe in any way the behaviour on the terraces in
             1988, by which I mean were you aware of any sort of o v e r ­
             c rowding?  A.   No.

          Q.   A lthough   no doubt    they were        full?         A.      Of course.

          Q. On this occasion, this year, you had I think two tickets
             but for separate parts of the ground.   A.   Yes.
                                2



                                                                  M. KAY

Q.   Your ticket   was where?         A.     In the Leppings      Lane standing
     area.

Q.   And your son's?     A.         In the North Stand.

Q.   What time did you arrive on this occasion, 1989?
     A.   We arrived at the ground at about 2 o'clock.

Q. Did you want to go in straight away or not?   A.   My son
   wanted to go in straight away.   I didn't want to go in
   straight away because I didn't want to be standing on a
   terrace for what might have been a very long time.

Q. Did your son therefore go in ahead of you?                     A.         Yes.

Q.   And as far as you are aware, presumably,                he went to his seat
     in the North Stand?   A.   Yes.

Q.   What about yourself?   A.   I   wandered around outside the
     ground for about half an hour or so.

Q.   In the immediate vicinity or --- ?  A.                   Yes, within a
     quarter of a mile or so of the approach                 from the Leppings
     Lane side.

Q. Were you approached at any time by any Policemen telling
   you to move on or asking what   you were up to? A.    I wasn't
   approached, no.  I saw Police   Officers moving people on
   near to the ground.

Q. Did you hear why they were               moving   them on?         A.      No.

Q. Did you see any people around obviously without                         tickets
   asking for tickets?    A.  Yes.

Q. Any idea of the sort of numbers?   A.   Impossible to say.
   I saw perhaps two dozen or so but it is very difficult to
   recall precisely.

Q. Did you see any ticket touts about?                  A.      No,    which is
   unusual for that kind of game.

Q.   How about, again - as youi were an observer and saw people
     no doubt arriving as you^were waiting - what comment do
     you have on the general behaviour of the Liverpool fans who
     were arriving at the match?      A.   The general behaviour
     in the time between 2.00 and 2.30 when I was wandering
     around outside the ground was not very different from what one
     would expect at any other football ground, that they were
     large in number, they were boisterous, some of them were
     singing and chanting and greeting friends that they saw
     approaching the ground.      I didn't see anything that was
     violent or i nt im idating or that I would categorise as
     serious misbehaviour.

Q.   What   about drinking?     A.         Some had clearly      been drinking.
                             3



                                                      M. KAY

Q. Did you see any with cans actually drinking as they went
   past or as they wandered about?   A.   I think I saw some
   with cans.   I can't remember whether they were drinking
   from them at the time.

Q.   You came back intending to go in I think about     half past
     two, is that right?   A.   Yes.

Q. And when you got back in order to go to the turnstiles,
   what was the state of affairs outside the turnstiles?
   A.   It was chaotic in the immediate vicinity of the
   turnstiles.

Q. What were the Police trying to do or apparently trying
   to do, if anything?   A.   It was difficult to tell what
   the actual strategy was. There were mounted Policemen
   near to the iron gates that come before the turnstiles
   and I think just inside the iron gates as well.   There
   were Police on foot a little further away and there
   may have been Police on foot in the immediate access area
   to the turnstiles but if there were I didn't come close
   to any.

Q. Did the Police appear to be taking any steps to control
   people as they arrived, coming down Leppings Lane before
   they reached the perimeter gates?   A.   Well, I had
   walked back to that ground down Leppings Lane.   I don't
   recall having had to pass through any Police check of
   any sort.   The largest number of Police on foot .that' I
   saw were on the right as you approached the Leppings Lane
   entrance close to where the bridge ends, I would say.

Q.    In fact, we have a photograph, if you would be good enough
     to look at what we call Composite Album No. 1 and I think
     it would be sensible if I took you to a p hotograph which
     was appro xi ma te ly 2.30 or just before.    Can I ask you to
     look at one which is MWL10/20A.       A.   I have that.

Q.   You can see what   it shows.   A.   Yes.

Q .People arriving.     That, in fact, is timed at 2.25 or 2.26
    is on the p hotograph but we know that is a minute out.
    A.   Yes.

Q.    Which is about 5 minutes before you actually came down.
     Is that the sort of picture that accords with your recollection
     of the state of affairs when you arrived?      A.   When I
     first walked away from the ground, I walked off to the
     left-hand side of that p hotograph and when I returned at
     2.30 I therefore came in the direction that most of these
     fans seem to be coming in.      Yes, it broadly accords with
     my r e co llection except that I was more conscious of Police
     Officers a little more to the right of the p hotograph than
     the ones where the lady Officer is standing on that photograph,
     but I wasn't inspecting the Constabulary, I had no cause to
     check.
AMS*
                                   4


                                                           M. KAY

       Q.   If you would like now to go on to MWL10/25A, which shows the
            scene in fact precisely at 2.30 outside Turnstiles A-G.
            A.   Yes.

       Q.   Those were the turnstiles you were   aiming   for,    were they
            not?   A.   Yes.

       Q.   That is a picture, on the face of it, of no queue and of a
            large number of people waiting to get into that turnstile.
            A.   That is absolutely right.

       Q.   That was the scene which presumably  was precisely what you
            faced.   A.    Yes.    It was a mass of people, perhaps with
            some element of c onvergence but nothing that could be
            described as a queue.

       Q.   One can see a mounted Police Officer just by the wall        or
            in front of   the wall in the middle of the photograph.
            A.   Yes.

       Q. And some uniformed Officers on: the right, not actually in
          the crowd.   A.   Yes.   I never got that close to the
          turnstiles.   I retreated long before I got to a position
          where I might have seen them.

       Q.   In fact, seeing that state of affairs, what did you do?
            A.   Well, I joined the back of the group, I would have
            thought within the outside gated area, between there and
            the turnstiles, and I stood in it for a while.    It wasn't
            getting anywhere at all;   it was just a mass of people and it
            was dangerous.

       Q.   It has been suggested that that sort of situation could
            not have arisen unless people at the back were pushing.
            You see, the point - that you can only get a mass of people
            jammed up together if people will come at the back and
            push and if people only did not push at the back it would
            not happen.        What do you say about that?    A.   Well,
            nobody was pushing to join the group when I got there;
            you merely became part of it at the back.         Once I was in
            it, it did move frighteningly at times and the slightest
            movement would p r e c i pi ta te other movement, and I was at
            one time close to a Police Officer on a horse - I don't
            know whether the one in the photograph or not - and when
            the Police horse moved very slightly people would move
            i nvol un ta ri ly alongside it and it would cause a ripple
            of movement and since there were railings there it was
            that and just such a movement that caused me to decide to
            get out of it.



                                               /And we know      from other.
                           5
                                                    M. KAY

Q.   We know from other evidence that people in it wer e in
      distress and getting crushed?   A. Yes.  I didn't see
      any signs of terribly obvious distress at that time.
      I just thought it was better to get out of it.

Q.   What about the mood of the people who were stuck in this
      crowd?  How would you describe that at the time that you
     were in it?    A. I didn't see anything at that time by
     way of mood that would enable me to attribute a mood to
     the group of people.

Q.   Anyway you decided to get out.  After how long,       roughly,
     trying to get through?  A. It is very difficult       to say.

Q.   You say in your statement five or ten minutes?          A. Yes.

Q.   But as one appreciates,   time passes more slowly     than one
      realises?  A.   Yes.

Q.   Anyway, having decided to get out of it, what did you do?
     A.   I walked away from the ground at that time unsure
     as to whether I would even try to get in again, or thinking
     that if I did, I might leave it until substantially after
      the kick-off.  I walked in the opposite direction from
     the direction I had walked at 2 o'clock.

Q.   That would be over the bridge?    A. I walked over the
      bridge, yes, and I walked around a little and I had a
      short conversation with a police officer.

Q.   You time that in your statement at about 2.50?        A.   I would
      say so, yes.

Q.   Was that a policeman who had a radio?     A.   Yes.

Q.   And he told you, I think, something-about the postponement
      or possible postponement of the kick-off?   A. He was
      under the impression as a result of something he ha heard
      on the radio,, as I arrived, that the kick-off had been
      postponed until 3.15.

Q.   No doubt that did not surprise you?   A. No. I attended
      a semi-final in Birmingham, not involving Liverpool, two
      years previously where the kick-off had been postponed
      by about 15 or 20 minutes.

Q.   Having been told that, did you decide to go back to Leppings
      Lane?   A. Yes.

Q.   To the turnstile area.   When you arrived there, what did
      you see?  What was the scene that faced you?   A. It was
      very different from the previous occasion.   There seemed
      to be a cordon of police officers outside or somewhere
      near the blue-gated area.

Q.   That is the perimeter gate?     A. Yes, that was controlling
      the flow of people into the  area outside the turnstiles
      which had been the problem area previously.
                            6

                                                     M. KAY

Q.   Were there a number of people outside the perimeter gate
     who were against, as it were, the police cordon?  A. There
     were a number of people waiting their turn to get into the
     turnstile area, yes.

Q.   If you look at the photographs, going back to that same
      bundle, MWL10-30A towards the end;  I know it is difficult
      to see because, of course, the photograph is taken from
      inside.   A. Yes.

Q.   But perhaps it is a little clearer in 31A.   You can see
     towards the back of the photograph, just towards the right
     of that bush, the perimeter gate which appears to be closed?
      Do you see that - the left-hand side of that photograph?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   There are some mounted police officers in the vicinity?
     A.    Yes.

Q.   And there is obviously a considerable crowd of people
     outside?    A. Yes.

Q.   And, of course, also a very considerable crowd inside?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   You joined, did you, the people waiting outside?   A.  Yes,
      but within a very short space of time I and others were
      allowed into the turnstile area.

Q.   You say "allowed in".   Was your impression that the police
      cordon deliberately moved to allow you in?    A. Yes. My
      impression at that time was that the police had begun to
      control a number of people getting inside the perimeter
      gate.

Q.   What about the crowd inside the gate?  By the time you got
     through into the area within the perimeter gate, was there
     a crowd there?   A. At that time it was entirely orderly
     inside the perimeter gates.  It was not particularly ove r ­
     crowded and people were proceeding through the turnstiles
     in quite a normal manner.

Q.   We know,   in fact, that G a t e C was opened at 2.52?   A. Yes.

Q.   Were you aware whether or not that gate was in fact open
     when you came back on the second occasion?   A. No, I didn't
     know anything about that at all.   That must have been
     while I was absent from the immediate area.

Q.   The picture you describe of the state of affairs within the
     turnstile area is consistent with the gate having been
     opened by then?   A.  Yes.

Q.   Would you agree with that?      A.   Yes.

Q.   I just want to ask you, if I may go back, about   the crowd
     outside when you arrived at Leppings Lane itself.   This is
     outside the perimeter gates.  We have heard some evidence
                          7

                                                  M. KAY

     in the course of the Inquiry that that crowd was very
     pushy, bad tempered and aggressive and effectively forced
     its way through those perimeter gates.   Was that the mood
     that you recall when you arrived or not?    A. No.  As I
     said before, it wasn't sufficient of a collective mood to
     be able to say it had any particular mood.   When I was
     there, there were some people expressing impatience about
     the fact that the mass of people didn't seem to be moving
     through the turnstiles, but this was at half--past-2 and I
     was well away from the area before the gate seems to have
     been opened.

Q.   I am sorry, it is my fault.    I was asking about the mood
     of the people outside in Leppings Lane when you arrived
     soon after 2.50.   These are the people who were cordoned
     off by the police.   Was there any aggfessive mood that you
     were aware of amongst that crowd?     A. No.   I found, on
     returning to the ground on that occasion, that everything
     seemed better controlled and more orderly and people were
     proceeding to do what they had gone there to do, get into
     the ground.

Q.   Anyway you went through one of the turnstiles?    A. Yes.

Q.   And having got in, what faced you was clearly the mouth
     of the tunnel ahead of you?   A. Yes.

Q.   Were you aware that you oaJMi have gone round the outside?
     A.  I was not aware.

Q.   Did you ask anyone where you should go?   A. Not as such,
     no.  When you go through the tunnel, when you go through
     the turnstile, on the right I think there were some
     programme sellers where I bought some programmes, and
     then I saw a gate within the turnstile area with a steward
     on it, and he was opening the gate to let some other people
     in.

Q.   That is the gate at the back of the West Stand,   I think?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   Which you now know to be the gate through which people
     were going up into the stand?   A. Yes.  I had no wish to
     go to the area immediately behind the goal or down near
     the front, so I thought that that gat§ would take me to
     the rear of the standing area and so I approached it.   I
     was told by the man on duty there that that was access
     to the seated area and that I should go, he gestured,
     towards the tunnel.

Q.   When you got into the ground, were you then aware whether
     or not Gate C was open or did you not really look?  Gate
     C, of course, is the gate which would, as you come into
     the ground, be immediately to your right.  A. No, I didn't
     notice.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  When you were trying to get to
     the gate that actually led to the stand, somebody directed
     you, did they?    A.  Yes.
                            8

                                                      M. KAY

Q.   Towards the tunnel?   A. Yes, it was pointed out to me
     that my ticket wasn't for that area and that I should go
     to the tunnel.

Q*         Mr. COLLINS:    Did you in fact go to the central tunnel?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   Did you go down it?     A. Yes.

Q.   Were other people going down at the same time?         A.    I think
      so, but not in especially large numbers.

Q.   Had the match in fact kicked off by    then?     A.   Yes.

Q.   So it must have been a minute or two after 3 o'clock?
      A.  Yes.

Q.   When you got to the end of the tunnel, what faced you?
     A.   A very large number of people in an area insufficient
      to accommodate them.

Q.   Did you manage to get into the crowd?      A. I was in it, at
     the back of it, yes.

Q.   Were you out of   the tunnel, actually on the terracing?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   Can you remember which side of the central barrier you went,
      either Pen 3 or Pen 4? A. I don't know them by number but
      I would have gone slightly to the left as you go through
      the tunnel.  It would be Pen 4.




                                  /Q.   How far down into the pen.
Q. How far down into the pen did you get? - A. Not very far.
   I could not be more specific than that.

Q. Where you were how uncomfortable were you by the time you
   got into your position? - A. Well it was very very crowded
   and packed and within a very short space of time one was
   conscious of people jammed like sardines and swaying and
   not having any choice about their movements.

Q. Could you see or were you aware of what we now know in fact
   was happening towards the front of the pens? - A. No, some
   of the mo vemen t was in a forward direction. Whether that
   was the result of pressure behind or whether it was the
   effect of crush barriers giving way in front, I have no
   idea.

Q. Did you become aware of people going out through the front
   perimeter fence and trying to scale the front perimeter
   fence? - A. At some point, yes.

Q. And were you aware of the match being stopped? - A. Yes.

Q. Did those two events roughly coincide as far as you can
   recall? - A. It is difficult to be specific but there was
   not much time between them, I don't think.

Q. Did you realise why people were climbing out and why the
   match was stopped immediately? - A. I did not really
   realise no.  It did not seem to me that it was a kind of
   pitch invasion or anything of that sort, but I did not
   know the nature of what had happened down at the bottom.

Q. We   have seen the video and indeed have heard evidence
   of   Police Officers, not only Police Officers, getting on
   to   the fence at the back and making gestures for people
   to   go back? - A. Yes, I do remember that.

Q. Was it possible to comply with those? - A. Not at first,
   no.

Q. Why not? “ A. Because there were too many people behind.

Q. Did people around seem to appreciate why the Police were
   wanting them to go back? - A. People around were shouting
   back to the Police Officers that they could not move
   backwards, it was not possible.

 Q. Did you eventually manage yourself to move back? - A. Yes,
    I moved first sideways and I think that took me to the
    vertical fence that divides the two pens, I was standing
    close to that and then a short time afterwards I went
    back out through the tunnel.

 Q. Now as you weftt back out through the tunnel were you aware
    of any Police Officers? - A. I was aware of some Police
    Officers coming on to the terraces through the tunnel as
&   '
                                        10

                                                   M. KAY


             I was going out.  I was aware of a slight altercation
             between some other people who were going out and the Police
             Officers who were coming in.

        Q. Can you recall what was the nature of that altercation? -
           A. It was to do with comfort in the ground and crowd
           control.

        Q. Did you see any injured people or people apparently injured
           as you went out? - A. No, all I remember was that I saw
           two or three men carrying another chap who had clearly
           been injured, I think not terribly  seriously, a leg injury
           or something of that sort, and they were carrying him
           through the tunnel at about the time I was going through
           the tunnel.

        Q. And you got back out into the concourse behind the tunnel,
           did you? - A. Yes.

        Q. I think you m e t up by chance with a friend of yours, an
           acquaintance? ~ A. A little later.    Once I was back in
           the concourse area I had made no decision as to what I
           was going to do but some people started to move round to
           the right as you came out of the tunnel.    I did that
           and discovered for the first time that that was access
           to another part of the terraces which roy ticket would have
           entitled me to go to and that is where I went and that
           is where I m et the person I knew.

        Q. Could you see the pitch from there? - A. Yes.

        Q. And you then presumably saw the unfolding events on the
           pitch? - A. I saw a lot going on without a great deal
           of knowledge as to precisely what had happened ©r how
           serious it was.

        Q. Did you hear any announcements over the Tannoy? - A. Not
           for a long time, no.

        Q. Can you recall what was the first announcement which you
           can recall hearing? - A. I remember a call at one point
           for medical people in the crowd.  I cannot remember
           precisely when it was but I think that was the first
           thing I heard.  The next thing I remember hearing in any
           detail was when the Liverpool Manager was speaking over
           the Tannoy, but that seemed to be quite a long time after.

        Q. It was,       it   was   about 50 minutes    after.   -   A. Yes.

        Q.             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can you give any idea when
                 you say you heard a call for medical people? “ A. My
                 Lord, I would have said it was in the region of 3.25 or
                 so, 3.30, but I may well be wrong about that.

         q   .         MR. COLLINS:  Certainly some significant time
                 into the events as it were? - A. That I became aware of
                 it, yes.
<6
                                      11

                                                 M. KAY


     Q. I think shortly after Mr. Dalglish's announcements it was
        announced that the match had been abandoned? - A. Yes, I
        think one of the things he said was:  "We don't want any
        more fatalities" and up until that point I was completely
        unaware and the people who were standing around me were
        completely unaware that things had been as serious as that.

     Q. I think you after the announcement that the match had been
        abandoned and people began to leave, went round to meet
        your son at the exit point to the North Stand? - A. Yes.

     Q. No doubt he had been somewhat worried? - A. He had indeed,
        yes, he had been watching things with a rather clearer
        view than I had and had seen people stretchered out and
        was fearful that I might have been injured since he knew
        that I was in that part of the ground.

     Q. Did he indicate to you whether he had tried to find out
        any information about what was going on? - A. Yes, he said
        he had asked a person, I can't recall whether a Police
        Officer or a Steward, and he met with silence.

     Q. It seems from what you have told us that there was precious
        little information given at any stage in the proceedings.
        Is that a fair comment? -A. Yes.

              MR. C O L L I N S :   Yes, thank you, Mr. Kay.


                           Cross-Examined by M R . H Y T N E R t

     Q. Mr. Kay, it may be said by some people that you are not an
        expert in policing procedures but have you been to a number
        of football grounds in the past? - A. I have been to a
        large number of football grounds, yes, but I am not an
        expert in policing.

     Q. You have seen the Police controlling crowds at other grounds?
        - A. Yes.

     Q. A t 2.30 was it your impression, having had experience of
        policing of crowds but without the training in Police
        procedure, that the crowd at 2.30 was both chaotic and dis
        organised? - A. Yes.

     Q. And that the efforts of the Police to control them were if
        anything counter-productive? - A. Yes.

     Q. Without going into too much detail, was the broad thrust of
        the difficulty this:    that there were large numbers of
        Policemen within the disorganised press of people but no
        Policemen attempting to stop the crowds coming to 3 0 in that
        press? - A. Save that I would not be able to agree with the
        words "large numbers of Police Officers" within the problem
        area.   I would agree with the rest of your statement.
£ 5
v                               12

                                            M. KAY


      Q. So such Policemen as there were were within the problem area
         and doing n o g o o d and no Policemen preventing people joining
         the press.   Is that broadly the problem? - A. It is something
         like that, yes.

      Q. Have you been to grounds where there have been Police - if
         not cordons - there have been strings Of Police with Tannoys
         or Public Address Systems filtering the flow of fans some
         little distance away from the ground? - A. I have not been
         aware of a positive filtering system in the way that you
         describe.  I have been aware on big matches and one big match
         in particular that I recall, of Police strung out at intervals
         over a very long approach to the ground.   I am talking about
         perhaps half or three-quarters of a mile and Police Officers
         standing every few yards.

      Q. Doing what? - A. Keeping an eye on the crowd.  I am bound
         to say at the time when I did see that and it was at a semi­
         final in Birmingham two years ago, my feeling at the time
         whether justified or not, was that they were too numerous.

      Q. You see there are various things that may be said to be
         impractical.  What I am very anxious not to do is to
         make suggestions that the Police should have done something
         that no Police Force anywhere else could have done.

               Have you for example been to Old Trafford and seen
         the Police controlling the crowds crossing the main Manchester
         to Chester road? - A. Yes I have,  many times.

      Q. That is what I want to ask you about.  Is it right that
         massive crowds come up both from the Station at Warwick Road
         and the car park at the Cricket Ground, up not amaain road.
         They then meet the main Manchester to Chester road which
         has to be crossed to get to the ground? - A. Yes, they do
         it in two places.  They do it first of all at Talbot Road
         by the Cricket Ground and then again at the main Chester
         Road much closer to the Football Ground.




                                     /Q. Is that done
                             13


                                                       M. KAY


Q, Is that done by simply having a line of Police Officers with a
   public address system who simply first tell the crowd when to
   stop and when to go, and the Police Officers turn round with
   their arms stretched or put their arms down and turn sideways?
   - A. Yes, and I have never seen it mismanaged.

Q. And never seen the crowd become unruly when they are properly
   organised? - A. No.

Q. Just one other thing which is of interest in what you say.
   You had been to the previous Semi-Final? - A. Yes.

Q. But nevertheless you were not familiar with the standing area
   because the previous year you had had a ticket? - A. I had
   tickets both years, but a seating ticket.

Q. I mean seating ticket.           I am sorry.  That is an insensitive
   question.           It does not follow, does it, Mr. Kay, that because
   a spectator goes to a ground once a year he is necessarily
   familiar with the whole of the ground the following year? - A.
   It certainly does not follow, no, and I have been to
   Hillsborough, although a long time ago, on very many
   o c c a s i o n s , but I have never I think previously stood in the
   Leppings Lane end.

Q. And the other thing I want to ask you is this, because things
   may be said about the spectators at the Leppings Lane e n d .
   Was it your impression from having followed Liverpool on a
   number of occasions that a large number, a large proportion
   of the people attempting to get in at the Leppings Lane end
   were people who usually are seated at Anfield but could not
   all be seated on this occasion? - A. I am sure that is true
   to some extent.  The basis of ticket allocation was such
   that a lot of people who had season tickets for seats at
   Anfield were only allocated standing tickets for the Semi-
   Final at Hillsborough, and I did see a number of people,
   not very many, a handful of people, at the Leppings Lane
   end standing whom I know normally sit down, people who sit
   near me at Anfield.

          MR. HYTNER:   Sir, there is a great deal more, but it
   is well ploughed ground, and I d o n ’t propose to ask this
   witness the questions that have been already asked many t i m e s .

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. W O O D W A R D :

Q. Mr. Kay,   in 1988 when you arrived you had been delayed? - A.
   Yes.

Q. So you got to the ground at what time? - A. We got to our
   seats as the match was kicking off, and had no difficulty in
   getting from where we parked the car to our seats.

Q. On that occasion did you notice any Police around the approach
   to the Leppings Lane entrance? - A. No.  Arriving later than
   we had intended to arrive because of the traffic difficulties,
   having parked the car, we merely proceeded as quickly as
                             14

                                                      M. KAY


     possible into the ground, and I have no recollection of the
     presence and distribution of Police Officers, the crowd or
     anything else.

Q. Would it be right in 1988 at that time on your approach to the
   ground you had a very free and clear way in? - A. I
   certainly d o n ’t remember any obstruction from parking the car
   to getting in the ground.

Q. By the time you got in obviously most of the people had gone
   in ahead of you? - A. Yes, but there were plenty of other
   delayed people.  I am afraid west-east transport is not
   terribly good.

Q.   In 1989 when you went to the game you arrived at the ground
     and you told us you came to the Leppings Lane entrance at
     about half-past-2? - A. Yes, the first time I had been there
     at 2 o ’clock.

Q. Between 2 o'clock and 2.30 you had observed the people around
   you? - A. Yes, but most of that time I was some distance away
   from the ground.  I walked away from the ground.

Q. Because you did not want to stand upon a packed terrace? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Those were your words. - A. Yes.  I did not want to stand
   there for what could have been three hours.

Q.   So even at that time you anticipated that the   terrace would be
     packed, did you, at about 2 o ’clock? - A. I had no views as to
     how packed it might have been at 2 o ’clock, but I did not want
     to stand in a terrace that would certainly have soon become
     packed and remain there for three hours.

Q . When you came back to the c r o w d , to the g a t e s ,that would be
    about what time? - A. About half-past-2.

Q.   At that time are able to help us as to how far back from the
     turnstiles the crowd waiting to go in extended?  Perhaps you
     will look at the pointer and be helped by the usher? - A.
     Well, it was really just a mass of people inside the
     perimeter gate, from there to the turnstile.

Q. Was there any clear space between the perimeter gates and the
   rear of the crowd? - A. I c a n ’t remember where precisely the
   rear of the crowd was when I joined it.

Q. Your recollection is it did not extent beyond the perimeter
   gates into Leppings Lane, did it? - A. If it it did it would
   not have extended by very much, I am sure of that.

Q. You could see the crowd ahead of you as you approached that
   place, and decided having stood in it for a short while to
   withdraw? - A. Yes.

Q. May we take it from what you saw when you joined the back of
                              15


                                                        M. KAY


     the   crowd you did not push in? - A . You may take t h a t .

Q.   And you at no stage were doing any pushing?         - A. Absolutely
     right.

Q. However, there came a point when you became reluctant to
   remain there? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was that because you were being pushed from behind? - A. I was
     being moved around in different directions.   The main sway
     that I remember was in fact towards my right rather than from
     behind, so presumably it would have come from my left rather
     than behind, but there were just so many people there it was
     swirling around at that point.  That is what I found dangerous
     and led me to believe that it was better to go.

Q. At that stage you were not aware of any mood on the part of
   the crowd, were you? - A. No, I find it very hard to say that
   there was a particular mood on the part of the crowd.  There
   were a lot of people trying to get into a football ground.
   Some individuals were manifesting impatience at the time it
   was taking.

Q. Here it was, half-past-2,       and half-an-hour to go to the kick-
   off? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you able to discern why anybody should be anxious at
   half-past-2 about getting in in time? - A. I was anxious about
   remaining in that crowd as it was for however long it was
   going to take to get into the ground.   My view of that
   was to get out of the crowd, but some people who perhaps
   feel more passionately about these things than I do
   decided to stay in.

Q. Had you been in a terrace       crowd before? - A.    I have been in
   terrace crowds before.

Q. When was the last occasion? - A. In the Wembley Cup Final
   of 1988.

Q. In 1989 you went away from the crowd again? - A. Yes.

Q. You have spoken of the activities of the Police, and you
   agreed with Mr. Hytner that their efforts seemed to be
   counter-productive? -A. yes.

Q. What precisely do you mean by that?   What was being done that
   was having an adverse effect? - A.  Well, the only Police
   Officers that I was aware in close proximity to where I
   was in the problem area at half-past-2 were the mounted
   Police Officers.  I am not sure how many of them there
   were, but in that space, and there is not very much
   space there, even one mounted Police Officer takes up
   quite a lot of room, and when his horse moves slightly
   it causes movement in the crowd which precipitates the
   kind of involuntary movement I was describing before.
   That seemed to be happening and there to be a problem
                            16

                                                  M. KAY


     without there being any compensating benefit, because
     there was no improvement for the time I was there in the
     situation.  It was not going from a situation of
     disorganised mass of people into an organised access to
     the ground.  If anything, it was getting worse.

Q. So when you accepted the generalisation that the efforts of
   the Police were counter-productive, you intended solely the
   presence and activity of the mounted Force.  Is that right? -
   A. In a positive sense, yes.

Q. You agreed with it being counter-productive.      - A. Yes.

Q. Are you aware that the use of Police horses in a crowd is a
   fairly standard measure of controlling crowds? - A. of course.

Q. You have not had the advantage of hearing the evidence of the
   mounted Police in this case, have you? - A. No.

Q. Or considering it? - A. No, I saw very brief snatch in the
   press, but I am sure I did not see it all.

Q. You have spoken of seeing the mounted Police and the behaviour
   of the crowd.  Were you aware that various Officers of the
   mounted Police have spoken of their horses being hit and
   struck by members of the crowd? - A. I d i d n ’t know
   anything of that until the Police Officer      who came to take
   my statement told me such allegations had been made.

Q. You did not see any of that? - A. No.

Q. When you spoke of mounted Police how many did you intend to
   describe?  Just the one? - A. In that sort of situation you
   are only really conscious of whatever is nearest to you.    I
   was aware of more than one mounted Police Officer in the
   Leppings Lane area.  When I talk of a sudden movement
   precipitating movement in the crowd I am obviously
   talking about the one that was nearest to me at the
   time.

Q.   It was really just one you are aware of?     That is right,   is
     it? - A. I d o n ’t know whether it is right or not.

Q. You are only aware of one? - A. I am only aware of one close
   to me having that effect.

Q. Thank you.  When you went into the ground       you say you were
   directed by a steward? - A. Yes.

Q. That was a steward situated whereabouts?     By a gate in the
   wall? - A. I d o n ’t know if that is the correct term for him.
   He was the person who obviously had responsibility for
   ensuring that people with seating tickets went up and through
   the gate to the seated area.

Q.   It may be helpful to look at the pointer.   Are you intending
     to descr ibe the access to some stairs or gateway in the wall
                            17


                                                  M. KAY


     there?  Do you see? - A. I c a n ’t see it from here.   May I go
     across and point it out?

Q. Please. (Witness demonstrates on m o d e l ) You are pointing to
   the stairway? - A. The stairs where it says ”Y-Z” .

Q.   You had had your ticket.  May I ask you about your ticket.
     Would you have found it helpful to find some indication on the
     back of your ticket as to where the accesses to the terraces
     were? -A. I suppose so, yes.

Q.   Did you experience any confusion in relation to the     signing
     and the notices on the gates? - A. The gates within     the
     ground, after passing through the turnstile?

Q. At any stage? - A. As you approached down Leppings Lane itself
   it was first of all not immediately obvious to me which
   turnstiles were for the seated people and which were for the
   standing people, although it soon became obvious.  Once you
   had passed through the turnstiles I saw no sign, advice or
   assistance at all as to where one should go.  Bearing in mind
   the fact it turned out to be an area through which both
   standing and seating customers were to go I found in
   retrospect very surprising.

Q. You went in, down the tunnel and on to the terrace and you
   told us into a pen slightly to the left? - A. Yes.

Q. By that time had the game already started? - A. Yes.

Q. And you managed to take up a position? - A. Just about.

Q. Did you at that time think of coming out because if was too
   thronged? - A. Not immediately, no.

Q. So is this the situation, that which confronted you was
   something you were prepared to tolerate? - A. I was asked
   before when I had last stood, and I said a year before at
   Wembley.   Apart from that I have not stood at a football
   ground for a great many years.   My experience when I did
   was that what seems to be an immediate crush inside an
   access point can very often disperse quite soon after you
   get there.




                            /Q. So you were expecting that.
                              18


                                                    M. KAY

Q.   So you were expecting that to happen?       A.   Yes, before
     I had a true appr ec ia ti on of just how many people were
     there and what the options of anybody who was there had,

Q.   Were you aware, apart from normal swaying or surging that
     one observes in a terrace crowd or may experience in a
     terrace crowd, of any p articular movement in the crowd
     whilst you were there?     A.   No, I was aware of forward
     and sideways m ov ements and I was aware, I can remember,
     at one time being pushed forward into a crush barrier
     and, along with others who were in the same situation,
     trying to ease my se lf to the side of that crush barrier.

Q.   This was the experience of some potent surge or sway            that
     did not give way, did not return?   A.   I am sorry,            I do
     not understand the question.

Q.   In your statement you speak of some irresistable weight
     from behind.  A.   Yes.   Yes, clearly when I was pushed
     down into the crush barrier, that was pressure from behind.

Q.   You had been on the terrace for soee minutes by that time,
     had you?    A.  A very few minutes because it must all have
     taken place between my getting there at a couple of minutes
     past three and the game coming to an end at six minutes
     past three.

Q.   Very well.   There came a point when you decided to come out
     and you came down the tunnel.  A.   Yes.

Q. At that stage there were         Police Officers coming     in the
   opposite direction.   A.           Yes.

Q. Are you aware of how many?           A.    Not many but they included
   a senior officer.

Q. And   they were obviously       on their way to do something.
   A.     Certainly, yes.

Q.   They had a mission.     A.      Yes.

                      Re-examined ty MR.      COLLINS:

Q.    In the crush on the terraces, were you at any stage aware
     of the existence of a gate at the baek of the radial fence
     which could have given you access to the next-door pen?
     A.    No.

                           A NDREW BYRNE,    called

                      E xamined     by MR.   GOLDSACK:

Q. Are you Dr.   Andrew Byrne?         A.    Yes,   I am.

Q.   From N ottingham and a consultant       a na esthetist?    A.      Yes,
     that is correct.

Q.   I think you came to the match on 15th April and in your
                             19


                                                      A. B Y R N E

     party were   some other doctors?      A.        Two other doctors      and
     a dentist.

Q.   You had seats in the   South Stand?        A.      Yes.

Q.   Had you been to the same match the year          before?        A.   No.

Q.   Are you a regular football supporter?    A.      I used to have
     a season ticket but, because of pressure of work, I had
     to give  that up although I have been to H il ls borough before.

Q.    At about what time did you take up your seat this year?
     A.    I can tell you exactly, it was ten to three because
     I looked at my watch and looked around so I know it was
     exactly ten to three.

Q.   Can you just help us by indicating which part of the South
     Stand you were in.   A.  (D e m o n s t r a t e d )

Q.   Fairly close to the West end.   A.      O verlooking            the Leppings
     Lane terrace, in fact, about 20 y a r d s ---

Q. Dr. Byrne, at ten to three, what was your i mpression of
   the state of the crowd in the Leppings Lane terrace?
   A.   I looked at the terrace and iden ti fi ed that that was
   the Liverpool end and to me it looked full.

Q. All of it or just part of it?   A.   There were certainly
   areas at the wings that looked empty or sparse, fairly
   sparsely populated, but the major bulk of the terrace I
   thought looked fairly full.

Q. Did you notice anything else untoward in the time between
   then and kick-off?   A.   Nothing between then and kick-
   off, no.

Q.   Shortly after the kick-off, were you aware of problems
     developing in the Leppings Lane terraces?    A.   I could
     certainly see rippling in the terrace which, having seen
     that before, indicates that it is fairly full and i seem
     to remember seeing Policemen pushing back people trying to
     get over the fence.    There was certainly quite a large
     Police presence there.

Q. When you talk of seeing rippling, is that after the kick-
   off?   A.   I think that was before the k ic k-off as well.

Q. Did you at that stage, when you saw the ripple, consider
   there was anything untoward with the number of people in that
   part of the crowd, or just a healthy crowd?   A.   Just a
   very large crowd.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    What do you mean?   Can you
     be any more precise as to what you mean by rippling?
     A.   It is a strange p henomenon where the top seems to
     ripple down.   It goes from the top downwards and you
     can see people move and they are obviously being pushed
     forward and they push the person in front of them and it
                                                    A. B Y R N E

has a d omino-like   effect.   You see this as a ripple      from
a distance.

Words are difficult to apply precisely but do you distinguish
between a ripple and a surge or is it the same thing?
A.   I have always assumed that because of the crowd control
barriers it is, in fact, s el f-limiting in that the barriers
will stop people going too far and that was the reason they
were erected, so it is a ripple thatseenP to just gradually
spread from above downwards.

     MR. GOLDSACK:      Is your experience   that the ripple
then goes back?    A.     Usually, yes.

In the few minutes just before kick-off on this occasion,
did you see the ripple going back?   A.   I believe so.

So what was the first indication you had that all was
not as it should be at that end?         A.   The first indication
was after the match had been stopped, I saw a person being
resuscitated, having mo ut h- to -m ou th resusc it at io n and
external cardiac massage on the side of the pitch and this
was i mmediately below - some 20 yards or so below - where
we were seated and from what I could see it seemed to be
being done effici en tl y and I thought this was certainly
s omething that was untoward but it was just one person
at that stage and it seemed to be being carried out
efficiently.

Was that being done by someone in uniform or --- ?         A.      No,
the two people were not in uniform.

The players having left the pitch, did you then c oncentrate
on what was happening on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end??
A.   As they leftthe pitch we stood up and we were obviously
somewhat annoyed that there had been an i nt er ruption and we
were standing around and talking and rather upset by the
delay.   It was some many minutes later that I realised
that there was a major incident.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could you speak up, or forward.
At first you were annoyed;     it was some minutes later that
what?    A.    That I realised that there was a major
incident, that something terrible had happened.

     MR. GOLDSACK:   In those few minutes before you
realised it was a major incident, what was your impression
as to what was actually happening?    A.   There were people
spilling over the top from the Leppings Lane end and I had
assumed that it was either that people had got in the wrong
partitions or that perhaps even supporters from N ottingham
Forest had got in the Liverpool end and, for their own safety,
they were being shepherded out.    That is something that happens
from time to time in football matches.

When you realised it was a major incident, what did you  do?
A.    I said to the other two doctors that we must go down
to the pitch.    The man who was with us was a dentist and
                                               A.   BYRNE



he stayed.   We made our way down underneath the Stand
and I saw a steward and asked him to take us on to the
pitch and he took us through the kitchens and we  managed
to get on to the pitch.

Dr. Byrne, I a ppreciate that times can be very difficult
but what is your best estimate as to the time at which you
decided to go down on to the pitch?    A.   I would say
a pp roximately 15 minutes after the game had stopped.

Which takes us to just after 20 past 3.      In that time,   had
you heard any a nn ou ncement at all over the tannoy?
A.   Abso lu te ly none.

I think you were here during   the last witness's   evidence?
A.   Yes.

Did you hear Mr. Kay say that at some stage he did hear a
tannoy a nn ou ncement for medical a ssistance? A. I
heard Mr. Kay say that.

Did you at any stage that afternoon hear such an annou nc em en t?
A.   Nothing at all.   No announcement at all.

Does it surprise you that   there was no announcement asking
for doctors?    A.  Yes.     In retrospect, I think it was a
gross omission.

Do you think if you had been down on th± pitch ten minutes
earlier than you were - you and others - that there was
more that you could have done to assist?   A.    I think
that is a very difficult question to answer but, knowing
this incident and the way that these people died, I do
not think that a lot could have been done.

By the time you reached the pitch, there were, of course,
other people already giving massage and such other assistance
as they could.   You remained on the pitch, I think, for
a few minutes helping with one particular person who was
dead in fact beforeyyou arrived, is that right?   A.   Yes,
that is correct.

And then I think within a fairly short period you decided
there was not a lot you could do on the pitch.        A.   Yes.
There were at least half a dozen people u ndergoing c a r d i o ­
pulmonary r es us ci ta ti on . |t seemed to be being performed
e fficiently by people who seemed to know what they were
doing and there didn't seem much that I could do on the pitch.

And so did you approach   a Police Officer?   A.     Yes.

And ask him, in effect, what else you could do that would
be of more use?   A.   Correct.

Did he take you through to what you now know was the gymnasium?
A.   Yes, he escorted me through the Police line across the
centre of the pitch to the gymnasium.
                             22


                                                      A.   BYRNE



Q. Again, can you give us some estimate of how many minutes
   you were on the pitch before going to the g ymnasium?
   A.    I would think 10-15 minutes.

Q.   Sothe   g ymnasium alittle after half three, probably.
     A.    I would think so.

Q.   When you arrived do  you  know whether you were the first
     doctor into the g ymnasium?   A.   fhere were certainly at
     least two other doctors there.

Q. What was the scene that you found on arrival?     A.    When
   I walked into the gymnasium it had been partit io ne d and
   on the right side of the gymnasium were piled bodies and on
   the left side were people being escorted in by ambulancemen,
   St. John's A mbulance people, and they were, if you like,
   the walking wounded.    They were being escorted to the left
   and the dead were being placed to the right.

Q. Did you have a conv er sa ti on with a senior Police            Officer?
   A.   I did.

Q. Uniformed or C.I.D.?        A.     UNiformed.

Q.   What were you asked to do?   A.    Well, firstly I went and
     attended to the people who were walking in.     There were
     one or two who were laying down on hoardings.     One person
     in particulr I remember had a pain in his back and I
     suggested that he was not moved until an ambulance came.
     There was very little one could actually do because there
     was no equipment, no means of looking after the patients.
     It was just a matter of triaging them to see who was the
     most serious and perhaps getting those to hospital first,
     so I had a quick walk around the g ym nasium to see if there
     was anything I could do and there was very little and then
     I said to the Police Officer, "What can I do now?" and
     it was at that stage he suggested that I certify some of
     the people dead because they needed to assure themselves
     that people were, in fact, dead and also, of course, to
     make room for other people coming in.

Q.   So did you then proceed      to the formal c e r t i f ic at io n   of,
     I think, some 16 bodies      in all?   A.    I did.

Q.   Was that carried out in the presence of a senior Police
     Officer?   A.   Yes, there were two other doctors who came
     and it was agreed that we would do this rather gruesome
     work between the three of us and we were given a Police
     Officer each who came round with us and beside each body
     was stationed a Police Officer and we went indep en de nt ly to
     certify the people dead in that gymnasium.

Q. Dr. Byrne, you said a few moments ago when dealing with
   what assistance you could give to those who were obviously
   still alive that there was very little you could do because
   there was not any equipment.         Ideally, what equipment
   would you have wished to have found there?         A.  O&e would
   need a basic r es us ci ta ti on box which would be some means of
                                            A.   BYRNE



a d mi nistering artificial ventilation either with some
form of inflatable bag or there are special airways available
which can be put into people's mouths to help.      Those are
very simple devices that should be available everywhere
where a large public event is held, in my view.       I would
have thought, knowing the numbers of people there, that
probably slightly;;more sophisticated equipment to deal
with common things that can occur such as heart attacks should
be available.      A de-ifibrillator would be something that
I am amazed that football clubs do not have and simple First
Aid bandages and perhaps r es uscitation drugs.




                            /LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:      A de-fibriUdbor
                              24

                                                     A. BYRNE

 Q*         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  A defibrillator could have been
       used in the gymnasium, could it? A.   Yes.

 Q.    We have been told it would not have been practicable on the
       field but it could --- A. It could be used on the field,
       sir, but probably in a gymnasium would be the place to
       site it.  They are portable.

 Q.         Mr. GOLDSACK:  Any other equipment that you w o M d
       have either expected to find or wished to find t h e r e ? r
       A.  It's very difficult to say exactly what equipment one
       would like because you can ask for everything and then
       somebody will turn round and say "Well, there wouldn't be
       anybody there who would know how to use it", so I think
       you would just need the basic resuscitation equipment that
       any doctor should be able to use.

 Q.    For how long did   you in fact remain in the gymnasium?
       A.  I   suspect it must have been an hour or so.

 Q.    After you had performed what you rightly describe as the
       gruesome task, were there any injured people still
       available that needed your attention?    A. By this time
       a lot   of doctors had arrived from local hospitals, people
       who I   recognised by sight as being local Sheffield doctors,
       and there was a lot of medical assistance available by
       this stage.

 Q.    As one of the people who was in    the mortuary, as it became,
       at a very early stage, what was    your overall impression of
        the way that side of things was   handled by the police
       officers?    A. I thought it was   handled very efficiently
        and very humanely by the police   officers present.

            Mr. GOLDSACK:    Thank you very much.

                   Cross-examined by Mr. H Y T N E R :

j Q.   Dr. Byrne, I am not sure that I got an answer of yours down
        accurately.  If I did, I would like you to help us about
        explaining it;   if not, I will not have any questions. I
        think you said that an earlier call for help would not
        have done very m uch good.  Have I got that down accurately
        or inaccurately?    A.  No, that is correct.

 Q.    Just for the benefit of the bereaved, I think I ought to
        ask you to explain that a little.  Can I take it stage by
        stage.  In the crush, there would have been those who
        immediately or after a while stopped breathing? A. That
        is correct.

 Q.    There will be those who got on to the pitch still breathing
        but gasping for breath, maybe with rib injuries or something
        of that sort?  A. I believe there were a few.

 Q.    By the time any doctor would have got to the pitch, however
       quickly, there would have been those who were already
       clinically dead - is that right?   A. That is correct.
                              25

                                                       A. BYRNE

    Q.   No good could have come from any doctor getting to them
         because they are dead?  A. Some of them may have been able
         to be resuscitated from the cardio-vascular point of view
         but would have suffered such lack of oxygen to th© brain
         that had they been resuscitated, they would have severe
         lack of oxygen brain damage.

I   Q.   When I say "clinically dead" I mean not capable of being
I        resuscitated.   A.  Well, capable of being resuscitated
         from the circulation point of view;  I am sorry.

    Q.   In between, would there have been those who weare either
         finding it difficult to breathe or who, though alive,
         had ceased temporarily to breathe? A. There would certainly
         be some perhaps finding it difficult to breathe for a
         number of reasons.  Most of those reasons would involve
i
         slightly more sophisticated equipment than would have been
         available or one would expect to be available at a football
         ground.

    Q.   You see, the comment that earlier medical attention would
         not have done any good would seem to imply logically that
         once the doctors got there they could not do m u c h good.
         Are you saying that really however heroically people were
         behaving in attempting mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and
         so forth, they did not actually do any good?     A. I think
         that is m y overall impression, yes.

    Q.   So people who appeared to be revived by mouth-to-mouth
          resuscitation or other means of resuscitation, are you
          suggesting that if they had not had medical attention
          eventually they would have started breathing of their own
          accord?   A. I b&ldeve  there are odd patients who have
          recovered after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, but they
         would have had to be resuscitated very, very quickly.

    Q.   You appreciate I have no medical instructions to challenge
         anything that you are saying.   I am simply trying to get
          some clarification.  A. Yes.

              Mr. HYTNER:  Having given it, I think I must accept
         your answers, Dr. Byrne.  Thank you.

                      Cross-examined by Mr. GLASGOW:

    Q.   Dr. Byrne, just one matter.  I accept, of course, and
         respect what you have said abot the equipment that ought
         to be available, but on this particular occasion in relation
         to what you saw in the gymnasium, couM<l you confirm for us
         that the presence of equipment in that gymnasium on that
         day would not have helped any of those who lost their lives?
         A.  I can only think of one situation where equipment would
         help me in that situation.  I don't know whether the
         patisat  survived or what happened to the patient.   It
         was a patient who was head injured, who was breathing with
         great difficulty, who was being kept on their side so
         that they did not aspirate vomit, and that is the sort of
         patient who one would want to secure the airway for transit
         to hospital and to do that one would have to place a tube
                                                A. BYRNE

into the windpipe,   the trachea, to protect them;  and
that equipment was   definitely not available.  I do not
know what happened   to that patient but certainly with that
equipment, that is   what I would have done and that would
have protected the   patient's airway.

Is that the sort of equipment that would be in the ambulance
for actual transportation to hospital?  A.  I would have
expected it to have been in the ambulance but it wasn't
in the ambulances that were available at that time at
Hillsborough.

     Mr. GLASGOW:    I see.    Thank you very much, Dr. Byyne.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Is that because they had been
taken out of there to use at the scene or what?   A. There
are, I believe, usually two types of ambulance.   There is
a resuscitation ambulance.   This is in the area where I
work.   There is a resuscitation ambulance where crews are
trained in this technique of intubation and carry the
equipment;   and there are ordinary, standard ambulances
that do not have this equipment.   I am not sure what the
Sheffield Ambulance Service do, but obviously there were
not these resuscitation ambulances present at Hillsborough.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Do you want to ask something,
Mr. Kallipetis?

     Mr. KALLIPETIS:    If I may, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

              Cross-examined by Mr. K A L L I P E T I S :

Dr. Byrne, did you in fact examine any of the ambulances
that were sent there by South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service?   A. No.

Did you come into contact with any of the many ambulancemen
that were on the pitch there rendering aid to the injured?
A.  I came into contact with an ambulanceman regarding this
particular incident which I have reported and asked for ■
resuscitation equipment.  He said to me, "What do you
require?" and I said "Have you got an endotracheal tube
and a laryngoscope?" and he said to me "What is that in
plain English?"

You are a consultant anaesthetist,       are you not?       A. Yes.

And an endotracheal tube is a special piece of equipment
that you haveeto be trained to use?   A. Yes.

Were you not in fact given a      resuscitator?       A. No.

Look at page 2 of your statement, Dr. Byrne.  A. I had one
of these resuscitation devices which inflates patients using
                                                A. BYRNE

a mask with 100 per cent oxygen.   It is a positive pressure
device.

It is called a Minuteman, and that was carried by an
ambulanceman and when you asked for it, he gave it to
you?   A. Yes.

And you used it on a patient but, alas, to no avail - is
that right?   A. That's correct.

You see, that sort of equipment was clearly there and being
used by ambulancemen?   A. I wouldn't call that the same
as endotracheal intubation equipment such as is carried
by resuscitation ambulances.

We do not understand that, Dr. Byrne.  What you mean by
a resuscitation ambulance may be different in your area.
We have first line ambulances which were in fact despatched
to the ground and we have paramedical trained ambulancemen
at the ground as well, but I think you have already agreed
with me that the use of an endotracheal tube is really a
highly skilled operation?   A. That is correct.

And if inserted the wrong way, you could kill a patient?
A.   Certainly if you insert it into the wrong orifice,
yes.

Indeed.  I think only a qualified doctor or somebody who
has had special training in the use of that equipment
should be allowed to use it - is that right?  A. Yes.
We have trained ambulancemen in Nottinghamshire.

In fact, as far as this particular patient is concerned,
as 1 understand your evidence, because of the length of
time before medical assistance could get to the injured,
it would have been to no avail anyway because of the lack
of oxygen?    A.  The need to perform this procedure in
this patient was to maintain his airway.   He was breathing
himself.   The need for oxygen in this particular instance
was unimportant.

Would you agree that three or four minutes is the critical
time?   A.  F o r . ..?

Lack of oxygen.  After three or four minutes?the brain cells
being to be damaged - is that right?   A. That is correct.

And after eight minutes, normally speaking, it is useless
trying to resuscitate a patient?  A. I don't think one
can be quite as dogmatic on times as that.

How long would you say, Dr. Byrne?   A. It depends on the
temperature, it depends on the age of the patient.

But as a rule of thumb, just give us some idea.  A. Anything
over ten minutes I think is going to be a bad outcome.
                            28

                                               A. BYRNE

Q.   That presumably is the basis for your earlier comment that
     in spite of there being no equipment which the doctors
     could use, it would not have made any difference anyway?
     A.  That is what I believe.

Q.   To that   end,   may I ask  you this: If   someone were to claim
     that 30   lives could have been saved had there been
     medical   equipment available, you would disagree with
     that?     A. I would have to scrutinise their evidence.

Q.   Do you by any chance recall the names of the two doctors
     with whom you decided to certify those that were dead
      in the gymnasium?   A.  No, I do not remember their names.

Q.   If I were to suggest a name, does Dr. Ashton ring a bell
      to you?   A.  There was a doctor with   a marked Liverpool
      accent and I  think the other doctor was an Indian doctor.

Q.   Was the one with the marked Liverpool accent wearing a
     light brown jacket or suit - can you recall?  A. I cannot
     recall.

Q.   You have referred to the system of triage, which is sorting
     persons into various categories for the purposes of taking
     them to h o s p i t a l . Was that system already being operated
     before you got to the gymnasium?          A. No.

Q.   Whereabouts are you talking about,     in the gymnasium itself?
     A.  In the gymnasium itself.

Q.   Lastly, this:          You have mentioned a defibrillator.  I do
      not think I need trouble you about the use of it on the
      pitch but I query the use of it in a gymnasium, Dr. Byrne,
     where we have heard there was a lot of chaos, a lot of
      people who were distraught about the injury and death of
      close friends and relatives, a lot of police officers
      suffering from shock and a lack of organisation in the
     gymnasium in the early stages.          Would you agree that it
     would be dangerous to use a defibrillator in those sort
      of circumstances?          A.  I don't think it is the
      cir cum st an ces ; I think it's the people using the
      defibrillator.         If people who are not familiar with the
      principle of defibrillation are using it, then it would
     be d a n g e r o u s .

Q.   You have to be able to monitor the patient before you
      use a defibrillator to make sure that his condition is
      right to use one - is that right? A. That is correct.

Q.   Also you have to make sure that the patient has no
      contract with any other person, including the operator?
      A.  And m e t a l .

Q.   And metal?    A. Correct.

Q.   And, of course, that there is no liquid on the floor       which
      might provide a contact?  A. Correct.
                                  29

                                                              A. BYRNE

Q.         And also that there is no danger of someone coming in and
            stumbling over you while you are using it? A. Correct.

Q.         In all those circumstances, would perhaps a first-aid room
            or a designated medical room be the better place? A. I am
            sure that would be i d e a l .

                Mr. KALLIPETIS:    Thank you very much.

                         Re-examined by Mr. C O L L I N S :
       /
Q. / Dr. Byrne, can I explore something a little more of Mr.
     Hytner's questions?   A m I right in thinking that broadly
     there are two categories.   There are those who have already
     died in the sense that they have stopped breathing as a
     result of crushing, and those you think probably would not
     have been saved by an earlier call for medical assistance?
     A.  Yes, that is correct.

           Because they would have been crushed on the terraces and
           would have been likely to have suffered, effectively, death
           before they were able to be got out?   A. They would have
           suffered severe brain complications.

Q .i     And the only way of resuscitating those sort of people
          would have been to have got them either mouth-to-mouth
       I or oxygen or whatever in the terraces themselves or
       j immediately upon being brought out?    A. That is correct.

Q.I        I suppose a doctor present immediately on them being brought
           out might have assisted but he could not, I suspect, have
           done a great deal more than a trained ambulanceman or a
           trained St. John's person could have done, is that right?
           A.  Yes, in that situation.

Q.         So far as the other sort are concerned, there are those
           who have suffered some sort of crush injuries, perhaps
           fractured ribs or whatever and who as a result have
           difficulty in breathing.  Is that right?   A.  Yes.

Q.       And if they are not given treatment, they might cease to
         breathe altogether?    A. There is a condition called
         tension pneumothorax where the rib punctures the lining
         of the lung and if it happens on both sides, then you
       ; cannot breathe and you need a seal putting in the chest,
       | involving inserting a special needle in.

Q.       That I can see, but what I am getting at is there may
         have been people presumably brought out from those terraces
         who had difficulty in b r e a t h i n g , who had not ceased
       ( breathing but who had difficulty in breathing?           A. There
       \ was certainly one patient that I saw.

Q.i        And there may well have been others?         A. Yes.

 Q.^(           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     On the pitch?        A. No, in the
           gymnasium.
                              30

                                                    A. BYRNE

Q . ; Still having difficulty then?      A. Yes.   He had clinically
      obvious rib fractures.

Q.            Mr. COLLINS:  And those sort of patients would have
     S   needed medical attention?  I am sorry, that is the wrong
     |   question.  Such patients could have been assisted by
     |   medical attention - is that right?    A. My view would
     j   be that you would get a patient like that quickly to
     j   hospital,
     i
Q.j      I see.  That is really all that sensibly can be done?
         A.  Unless you have this special equipment for relieving
         tension pneumothorax.

Q.       We know that oxygen was administered to a number of people.
         Is that simply to help them when they have difficulties
         in breathing?    A.  The use of high inspired concentrations
         of oxygen in this situation is, I think, probably not very
         well proven.   It is more as a device to force something
         into the lungs.   There is 20 per cent oxygen in the air
         and that is usually sufficient, but it has to be got into
         the lungs.    This device that has been mention is in fact
         just a way of inflating the lungs but, instead of with air,
         with 100 per cent oxygen.   So I don't think in that
         situation it's been proven that 100 per cent oxygen is
         necessarily any better than air.

Q.       So does it boil down to this - t h a t although obviously the
         presence of a doctor helps to tend to a patient to diagnose
         fractures and to treat the patient in the correct manner,
         what really matters is getting patients in this sort of
         situation to hospital as quickly as possible?     A. That is
         my belief.

Q.       One other thing which is slightly different.     I do not know
         whether you can help about this.   If you are beinggcrushed
         and are having difficulty in breathing, does that of itself
         tend to deprive the brain of some oxygen?    ft;\ It shouldn't
         do.   There is a situation where the lung itself can become
         bruised and if that happens then the amount of oxygen in
         the blood decreases but this is a; gradual effect over a
         matter of hours.




                                    /Q. The only reason I ask
                                  A. BYRNE



The only reason I ask that is I was wondering if people
were jammed into a crowd and were having difficulty in
breathing, could this in itself affect their perception
of things by making them what I suppose in normal terms
would be called somewhat light headed? - A. Yes, I have
obviously thought about what happened and tried to come
to some sort of conclusion in my own mind and having seen
the 16 dead people wit h a minimum of external injuries,
the conclusion I have come to myself, which obviously would
need to be borne out by post-mortem examination, would be
that these people were held as if in a vice and were not
able to breathe in.   If your airway is obstructed and
you can breathe but you cannot get air in because something
is stopping the air going in, then you get little bruises
on your face and there is various clinical signs.    These
people did not have that sign and therefore they mu s t have
been held in such a w ay that they could not actually take
breath in and therefore they would graduJiilJf just run out
of oxygen.

That I follow but I was asking you about a slightly
different point which you may not be able to help on and
it m ay not be anything much to do wi t h oxygen starvation,
but I was just wondering if you were in a situation like
that having difficulty in breathing because of the crush,
whether this could have the effect of making you wh a t the
layman would call light headed? - A. It is possible but
I think there are other causes for light headedness.

I know alcohol is an obvious one but we do have some
descriptions from some of the people who survived that
they began to drift into unconsciousness as a result
of the pressure.  Is that something which could happen?
- A. I believe that is possible, yes.

All I was wondering was whether there was a possibility of
a stage besfore that when people did not appreciate, were
not able to react in a normal manner because of the effect
of this crushing upon them.   Is there anything in that
theory at all? - A. I think that is a possibility.

The reason I ask you that is we have had some evidence
that people did not appear to respond for example to the
Police request to move back.  Is it possible that they
did not respond because they were somewhat disorientated
as it were? - A. Yes, I believe that is possible.

That is something that could in your view arise out of
simply being in a crowd and crushed? — A* I think there
is a lot of things that can happen to one in a crowd and
the lack of oxygen could be one of the factors.

Of course if it is coupled wit h drink, with alcohol and
heat, those don't help? - A. And hysteria.

       MR. COLLINS:   I am obliged.
                                     A. BYRNE



                  Bv LORD JUSTICE T A Y L O R :

Could I just ask you really ©hv the same matters as have been
put to you already.

      You said when you were in the gymnasium there was
very little you could do because there was no equipment
and then you were asked w hat equipment you would have liked
to have had.

      Does it follow from that that if all the equipment
that you said you would have liked to have had had been
there, there would have been people upon who m you could have
used it? - A. Certainly sir the equipment that I have
detailed regarding endotracheal intubation I would have
used in that situation.

So we are still talking about after 3.30 in the gymnasium
when you consider that had the desired equipment been
available it could have been usefully employed by doctors?
- A. That is correct sir.

 Well going back from that to much earlier than 3.30 because
 you did say you thought it was a gross omission that there
 was not a request for doctors.      If doctors had been asked
 for urgently let's say within a couple of minutes of the
 game stopping and had come down then on to the pitch, what
 I am not clear about is whether you are saying that although
 it might have looked better that they had been called for
 and were doing their best, nothing useful would have resulted,
 or whether without saying the numbers it might have been
 possible to do something for people for whom in the event
 it was not possible to do anything? - A. I understand what
 you are saying sir.      The patients that I saw on the pitch
 weredead and I don't believe anything could be done for
 them.      The majority of the patients I saw, obviously the
 patients I certified were dead and therefore I have a r*ther
  if you like clouded view of what could be possible.     I had
 not seen what the results of the survivors were, I don't
 know what happened to the survivors and what they survived
  of.    I can only give you my impression and my overall
  impression was that the sort of ways that these people died
  there was very little that one could do as a doctor by
  the time that they had been brought out with their heart s
  s t opp ed .

. Does it come to this then, that what doctors could have
  done and indeed still could have done at 3.30 in the
  gymnasium might have been simply to make more comfortable
  those who had survived? - A. I think that is a good summary
  sir, yes.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I see.    Thank you very much.

       MR. COLLINS:   Yes,   thank you doctor.
> 'V
       A

                                         33

                                                        G. KELLY



                                     GRAHAM KELLY Called

                                Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :
                                  ■- —   —    ■—   ■—        -




           Q. Yes, Mr. Kelly,   it is Graham Kelly.         Is that right? - A. Yes.

           Q. You are Chief Executive of the Football Association having
              succeeded Mr. Croker on his retirement in February this year?
              - A. Yes.

           Q. Mr. Kelly I want to take please your second witness statement
              first which is the one that deals with the events other than
              the 15th April 1989.

                    You were I think Secretary of the Football League
              before that from 1979 until 1988.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

           Q. You have been involved in football since joining the League
              in 1968? - A. Yes.

           Q. Mr. Kelly just to bring out the status of the F.A.   It is,
              as you say, a company limited by shares,c most of which are
              held by representatives of associations with football clubs
              in England and Wales.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

           Q. It acts through its Council and Committees and produces the
              Football Association Handbook, which I have a copy here,
              and this is the relevant one giving the rules of the
              Association and Laws of the Game for the season 1988/89?
              - A. Yes.

           Q. How would you describe generally the purpose of the F.A.?
              - a . The purpose of the F.A. is to administer every aspect
              of the game in England and to promote the interests of the
              game in every possible way.

           Q. The part of the F.A.'s activities with which we are directly
              concerned is of course the F.A. Cup.  Is that right? - A.
              Yes.

           Q. Competition, which as I suppose everyone knows is a competition
              open - I say everyone knows, perhaps I don't having regard
              to the way I am putting this question - but what Clubs in
              fact are eligible to participate in the Cup Competition? -
              A. I would summarise the 500 and odd most senior Clubs in
              the c o u n try .

           Q. And the major, that is the First and Second Division Clubs
              I think don't come in until which round? - A. They come in
              at the Third Round proper.

           Q. And one of the attractions of the Cup, as you point out, is
              the possibility of a relatively small and unknown Club getting
              through the stages of the competition and coming up against
              major First Division or Second Division Clubs? - A. That is
              correct, yes.
                                  G. KELLY



      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Giant killers.

      MR. COLLINS:  Giant killers, yes, and sometimes
beating them? - A. Yes.

Now also of course the F.A. is very concerned and has over
the last few years been particularly concerned, has it not,
with the problems of hooliganism and football problems and
of course the effect that has had upon our participation
in Europe? - A. Yes, that is so and further back than that
I would say, Mr. Collins.  It goes back more than a few
years now.

When was it that football misbehaviour came to be really a
problem as far as you can help us in this country? - A. I
would have to research the question.  I can only give you
my impression.

Well has it been e ve r since you have been involved, let me
put it that way, since 1968? - A. I would say it has certainly
been a problem, yes, because before that time there were
alterations being made to grounds, for example, to keep
spectators away from the immediate goal area.    That would be
in the '60s before I became involved.

One of the aspects of that has been the perimeter fence or
some such device, barrier to keep spectators off the playing
area.  Is that right? - A. The perimeter fence became^a serious
issue I would say about ten years ago.  M y researchers show
me that there were a number of incidents at about 1978 and
the Football Association became increasingly concerned at
that time.  One of the measures which they adopted in
disciplinary cases, cases of disorder where Clubs were found
not to have taken the adequate precautions, was to order
that that Club erect perimeter fencing on a certain area of
the ground.

That I think has stemmed partly, has it not, from the
European measures that have been required in relation to
crowd control in football grounds on the continent and indeed
here as a result of our participation in European football?
- A. I would imagine so, yes.  I would imagine that fences
have been seen abroad and originally they were anathema
in this country but sadly no longer the case.

You are no doubt familiar with the UEFA publications dealing
with the requirements for security and crowd control? - A.
Yes, I am.

One of the measures that is required, and I am looking at
the most recent, I think you have seen copies of this, have
you not? - A. It is issued on a regular basis.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What is the name of the
document?
                                    G. KELLY



      MR. COLLINS:  It is "Order and security in the stadia"
in relation to Union Des Associations Europeenaes De Football
(UEFA).

      THE WITNESS:  Yes, it is issued on a regular basis
in three languages by UEFA.

      MR. COLLINS:  If you would be good enough to look at
"B. Measures at the Ground".  It is page 12 I think.  Have
you got it? - A. Yes, I have.

It deals with the obvious things.    "2. Adequate police control
at the outer perimeter fence."

      "3. Efficient entry controls with the co­
      operation of the police forces:

      a) to ensure that the supporters do not enter
      the wrong sector of the stadium;  ....

      4. Adequate security service in the interior
      part of the stadium as well as at the entrances
      and also on the t err ac es.......

      5.   Segregation ....

      6.   Protection of the playing field by means of

      a) a fence of at least 2.20m height or a moat
      or else

      b) a barrier with adequate policing as to make
      it impossible for spectators to reach the
      field of play.

      Fences must have sufficient security gates
      opening towards the playing field and in the
      case of moats or a combination of moats and
      fences adequate other security passages
      should be pro v i d e d ......

      15. There m ust be an adequate service of stewards
      in the s t a d i u m .......

      17.  Distraction and entertainment of the
      spectators before the game by means of a
      match being played as curtain-raiser, other
      sports demonstrations or of a music parade,
      etc. unless impossible for weather conditions."

Those are the Category A.  The other is for Category B
matches which as I understand it, they are not defined, are
all major matches other than those which are Category A.
Is that right? - A. Yes I suspect so, yes.
                         36


                                    G. KELLY



Q. And if we look in that, the measures in the ground, they are
   if not identical virtually identical? - A. I should think
   they are identical to the ones you have quoted.  They differ
   mainly in the supply of tickets in an earlier section.

Q. The measures at the ground are identical.   I think those
   were reflected, were they not Mr. Kelly, in the document
   that the F.A. put out in 1985 dealing with management of
   grounds which is at page 294 of our bundle of documents
   which has been described as the core bundle of which you
   are just being provided a copy.  This is the revised but
   I think the one that is still in force.   Is that correct?
   - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Memorandum on crowd management.   If you look at the covering
   letter it is signed by Mr. Croker and yourself as General
   Secretary of the Football League.   You refer in the last
   paragraph of the letter:

         "Failure to act on any of the recommendations
         may be taken into account should a Club
         subsequently be charged wit h misconduct under
         Football Association Rules 23 and 24."

   Before going to the memorandum can we look at the Rule
   Book and just see what are the terms of the rules referred
   to.  Turn to 24 in the Rules of the Association.

         "24   (i)

         Every Association and Club should be responsible
         for ensuring:

         (a) that its directors, players, officials,
         employees, spectators and other persons
         purporting to be its supporters or followers,
         conduct themselves in an orderly fashion and
         refrain from violence threatening, abusive,
         obscene or provocative behaviour, conduct or
         language whilst attending at a match in which
         it is involved whether on its own ground or
         elsewhere.

         (b) that no spectators or unauthorised persons
         are permitted to encroach on to the pitch area
         or to throw missiles ...   Clubs are expected
         to provide a private w ay for players and
         officials from playing ground to dressing room
         wherever this is practicable."

   Effectively you put the onus on the Clubs to control their
   own spectators? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And you make plain in the course of Rule 24 that by (ii)
   that if the Club fails effectively to discharge its
   responsibility in any respect then the Club can be effectively,
'a
                           37

                                      G. KELLY



     what it boils down to, fined or disciplined in some other
     way? - A. Fined and disciplined in some other way usually,
     yes.




                          /Q. And you include ....
H'   *



                                         38

                                                                   G- KELLY


         Q. And you include by the letter were were looking at on page 294
            that if they fail to comply with any parts of the memorandum
            that will be included as a disciplinary offence, if I may put
            it that way? - A. It will be taken into account by the
            Commission which examines the incident.

         Q.   Indeed.  I think actually as you make clear at the end, if you
              look at page 299 of our bundle, it may even itself constitute
              a disciplinary offence, any breach of the memorandum.                   I am
              looking at 1(1) at the bottom of page 299 - "May in itself
              lead to such a c h a r g e " , you say? - A . Y e s , I s e e . Y e s .

         Q. All this, I think, reflects both of course the FA's approach
            to crowd control within this country, but it is influenced by
            the UEFA approach on the C o n t i n e n t , or would appear to be
            anyway? - A. I would think so, yes.

         Q. You were involved, Mr. Kelly.  Presumably you know? - A. It
            was a document drawn up primarily by the Football Association
            at the time.

         Q. I follow that. - A. I don't disagree.  I suspect that Mr.
            Croker will have looked at all the documents he had access
            to.

         Q. Presumably it was intended that football in this
            country should be in harmony with the requirements of
            European football, otherwise we might have some
            difficulty, even if we were able to, in playing in
            European competitions? - A. I would think in drawing up
            this document the Football Association at the time
            would take on board everything which could control or
            attempt to control hooliganism, and there would
            presumably be some attempt at harmony with other
            statutory provisions.

         Q. Judging by your rule book the control so far as stopping
            hooliganism was concerned was directed largely at preventing
            incursions on to the playing area - is that right -    whether by
            people coming on or   throwing of missiles? - A. That  was one
            aspect of hooliganism, certainly, yes.

         Q. Would that be the most important or not, so far as the FA was
            concerned? - A. Preventing access to the playing area?

         Q. Yes.    - A. Not necessarily.

         Q. Integrity of the playing area? - A. Not necessarily.                It was
            one factor among many.

         Q. Can we look at the memorandum itself.   Page 295 is where it
            starts.    (A) deals  with all ticket matches or ticketing
            generally.   I don't  think we need go into that.  It   speaks for
            itself.  You deal in (B) with crowd planning.   No. 3 you refer
            to the consideration of reducing capacity in the interests of
            control of particular matches.   Now, what circumstances would
            you have had in mind, Mr. Kelly, in considerations of
                              39

                                                      G. KELLY


     reduction of capacity? - A. I think I would read this in
     conjunction with the all ticket requirements.  It might be
     necessary to place an all ticket requirement on the away
     matches of a specific club, and that in itself could lead to a
     reduction in attendance at a particular match.

G. No. 5, variation of kick-off times.   I said when going through
   this the other it seemed that that referred to prior
   variation, that is to say variation which was announced before
   the game was due to be played? -A. Yes, it does.

Q.   It does not refer to an ad hoc variation because of crowd
     problems on the day? - A. No, it does not.

Q. Can I go over to (D) on page 296, protection of playing area;

          "And adequate number of Police and stewards must be
          available to restrict access to the field of play.

          Clubs must protect the playing field by means of a fence,
          moat, double barrier wall or other system capable of
          denying access.       It must incorporate an adequate number
          of e x i t s , manned at all t i m e s , to allow access to the
          field of play in emergencies.

          The Football Association may instruct a club to install
          such a fence, moat or barrier, subject to any designation
          order under the relevant Act which may be in force at the
          club” .

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       That is still in force,     is it? -
     A. Yes, my Lo;rd.

Q. So does that mean that the FA as of now require any club to
   have fencing, moating or if they don't have that some system
   which is capable of denying access to the pitch to
   spectators? - A. There are a number of cases where as a
   result of misconduct and a Commission finding a case proven
   against a club, the FA has made an order against the club
   compelling them to erect fencing.   Yes, compelling them to
   erect fencing in a particular part of the ground.

Q.   May be so, but what I am asking, this is a          rule which is not
     dependent upon any finding of disciplinary          breach.  This is a
     general rule, is not it? - A. It is a general power which the
     FA has r e s e r v e d , but I am not aware that the Football
     Association have used this power without an incident of
     misconduct.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   As drafted it appears to put quite
     unequivocably the duty on the club to protect the playing
     field by those various means - "clubs must protect"? - A. That
     is right.

Q.   So on the face    of it all clubs that have removed safety
     fencing are in breach of that rule, on the face of this
     language?
■3
                                   40

                                                          G. KELLY



     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, unless they have got some
          other system capable of denying access to spectators, and that
          does not just mean relying on their co-operation, does it? -
          A. No, they must ensure the integrity of the playing surface.

     Q.   I would like to know about this.  A number of clubs as we know
          since Hillsborough have taken down the perimeter f e n c e s . That
          is right, is not it? - A. Yes.

     Q.   What view does the FA take of that? - A.I think the general
          view of the Football Association is that   it was a little hasty
          to dismantle the perimeter fencing.

     Q.   I am sorry, Mr. Kelly, I am not asking you whether they
          thought it was a good idea or a bad idea, but what view ins
          the light of (D)(2) here does the FA take, because presumably
          in places where these fences have been taken down, they have
          not dug a moat, and I don't know they would have had any other
          system to deny access to the pitch to spectators other than to
          trust them? - A. The FA wants the pitch to be protected.   The
          Football Association has not come to a view since
          Hillsborough.  It has merely advised clubs to consult with
          their local authority about the safety measures in force,
          particularly the perimeter fencing.

     Q.   Does it come to this, that if some clubs are going to be
          allowed to take down their fencing, as some have already done,
          and not put anything else up instead, this (D)(2) may require
          some amendment? - A. I think that is possibly the case, my
          Lord.

     Q.                MR. COLLINS:     That would seem to involve European
          p r o b l e m s , because there would then be a possible breach of the
          UEFA requirements, would not there? - A. There would be a
          breach of the UEFA requirements for those clubs who were
          playing in UEFA competition actually, sir.

     Q. I follow that, but it is at least hoped by the Football
        Association that European involvement will begin again? - A.
        That is r i g h t .

     Q. And that would involve European matches being played in this
        country? - A. Yes.

     Q. I suppose what you will say is that the FA is rethinking the
        whole approach following Hillsborough.  Is that right? - A.
        That is correct.

     Q. And no doubt for the Stage 2 of this Inquiry you will be
        putting in your recommendations and thoughts on this aspect? -
        A. We have put in o u r . ...

     Q.   I have not had a chance to read them, but I believe you have
          already put in submissions? - A. We have put in a submission
          and would wish to comment further.
                           41

                                                G. KELLY


Q. And do they cover this aspect that Lord Justice Taylor was
   just raising? - A. They don't cover the specific protection of
   the pitch, the specific method of protecting the pitch.  The
   Football Association have not specifically looked at this so
   far.

Q. No doubt the point having been made that can be done.   Mr.
   Kelly, there is an obvious problem, is not there, because
   there is an emphasis, it is right to say, in the F A ’s
   approach to the clubs of preserving the integrity of the
   playing area.  That is right, is not it? - A. Yes.

Q. And the clubs know that if there are incursions on to the
   field for whatever reason this can lead to a disciplinary
   action against the club by the FA? - A. Yes.

Q. And therefore the clubs will tend to concentrate on taking
   measures to avoid any pitch incursions? - A. Yes.

Q. And this in its turn will lead them or possibly lead to
   concentration upon avoiding incursion, and thus not perhaps
   sometimes identifying the reason for that incursion? - A. I
   would hope that clubs would take every effort to prevent
   access to the pitch, subject to the appropriate safety
   pr o v i s o s .

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is the point, is not it?  It
     is getting the balance right? - A. Quite right, my Lord, yes.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:  One other matter on this memorandum, Mr.
     Kelly.  Could you look at page 297, No. E 9.  One of the
     requirements is that all efforts should be made to provide
     spectators with pre-match or half-time entertainment, although
     the nature of the entertainment is not for obvious reasons
     spelled out. - A. Yes.

Q. That is a matter which is considered to be of importance no
   doubt to keep the crowd entertained to stop trouble? - A. It
   is felt that if there is something to distract the supporters
   there will be less tendency to create problems, to create
   trouble.

Q.   I will come back to that perhaps a little later.   On (G) on
     page 298, measures to be adopted by the away club.     No doubt
     at a Semi-Final would each club be treated as an away club, or
     am I wrong, or as these only applicable to League matches? -
     A. Primarily this document is applicable to League matches
     because it talks about liaison between the home club and the
     away club.

Q. Indeed.  I follow that. - A. I would have thought the
   provisions generally are relevant to Semi-Finals at a neutral
   ground.

Q. I wondered about (3):

          "Appointing stewards to help manage and inform spectators
                             42

                                                      G. KELLY


          at matches and to accompany parties of supporters
          travelling a w a y " .

     Is that something you would anticipate Nottingham Forest and
     Liverpool would have done or should have done for this match
     at Hillsborough? - A. Yes, it is a feature of being
     responsible for your spectators, for your followers, that you
     should take all possible steps to monitor and steward the
     travelling supporter.

Q. One of the points that has been made is that it is difficult
   to expect Hillsborough stewards to go on to Leppings Lane
   terraces among foreign fans, if I may put it that way? - A. I
   don't know I could comment on that, Mr. Collins.

Q. That is presumably the purpose of having away team stewards,
   to avoid the need for home side stewards to go on to away
   terraces?   Is that one of the purposes behind it or not? - A .
   I think it is more, unless I have missed a point in clause (G)
   which I would have to pick up by rereading it, I would think
   it is more a point on the actual travelling of the supporters.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   During the travel? - A. During the
     travelling, stewarded travel on coaches and on trains.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:    I follow.  Can I come back to your
     statement.   We had reached paragraph 9.  As a result of these
     problems I think the FA employs three ex~Policemen whom you
     name as consultants who visit and report on matches? - A. We
     do, sir.

Q. And you have produced Mr. Evans' report on the 1988 match, and
   we will be calling him so I won't ask you to go through that
   at this stage.              Suffice it to say for the Football
   A s s o c i a t i o n ’s purposes it gave it a clean bill of health? - A.
   Yes, it gave it an excellent report.




                            /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sorry.
                               43


                                                         G. KELLY




          LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:           I am sorry,   which      page are
     you on there?

          MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry,           sir,   that was      at the bottom
     of page 4, Paragraph 9.

Q. May I now go on to page 6, Paragraph 13, where you deal with
   c om pe titions - Competitions Department.    You set out your
   s taff that deal with the mechanics of c ompetition and what
   you have to do for the purposes of the Semi-Finals is to
   find grounds which are, broadly speaking, large enough
   to accomm od at e a s ubstantial quantity of supporters and
   willing to stage a Semi-Final.       A.  Yes.

Q. Because, of course, as we know,             Semi-Finals    are held on
   neutral grounds.   A.   Yes.

Q.    And you do not know when you initially ask for the a v a i l ­
     ability of grounds which clubs are going to be meeting each
     other in the Semi-Final, it being a knock-out competition.
     A.     No.

Q.   You have annexed to your statement a document which I have
     c on ve niently and inevitably lost - if you will give me a
     moment.      It is at page 16, the letter in February, 1989,
     sent to the various clubs by the Competitions Secretary,
     Mr. Clarke, asking whether they would be willing to stage
     Semi-Finals.      A.   Yes.

Q.   I do not think it is necessary for me to take you through
     them in detail but can I ask you to go on to page 22 which is
     the summary, is it not, of all those grounds which could
     have been available to hold Semi-finals or Semi-Final replays
     in April of this year.   A.   Yes.

Q.    We can see there set out helpfully the grounds                in question
     and their capacity, both seated and standing.                  A.   Yes.

Q.    And the only one which said, "No" was Arsenal, the rest
     agreed.     A.   There was a quali fi ca ti on to one of the
     other replies but I don*t    think it is relevant to the
     Inquiry.

Q.   One or two appear to have said, "No, but we would be
     available for a replay if necessary".   A.  Leeds United,
     yes.

Q. And N ottingham Forest but that was perhaps, as it turned
   out, an irrelevant one anyway, because of course Nottingham
   Forest were one of the teams involved in the Semi-Final.
   A.    They could have staged the other one.

Q.   I suppose they could have staged the other one.  Th± has
     happened, has it?   A.   Yes.   It is a point that we ask
     in the letter which yoyhave just referred to, I think.

Q.   I had   forgotten that.        Yes,   you are quite right.           Going
I

                                    44


                                                         G.   KELLY



         on to your Paragraph 15,         you point out that one of the
         major problems in recent         years has been the question of
         segregation.  A.   Yes.

    Q.   That is something you have to take very much into account
         in choosing the ground, I imagine?   A.  Yes.

    Q , Because not only do you need capacity but you also need,
        if you can, a rough equality of division of seating and
        standing which mean that each club s egregated can have
        roughly the same number of tickets.     A.   As far as possible
        sir, yes.

    Q.   I appreciate it is impossible to achieve exactitude in that
         respect because of the lay-out of the grounds, but that is
         what you aim for.     A. It can be difficult but we aim for
         it.

    Q. And does that mean that it has tended to be a small number
       of clubs thdt have been used for Semi-Finals, really for
       that reason, among others?    A.   That is a reason, yes,
       why only a small number of clubs have been used.

    Q. How much is the Football Associ at io n guided by the Police
       requirements in respect of allocation of parts of grounds?
       A.   Well, the Police requirements are paramount, really,
       Mr. Collins.    Segregation, as you have said, is a vital
       factor.    It has been at the heart of curbing hoolig an is m
       for many, many years and the Police requirements on
       segregation are very, very important indeed.

    Q. So that if the Police say, "We will only police the Semi-
       Final held at such and such a ground if the segreg at io n is
       done this way", then you have to go along with that or not
       hold it at that ground;    is that the position?
       A.   That is correct, yes.

    Q.   So it was at Hillsborough,   as we know.    The Police said
         the only way they would be   prepared to police it was if
         Liverpool had the   West and the North and Notti ng ha m Forest
         the South and the   Kop. A.   Yes.

    Q.   I will come to a little more detail about that but e ss en tially
         what we have heard was that the Police said, SThat is the only
         way we will do it."   You the F.A. made r e p r e s e n ta ti on s but
         once the Police said, "That is the only way" you had to go
         along with it.   A.   Are you talking about 1989?

    Q.   Yes.     A.   That's    right.

                LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:      Or hold it somewhere     else.

    Q.          MR. COLLINS:     Or hold it somewhere else.           A.      Yes.

    Q.   That, as I say, I will come to in a moment.    Now, we know
         that the 1988 match went well and you came up,of course,
         with the same tie  in 1989.     A. Yes.
                               45


                                                 G.   KELLY



Q.   You had had, had you not, r ep re se ntations from Liverpool
     in 1988 that they were being given the smaller allocation
     of tickets?   A.    I am not aware that we had r e p r e s e n t ­
     ations in 1988, sir, no.

Q.   Would you look at Paragraph 17 of your statement, please.
     I may have misread it.     I t is on page 8.  You say that
     normally the F.A. is not invited to or involved in planning
     meetings between the staging club ^id the relevant
     authorities and that you did not attend meetings or receive
     documents for H il ls borough this year but you go on, "However
     after the 1988 Semi-Final venue had been chosen as
     H il ls borough for the Liverpool or Nottingham Forest tie,
     Mr. Titcombe" - he is one of your employees, is he not?
     A.     Yes.    Yes.

Q.   "--did attend a meeting there between repr es en ta ti ve s of
     Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest and the
     Police at which L i v e rp oo l sought unsucce ss fu ll y to persuade
     the Police to reverse their decision on the a llocation of
     the ends of the ground.         Liverpool's position was that
     they as the club with greater support were being allocated
     fewer tickets because of the allocation of ends and other
     parts of the ground.         The F.A. would have been content if
     this attempt had s ucceeded."        A.   Yes.

Q.   Thgt appears to be saying that there was a c omplaint by
     L iverpool once they knew that the 1988 Semi-Final was
     to be at Hil ls bo ro ug h and the ends they were to be
     a llocated and they tried to get it changed.      A.  Yes,
     that is correct, sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can you jast help on that
     any further?     The last sentence there, "--would have
     been content if this had succeeded" do you mean by that
     that you adopted a neutral position or that you supported
     Liverpool's view or can you help about that?     A.   I
     suspect Mr. Titcombe gave some element of support to
     L iverpool's request at that meeting.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:     You knew, therefore, when you came to
     decide as to which was the correct ground for the 1989
     Semi-Final thefe Liverpool had made c omplaints in 1988?
     A.    Yes.

Q. And if you were to stage at H il ls borough in 1989 the
   likelihood was that you would get the same complaints.
   A.   There was a possibility, yes.

Q. And it was a p os si bility that,     in   fact,   came into      being,
   was it not?    A.     Yes.

Q. Because that     is exactly what happened.          A.     Yes.

Q.   Now, we have already looked at the possible grounds which
     are set out at page 22 of your bundle and essentially
     there were, were there not, two possi bi li ti es for this
     tie - one was, of course, Hillsborough which was nearer
IM

                                    46


                                                       G.    KELLY



          to N ot ti nghamm and the other was one of the Manchester
          clubs.      A.   Yes.

     Q.   Which was,   of course,   nearer   to Liverpool.      A.     Yes.

     Q.   I a ppreciate that you do not want'to have ties in the
          same city as one of the grounds, that is to say you would
          not use Everton ground normally for a tie involving
          Liverpool and vice versa, is that right?      A. I think
          we would veer away from it now, although we have done so
          in the not too distant past.

     Q.   What is the reason that you would normally not want to have
          the same city?    A.   Well, because there would be a
          p ossibility of trouble from the other club involved in the
          same city - from the supporters of the other club in the
          same city, I believe.

     Q.    I am sorry, I do not quite follow that. A.   Well,    in
          1981 we took the Spurs/Wolves replay to Highbury, Arsenal,
          and I u nderstand that there was an^element of a ggravation
          from Arsenal s upporters towards Tottenham.

     Q.   You mean because they are so close?        A.       Yes.

     Q.    And you thought, for example, that if you     held it at
          Everton, there might be some trouble from the Everton
          suppor te rs ? A.    We didn't think s pe ci fically that
          that would be a problem but as it turned out it soald
          have seemed unfair to go with this particular tie to
          Everton because we could not reciprocate for a replay in
          N ottingham - we couldn't take the replay to Notts County.

     Q.   That was what seemed possibly to be the better point,
          that there might be an unfair advantage to one side if the
          match was held at a ground in the same city.   A.    That is
          a better point, yes, I agree.

     Q.    But M a n c h e s t e r , p ar ti cularly Manchester United, would be
          of a similar size and would not create those sort of problems,
          would it?           A.       No.

     Q. And I note that M anchester United was,        in fact,      chosen    for
        a possible replay.    A.   Yes.

     Q. One of the comp la in ts that Liverpool made was that           two years
        running their fans had to do the travelling.      A.            Yes.

     Q. Because, of course, Nottingham is c om pa ra ti ve ly close           to
        Sheffield;  it is only 30 miles down the M 1;       whereas
        Liverpool involves quite a treck across the Perrines.
        A.   Yes.

     Q. And although M anchester is closer to Liverpool than Sheffield
        to Nottingham, on the face of it fairness might have seemed
        to dictate that this time the match should go to Manchester
                             47


                                                        G.   KELLY



     rather than to Sheffield.         A.   I think the geography
     point is a factor.         The Sheffield venue is slightly
     more neutral than the Manchester venue but the prime
     co ns id er at io n was the excellent report which we had
     received of the match the previous year, in 1988.

Q. Had there ever been any trouble on a match between Liverpool
   and another club at Manchester United, as far as you are
   aware?   A.   Between ---   With Manchester United being
   used as a neutral venue?

Q.   Yes.   A.    Not as   far as   I am aware.

Q.   I mean, I can see that you have got a good report on 1988
     but it seems to have been the case, judging by your
     statement, Mr. Kelly - correct me if I am wrong - that
     that simply o utweighed every other consideration.
     A.   It had a lot of attractions because of that report,
     because of the experience of Hillsborough and the
     immediate e xperience the year before.   Could I just
     revert to your previous question?

Q.   Of course.    A.   There was trouble in M anchester on the
     occasion of the Liverpool -v- Manchester United Replay
     some years ago when that match was played in M anchester City.

Q.    Yes, but that, of course, came up against the problem
     that you have indicated earlier of having a match in the same
     city as one of the other clubs.    A.   That's right, yes.

Q.    That of course would not apply     to Liverpool   -v- Nottingham
     Forest, would it?     A.   No.

Q. Can I ask you to look at Paragraph 26 of your statement,
   Mr. Kelly.    You say that you considered that as Chief
   E xecutive you should have a recomme nd at io n to the Committee
   on the question of where the Semi-Final should be staged;
   is that right?    A.   Yes, I feel that as Chief Executive
   I should have a recomffleridation to make.     At the time I
   was playing my way into the role at the Football A ss oc iation
   and different c ommittees approach these questions in
   different ways.

Q. Certainly, but you thought you should, as it were, make
   your cont ri bu ti on and should have an in-put into the
   decision?     A.     I thought I should be ready to do so
   if asked by the Committee.

Q. And you formed, as you say, the p rovisional view that            it
   should go back to Hillsborough because it had been a
   success last year.   A.   Yes.

Q.   You then refer to a call from Mr. Robinson of Liverpool
     e ffectively asking for the reverse of the ends.  A.    Yes.

Q. Because it was not, of course, only the fact of fewer
   numbers;  it was the fact, too, that it was more expensive
   for Liverpool fans to come pro rata, bywhich I mean that
x>
                                  48


                                                           KELLY



          there were more standing places on the Kop than on the
          West  end and Leppings Lane terraces - far more - and
          standing is much cheaper than seating.   A.   That point
          is correct, although I am not aware that Mr. Robinson
          was making that specific point.

     Q. He was c on cerned with pure numbers.       A.   Pure numbers,
        as I understand it.

     Q. And he asked for a change of ends.   As I understand it,
        he also pointed out, as you say in your statement, that
        there would be bad feeling and complaints from Liverpool
        if they were done down for two years running in the sense
        that they were given the smaller allocation two years
        running.   A.   Yes.

     Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do I gather that he did not
          raise the question of not having that venue at all but
          having M an ch ester? A.  I don't think he raised the
          question of an alternative venue.

     Q.   Just the other   end?   A.   The other end.

     Q.        MR. COLLINS:    Of course, in fairness to him, he would
          not n ecessarily have known that any other venue was available,
          would he?    A.   On the morning of the selection ---

     Q.   Yes.     A.   Yes, he would have known   from his e xperience
          what   venues were available.

     Q.   He would p resumably have thought that the F.A. had plumped
          for H il ls borough because that was the only sensible one
          available.      Or he night well have thought that.  A.    He
          might well have thought that, yes.

     Q.   In any event, you tried - I say "you" - the F.A. tried
          to check with Hil ls bo ro ug h whether the switch of ends was
          p ossible and the answer came back that it was not.
          A.    fhat is correct, sir, yes.

     Q. And you say on matters like this the staging club and
        the F.A. are really bound to accept the view of the Police -
        a view with which I do not seek to quarrel at all.
        A.   Yes.

     Q.   So the fact is that you knew that there was no chance of
          there being a change of ends so you knew there was likely
          to be some disquiet among the Liverpool supporters at
          what had happened two years running.   A.   Yes.

     Q.   Now, you go on to say that you did not think that this
          outweighed the reasons for staging the tie at Hillsborough
          and you refer to a number of factors which you took into
          account.     Can I go through them?   First of all, and I
          indicate that, as you indicate, they are not in any particular
          order of importance;    that is right, is it, Mr. Kelly?
          A.   That's right, sir, yes.
                              49


                                                      G.   KELLY



Q. First, geography - not only of the two clubs but of travel
   routes.    " Ho ol iganism en route can be a p r o b l e m . ”
   As far as geography is concerned, I think you would accept,
   would you not, that there is no real d ifference between
   Manchester and Sheffield, the only real d ifference being
   that either Liverpool or Nottingham have to travel that
   much further?       A.   It was my impression that Sheffield
   is a slightJy more equitable venue than Manch es te r for
   this p articular c om bi nation of clubs.

Q.   You mean because N ottingham have to go slightly further
     than Liverpool would to Manchester and Liverpool slightly
     less far than Notti ng ha m to Manche st er ? A. Yes.

Q.   That I can follow if it is the first year but when the'
     similar event the previous year has been held at Hillsborough,
     that would appear to be an advantage to Nottingham.
     A.   Yes.   As I say, it was outweighed by the excellent
     report.

Q.   So geography if anything is neutral but might tend to point
     in favour of Manc he st er and in favour of Liverpool having
     to travel a lesser distance;     right?   Is that fair?
     A.   It being the second year?

Q.   Yes.   A.   I think in retrospect, Mr. Collins, I would
     admit that there is an element of unfairness in having
     chosen this p articular venue for the second q ea se cutive
     year but Manc he st er was chosen for the replay.

Q.   Let me come now to (2) Capacity.        You say, "This tie
     needed a big ground and H il ls borough   is one of the largest,
     holding 6,000 more   than Villa Park."        If we look at
     capacities, we see that H i ll sborough has 54,101 and Manchester
     United 54,719, so there is nothing in that score.        A.   No.

Q.   In favour of Hillsborough.      A.   No.

Q.   Indeed, if anything, it is m arginally     in   f av o u r of
     Manchester.   A.    Yes.

Q.   (3) E xper ie nc e as a staging club.   Sheffield Wednesday
     are very experienced.        Actually that is true except that
     they had had       three years only, they had had 1987 and
     1988 and now       1989, there having been   a large gap since 1981
     when there had been trouble.        A.   There had been a gap
     since 1981.      They were chosen as a possible replay venue in
     1986 but they had not had a tie before 1987 but against
     that they had a long track record of staging Semi-finals.

Q. What about Manch es te r   United?   A.   They have not had
   as many Semi-Finals;       they have had ---

Q.   Not as many but they have had some?        A.      They hase had
     some, yes.

Q. And they have had a perfectly good track record, have they
   not?   A.   They have had a good t ra ckvcecord but not as
                                               G.   KELLY



   long a track   record   as Sheffield Wednesday.

Q. Maybe, but it does not sound as if experience as a staging
   club really tipped the balance very much if at all in
   favour of Sheffield Wednesday, did it?      A.   I would
   dispute that.   I think experience as a staging club is
   paramount and Sheffi el d' s experience was a major factor.




                             /(4)   Security   at the ground.
                            51



                                                    G. KELLY

Q.   "4.  Security at the Ground".  You deal with the favourability
     of Mr. Evans's report.  Again there is no reason to doubt
     that Manchester United security would have been perfectly
     adequate, was there?   A. No, none whatsoever.

Q.   5.  Whether the Club was playing at home is, with respect,
      irrelevant, is it not, because as it happens both
      Manchester United and Sheffield Wednesday were playing
      at home that day?   A. Well, as I say in my statement,
      this is not of any great weight.  It is of very minor
      relevance, but it could be of relevance in a season where
      there is possible fixture congestion.

Q.   What I am getting at is it clearly was not of relevance
     in the circumstances of this decision because Sheffield
     Wednesday was playing at home and so, as it happens, was
     Manchester United and Aston Villa?   A.  Very much at
     the margin, Mr. Collins, but Sheffield Wednesday were
     scheduled to play Norwich City who were due to play a
     re-play at home against West Ham on the 22nd March.   So
     it is very much in the margin but it could have been a
     c o n s ide ra tio n.

Q.   I do not doubt it could have been, but all I am suggesting
      is that it could not have been on this particular occasion
     a consideration because Sheffield Wednesday were playing
      at home.  If, for example, Manchester United had been
      playing at home and Sheffield Wednesday had been playing
      away, then I can see that it was a factor, but as both
     were playing at home, I cannot see that it was a factor
      at all, or am I wrong?   A. I don't think we need to
     disagree about it but there was the possibility that
      Sheffield Wednesday would not in fact be playing at home
      on the relevant day.

Q.   But they were?   A. Well, no, they didn't because Norwich
     City appeared in the other semi-final at Aston Villa.
      That's the point I'm making.   I'm sorry, was I not clear?

Q.   I, take your point.  I see the    point.   Then you deal with
      the home city point but again     that is not relevant in
      relation to Manchester United     in a Liverpool v. Nottingham
      Forest match, is it?    A. No,    no.

Q.   You deal with the recommendation in your next paragraph
      of Mr. Wiseman, who is your experienced Chairman of the
      Match and Grounds Committee.   He effectively confirmed
      your provisional view that Hillsborough should be the
      venue, is that correct?   A. Yes, I think he told me rather
      than I told him.  He said, "Well, it's got to be
      Hillsborough and Aston Villa".

Q.   And you say that you mentioned the point about the Liverpool
      complaint iand that Aid not change his view?  A. That is
      correct, Mr. Collins, yes.

Q.   How did you put it to him?   Can you remember?  A. I put
      it to him that we had had a representation on the
      telephone that morning from Mr. Robinson from Liverpool
      Football Club complaining about the possibility of having
                             52


                                                       G. KELLY

     the Leppings Lane end and consequently a smaller number of
     tickets, and I said "Does this affect your view?  Is this
     relevant?  Does this change your opinion?" and he said "No".

Q.   We go on to your paragraph 30 and you deal with the
      committee meeting which decided where the venue should
      be.  It was held on the same day that the draw took place,
      I think?  Is that right?    A. Yes, it was.

Q.   You say that one of the members did indicate the possibility
     of Manchester?   A. Yes.

Q.   And specifically Manchester United?         A. Yes.

Q.   Which would have been the choice of the two Manchester
     Clubs, is that right?   A. I don't know whether the
     member mentioned Manchester United.

Q.   Someone?    A. But Mr. Clarke said "If you are going to go
     to Manchester, it will be United because City were chosen
      last time".

Q.   You say this:

             "I believe the main point which prevailed with members,
             some of wh o m I believe had attended Hillsborough in
             1988, was that the identical tie had been well handled
             there".

     A.     Yes.

Q.   The picture you are    painting   is that   that really was thp
      determining factor   - is that right?      A. It was uppermost
      in people's minds.     It was certainly    uppermost in Mr.
     Wiseman's mind and    he was putting it     to the committee at
      the request of the   Chairman.

Q.   Yes.    You go on:

             "There was no dissent to allocation of the tie to
             Hillsborough and the re-play to Old Trafford";

     and then this:

             "Neither I nor Jack Wiseman mentioned the call from
             Mr. Robinson in   the committee meeting".

     Why on earth not, Mr. Kelly?    A.  I don't know why he
     didn't mention it.  I didn't mention it because I didn't
     feel it was of major relevance at that time and I reported
     it to Mr. Wiseman and he didn't do so.

Q.   But surely the committee who had to make the final decision
     ought to know all the pros and cons) did it not?   A. I think
     that is so but, as I have said, the prime consideration was
     the report of the previous year, the excellent report of the
     previous year.
                          53


                                                  G. KELLY

Q.   But surely the committee had a right to know that there
     were complaints from Liverpool about the allocation,
     because it might have changed some of their minds, might
     it not?   A. I doubt myself whether it would   have changed
     their minds, having then had experience of the previous
     year and the knowledge of the report.  I would certainly
     expect that they had the right to know all material
     information but the fact that Liverpool had made a telephone
     call an hour and a half before the meeting ---

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Never mind the telephone call.
     Were the points that were really behind the Liverpool
     objection raised?   A. No.

Q.   Well, those were the relevant points, were they not?
     A. Well, it did not seem to me in the meeting that it
     would affect the committee's choice of venue that Liverpool
     would be getting a smaller number of tickets than
     Nottingham Forest supporters.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:  But did it not occur to the committee
     or to anyone that this might affect the behaviour of the
     Liverpool fans if they felt that they had been unfairly
     treated?   A.  I think the prime consideration, as I have
     said, Mr. Collins, was the report of the previous year.
     It was an excellent occasion the previous year, it was
     well handled, well policed, well behaved, and there was
     no thought in anybody's mind that anybody would be induced
     to misbehave in any way whatsoever.

Q.   One way to avoid misbehaviour is to appear to be fair and
      equitable, is it not?   If you seem to be unfair, then this
      tends to lead to resentment, does it not?   A.  I have said
      that in retrospect the allocation to Sheffield Wednesday
      for the second year in succession may be considered unfair,
      but bearing in mind that this was a telephone call on the
      day of the meeting and we hadn't had any previous
      representations between the 1988 semi-final and the 1989
      semi-final from Liverpool Football Club, that conditioned
      my thinking in not thinking to raise it during the course
      of the meeting.   I was, of course, at pains to make Mr.
      Wiseman aware of it before the meeting.

Q.   But the decision was not yours or Mr. Wiseman's.  The
      decision was the committee's, was it not?  A. That is
      correct, sir.

Q.   And it might be said that the committee was deprived of
     the opportunity of making the decision with the full
     information at its ---

Q.   Disposal?  It might be said, as I say, I think I doubt
     that that would have made any difference to the committee's
     decision.  That is my opinion.

Q.   Did it occur to you or to the committee that this being
     the second year that Liverpool had reached the semi-final,
     and was on course for a possible League double, this might
     mean that more supporters would want to travel to the match
     even than the year before?   A. Not specifically.  I mean
                           54


                                                G. KELLY

     there is obviously a great amount of interest in a Cup
     semi-final.  There would be a large demand in any case.

Q.   But did it not occur to you that there might be an even
     larger demand for the reasons that I have just set out?
     A.  No, it did not.

Q.   That is not an unreasonable thought, is it?   A. I think,
      as I say, any semi-final is attractive.  There are moments
      of high tension and drama and everyone wants to be there.

Q.   You see, the point of all this is that if there is a
     greater demand which is not being met and there is a
     conception of unfairness, this might encourage, surely,
     people to come without tickets in the hope of getting in?
     A.  I don't think there has been a suggestion that people
     have been let into semi-finals without tickets.

Q.   I am sure, but we have heard a considerable amount about
     fans coming without tickets in the hope of getting them
     and possibly in the hope of getting in without tickets.
     People do that, do they not?   A. Yes, theyydo.

Q.   They did it at the Cup Final this year.  You know about
     that, I take it?   A.  I'm not quite sure of the specific
     point you are putting to me about the Cup Final.

Q.   There were, according to reports that one has seen, a
      number of Liverpool supporters who came to the Cup Final
      without tickets and hoped, it wo u l d seem, to force their
      way into the ground.  Are you aware of that?      A. I don't
      think I have seen that report.

Q.   It stems from a report in the Times, actually.  It was in
     the Times the day after the Cup Final.  A. No, I am sorry,
     I don't recall that.

Q.   I see.  You were not aware, then, of the report that we
     have seen certainly in some League matches of Liverpool
     supporters coming without tickets in the hope of getting
     in to all-ticket matches?   A. No.

Q.   There was the Watford one which we have had reference to
     in the course of the inquiry in, I think, February 1988,
     if I remember correctly.   A. No, I have only been made
     aware of that through reading the transcript of the
     Inquiry.  I don't know the details of it.

Q.   But is that not something which Watford would have reported
     or should have reported to the F.A. or not?   A. I really
     couldn't say without examining the issue.   I don't know.

Q.    Anyway it did not cross your mind that the way this was
      being done might encourage people or might result in
      people coming without tickets in the hope of getting into
      the ground?   A.  It didnTt cross my mind that there would
      be any greater tendency this y e a r .
                             55


                                                  G. KELLY

Q.   Can I just    go back to deal with two matters which I have
      not dealt   with?   First of all, the 1981 incident.   Now,
      you refer   to that in your statement.   If I you will just
      give me a   moment, I will find the right paragraph.    Page
      10.   A.    Yes.

Q.   I do not think it is necessary to go into that in any
      detail.  We have seen the document and it really speaks
      for itself.  But you knew, I take it, that since then
      there have been the building of these pens, or not?
      A.  I knew that there had been improvements and changes
      to the ground since 1981.  I really cannot say that I
     would have been aware of the pens.

Q.   Incidentally, going back to your protection of playing area
      in your memorandum of 1985, the point about protecting
      by means of a fence, etc., was there any policing of that,
      that is to say, did your three ex-police officers go to
      grounds specifically to report on compliance or non-
      compliance with the protection of playing area aspect?
     A.   Yes, they went to grounds to report on a whole number
      of factors.  They have a standard report which they submit
      after every visit and indeed Mr. Walker, after a visit to
      Hillsborough in 1987, the sixth round tie against Coventry
      City, reported not only on the perimeter fence, which he
      said was of standard height, but also on the performance
      of the ground stewards employed by Sheffield Wednesday
      and the excellent degree of co-operation between the
      stewards and the police.

Q.   The other thing I would like to deal with is the question
     of entertainment.  I think it is probably more conveniently
     set out in the Annex to your statement which is the booklet
     in relation to the 1988/89 Cup.  It is pages 4 to 11.   On
     page 6 there is a reference to musical entertainment
     and a requirement to arrange for "the usual entertainment
     before the match and during the interval".  Wha t is meant
     by "the usual entertainment"?   A. The usual entertainment
     I would say is to keep the crowd amused by playing music
     either over the tannoy or by a performance on the pitch.

Q.   Then over the page on page 7, you talk about "The Press
     Department of the office will be contacting staging clubs
     separately running the soccer star demonstration prior
     to the match", and you say that if any problems are
     encountered, Mr. Kirton is to be contacted?   A.  Yes.

Q.   We have heard that the F.A. actually cancelled that at the
     last moment?   A. Yes, I think I have to admit to a b rea k­
     down in communication here between the various departments
     of the office.   It was more a case of the event not being
     on than being cancelled at the last minute.

Q.   Well, notification that it was not on was not given till
     the last minute - is that a fair way of putting,it?
     A.  Notification was given when Mr. Mackrell telephoned
     the Press Office about 10 days prior to the match and Mr.
     Bloomfield in our Press Office said "No, it isn't on this
     year".
                           56

                                      G. KELLY



Q. Was anything else arranged to be put in its place? - A. No,
   it wasn't.  This was a specific obligation we have to the
   sponsors of the Soccer Star Scheme to provide an occasion
   when they can reach an audience and there was no live
   television of the match.  The Soccer Star Demonstration
   was never countenanced by those whose job it is to tun: it
   but unfortunately Mr. Clarke was not aware of that and he
   sent out the standard wording in the instructions to the
   Club.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, when you say "never
     countenanced by those whose job it is to run it" who is
     that? - A. Well there is a department of the office.

Q. Of the F.A? - A. Of the office of the F.A. whose job it
   is to administer the Soccer Star Scheme and they said to
   the sponsors "We might put on a demonstration at the semi­
   finals this year if there is an opportunity of getting media
   coverage for the Scheme" but that was quickly discounted.
   There was never any possibility of the live television, or
   never a real possibility of live television coverage and
   it was never the intention after a very early stage of
   the organisers to put forward this particular item.

Q. Was this, I have looked at the programme and I can't see
   anything in the programme for the match about it. - A. In
   the match programme, m y Lord?

Q. Yes.  I d o n ’t think there was anything in the match
   programme? - A. No, I don't think there was.

Q. But was there anything which might have led people travelling
   to the match to think there was going to be some pre-match
   entertainment?  I don't know.  Anything in the Press or any­
   thing on the radio or anything of that kinil? - A. I can't
   think so sir, no.

Q.           MR. COLLINS: So the result was that there was
     actually no pre-match entertainment other than some disc
     jockey? - A. I am not aware precisely what the pre-match
     entertainment was but the requirement was the usual musical
     e n tertainment.

Q. Which does not from what we have heard amount to much?
   - A. I don't know what you have heard sir.

Q. Was there anything more, you were there, was there anything
   which you w ould have considered to be entertainment? “ A.
   I am afraid I was not in my seat until shortly before the
   match started.

Q. Certainly nothing happened on the playing area? - A. I don't
   think so, no.

Q. May I now come to the day in question,  iram not going to
   ask you to go through in any great detail because obviously
    vv
^                                    57

                                               G. KELLY


              it is not necessary for you to cover points that have already
              been covered by others.

                    I would like to ask you just one thing about your
              arrival.  You say you got to the ground at about 20-past-12.
              Is that right? - A. Yes, I did.

         Q. You approached the ground effectively with other Liverpool
            traffic at the latter stage.  You happened to come in the
            way that Liverpool traffic was coming? - A. Yes, I believe
            so, yes.

         Q.   You say this:   "I was not stopped by Police as I had been
              the year before"? - A. That is correct.   My car was stopped.
              I am travelling from the south this year.    I am travelling
              from the north in 1988 on the Liverpool supporters' route
              and my car was stopped at some point and I was asked who
              I supported by a Policeman.

         Q. Did this appear to be a routine stopping as far as you could
            tell last year of vehicles? - A. Oh yes, yes.

         Q.   And     you say there was nothing like that this year? - A. I
              did not experience that this year but I don't kh@w the
              reason, whether the reason is that I came a different route
              or because it was not operating.

         Q.   In your paragraph 5 you deal with the matter that you were
              told by Mr. Kirton.   Was this something you were told at
              the time or is this merely reporting what you have been
              told since by Mr. Kirton? - A. Since.   The day after or the
              day after that.   The Sunday or the Monday.

         Q. Well I will leave that to Mr. Kirton to deal with.        It is
            obviously better that he should? - A. Yes.

         Q.   You confirm that if  there is a request for a delay of the
              kick-off by the Police you will accede to it. Is that right?
              - A. Without question whatsoever.

         Q. Would that be the case even if the teams had come out on
            to the pitch and the Police even then said it was necessary
            to delay the kick-off.  What would be the position? - A.
            We would delay the kick-off.

         Q. In fact you were never requested? - A. No.

         Q. Your first awareness of problems was,    as you say:

                    "Soon after kick-off m y attention was diverted
                    from the game and I noticed that fans were
                    scaling the perimeter fence ...."

              A. Yes.
'p
                              58

                                           G. KELLY



     Q. This would appear, from the w a y you put it, to be before
        the hitting of the bar by Mr. Beardsley, by Peter Beardsley?
        - A. Yes, I believe so because I did not see that incident.

     Q. And one would imagine that you would have been concentrating
        on the game if you had not had yor concentration diverted
        by something else? - A. Yes I would because it was an exciting
        opening to the game until m y attention was taken elsewhere.

     Q. Wha t was your first reaction, incidentally Mr.   Kelly, when
        you saw the perimeter fence being scaled? - A.    My first
        reaction was to question what was going on.   I   did not
        make any assumptions.   I did not know what was   going on.

     Q. Once the game was stopped did you go down on to the pitch
        yourself? - A. Yes, I did.

     Q. Was that to try and find out wha t was happening? - A. Well
        I walked a little way on to the pitch alongside Mr. Dalglish
        and made a comment to him, yes.

     Q. Yes, what comment was that? - A.   "What the hell is going on?"

     Q. Did you go up to the Leppings Lane end to see for yourself
        at all? - A. No, I didn't, no.

     Q. What did you in fact do? We know at some stage you went
        up to the Control Box.  What did you do between the time
        of leaving your seat and going on to the pitch and going
        up to the Control Box? - A. I stood at the entrance to
        the player's tunnel with various officials including the
        match referee and linesman.

     Q. Was it obvious to you by then that it was not a straight­
        forward pitch invasion, it was something other than that,
        it was not hooliganism? - A. Yes, it did not appear to
        be hooliganism.

     Q. So did you decide to go to the Police Control Box to find
        out what actually was happening? - A. Yes, I asked
        Mr. Mackrell to take me.

     Q. Did you hear any announcements over the Taanoy, any
        relevant announcements over the Tapnoy before you went
        up to the Control Box? - A. No, I didn't.

     Q. When you got to the Control Box you spoke I think to the
        Police Officer in charge who you now know to be Chief
        Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. Yes, I did.

     Q. A nd w hat were you told. Can you remember Mr. Kelly? - A.
        I was told that a gate or gates had been; forced and that
        there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters.   I was
        told that there had been fatalities; the match was likely
        to have to be abandoned and I was shown a picture on the
        monitors above in the front of the box purporting to
                                  G. KELLY



represent the gate that had been forced, gate or gates that
had been forced.

Now this picture then was not a reply of the forcing of the
gate but simply a camera showing the gate which had been
forced.  Is that what you are saying? - A. That is ray
recollection.  It was a black and white picture of, I don't
know what it was quite honestly because there was so many
monitors along the top andsjuy experience is not of looking
at them, but they said:  "That is the gate.   It has been
forced.  There has been an i n- rus h" .

Can you recall n o w whdthh gate it was that was being shown
on the monitor? - A. I am afraid I have no idea, no.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But the way it was put to you
the forcing of the gate had permitted an in— rush into the
ground? - A. Yes.




                 /MR. COLLINS:   Who was it
                                60

                                                       G. KELLY

q   ,        m r . collins?   who was it-, can you remember, who t-old you
        this? - A. It was Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. Did he ask you, indicating the match was likely to be
   abandoned, but did he tell you anything about his intentions
   as to making any announcements or doing anything? - A. I can't
   recall that he told me of his intentions at that stage.  I put
   in my statement what I recall he said to me.  I can't recall
   anything else.

Q. But there was still a possibility, as I understand your
   statement, that the match might go ahead? He was not ruling
   out that possibility?  Is that correct? - A. My recollection
   is that the match was in all probability going to be
   abandoned, at that stage.

Q. It was about 10 minutes later you had a meeting again with the
   Police Officer, the referee and the representatives of the
   three clubs concerned, that is Sheffield Wednesday, Nottingham
   and Liverpool, and by then the Police had not ruled out the
   possibility of a continuation? - A. That is what they were
   saying, although I suspect that....

Q. They were just saying that. - A ....... they did not want people
   to know that the match was being abandoned.

Q. And you go on and indeed it is clear from the video we have
   seen there then followed a considerable period of uncertainty,
   with no announcements and no-one really knowing what was
   happening? - A. Yes, that is correct, Mr. Collins.

Q. You had, I think, representations from the team managers that
   they wanted to know, and indeed in the case of Nottingham they
   effectively wanted to go? - A. I have no doubt they wanted to
   know.  I don't recall a representation from Mr. Dalglish, but
   I certainly received a message from Mr. Clough they were going
   home.

Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     What stage was that? - A. That was
        about 4 o'clock, my Lord.

Q.           MR. COLLINS:    Did you form any opinion at the time, Mr.
        Kelly, about whether or not there ought to have been more
        information given, that is to everyone, including the people
        sitting or standing in the ground? -A. Yes, I think that
        everybody was concerned to know what was going on, not least
        the 50,000-odd people in the crowd.

Q. Once the disaster had occurred did you get the impression or
   did you yourself receive any direction from the senior Police
   who were supposed to be in charge of the whole thing? - A. You
   mean at any time, Mr. Collins?

Q.      Yes? - A. No.  At   the end of the meeting - I had two contacts
        with the Police;   the one in the control box at about 3.20 and
        the meeting in the Boardroom of all interested parties at
        about 3.30.   At the conclusion of the 3.30 meeting I asked Mr.
                          61


                                                  G. KELLY


   Duckenfield to stay in close contact with the referee so we
   would be aware of the prospects of play continuing, e t c , , but
   that
     «
        was the last I heard.

Q. As far as you were aware was there any such contact? - A. I
   am not aware that there was, but I really could not say.
   There may have been, because people were coming and going to
   and fro.

Q. Put it this way.  Were you aware of the final decision to
   abandon before you heard it announced over the Tannoy? - A. I
   did not hear it announced over the Tannoy because I was back
   stairs virtually all the time apart from a couple of minutes
   when I went back to the box to check that my wife was OK.

Q. How was it conveyed to you then, the final decision to
   abandon? -A. I can't recall who conveyed it to me, but it was
   conveyed to me outside the referee's room by somebody, and I
   suspect in retrospect that was - I still don't know what time
   the match was abandoned.   I really don't.  I put it in m y
   statement at 4.25, but that was when I became aware of it.   It
   may have well before then.

Q. One final matter.   Am I right in thinking these Semi-Finals
   are televised but not live? - A. Usually they are not
   televised live.   There has been one occasion where the match
   was televised live, and that was the 1987 Leeds-Coventry Tie
   at Hillsborough.

Q. This particular one we know was televised by the BBC but was
   not being put out live.  Is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is there any reason so far as the FA is concerned why it
   should not be a live television? - A. There is not a short
   answer to that question, Mr. Collins.  The relationship
   between football and television is complex.  It is a complex
   negotiation.  We have very few remaining commodities within
   the game which television want, and the Semi-Final is one.
   Live television of the Semi-Final is one, but it has not yet
   been agreed to televise live.  I suspect it will be in the
   future.

Q. The reason it may be important is this, because if there is a
   life televising it may discourage those who have not got
   tickets from coming if they can see it at the same time on
   television.  That is the point, is not it? - A. Yes, that is a
   valid point, and I think it will be given very serious
   consideration in the future, as it was indeed for the replay
   at Old Trafford on 7th May.

Q. I entirely accept, and I don't want to go into the
   complexities of television and the FA, because I know there
   are difficulties, but is the situation this that the BBC had
   wanted to televise live, indeed the television companies
   generally want to televise Semi-Finals live, but at the moment
   the FA's policy is no, although as you say may well change? -
   A. That is correct.
                            62

                                                      G. KELLY



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The 1988 Semi-Final was not live? -
     A. That is correct, my Lord.

Q. But the 1987 Leeds-Coventry one was, from Hillsborough.  Is
   that right? - A. In effect it was live, but in reality the
   transmission was delayed by about an hour-and-three-quarters,
   but to all intents and purposes that match was televised live
   because it was moved to a Sunday for anti-hooliganism reasons.

Q. Whilst talking about that, one of the suggestions that have
   been made by quite a lot of people that I have read about is
   there is something to be said for showing the match live on a
   large screen at the home team's ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Have you any views about that?  The idea I suppose being (a)
   that you don't need to travel if you have not got a ticket and
   (b) that you can watch the match in something of an atmosphere
   of supporters and so on without travelling to the game itself?
   - A. Generally that is desirable.  It can help in relieving
   the pressure, but I believe there are technical problems in
   transmitting a daylight match back to a football ground.  I
   stand to be corrected, but I don-t think Anfield is suitable.
   I think they have tried it.  They might go to Tranmere or
   somewhere.

          MR. COLLINS:   These suggestions sound, with respect,    to
     be matters to be Stage 2 matters rather than Stage 1.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     That is right.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. H Y T N E R :

Q. Mr. Kelly, just dealing with entertainment for a moment, can
   we be absolutely realistic.  Stale pop music over a Tannoy can
   hardly compete for pre-match entertainment with, for example,
   half-an-hour each way between Liverpool schoolboys and
   Nottingham schoolboys?   You seem in some doubt?  Do you feel
   that pop music over a Tannoy might be more of an attraction to
   football spectators and a magnet to bring them into the ground
   earlier than a match between the two city's schoolboys? - A. I
   don't think I have a view on stale pop music or other pop
   music, M r . Hytner.

Q.   Let us says it is not stale pop music.  Suppose it isexciting
     pop music.  Can you answer the question now without
     hesitation?   Which do you think is more likely to attract
     spectators into a ground earlier?   Exciting and brilliantly
     played pop music over a Tannoy, or a match between Liverpool
     schoolboys and Nottingham schoolboys? - A. It might be
     exciting and brilliant displays by a marching band.   It may be
     nothing to do with football.   The point is, musical
     entertainment.   That is what we stipulate in our guidance to
     the clubs, and that is what we expect.

Q.   You will forgive me if I suggest to you you may possibly be
     ducking the question. - A. I may not be agreeing with the
*




                                63

                                                         G. KELLY


         premise.  I doubt if   I am ducking the question.     It will be
         the first time in my   life if I am.

    Q. The usual entertainment may mean music over a Tannoy.   A live
       spectacle, be it a marching band or a football match between
       schoolboys or a display of physical fitness by some local
       girls' club, or gymnastics, something of that sort, is
       obviously more likely to attract people into the ground
       earlier than pop music over a Tannoy? - A. That is not the
       experience of professional people who run football clubs.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What, a live display is not more
         attractive than canned music? - A. I don't know whether a live
         display is more attractive than canned music, but the point
         Mr. Hytner is making, my Lord, is whether people will be
         attracted to the ground earlier, and professional opinion is
         that it is very doubtful indeed.

    Q.        M R . HYTNER: Can you give us some examples  of research
         done to produce such a professional opinion? - A.  I can't give
         you any examples of any research, but I can give you the
         opinion of the Chief Executive of Watford Football Club who
         are widely regarded as one of the more imaginative of our
         professional brethren in attracting and maintaining
         family support.

    Q. With a possible bias for obvious reasons towards pop music,
       perhaps? (L a u g h t e r ) - A. Yes, and the opinion of Mr. Plumley,/
       who is also the Chairman of the Football League Executive
       Staffs Association is that it makes not one jot of difference
       in getting the people into the ground earlier.

    Q. Counsel must not give evidence themselves.  I must not hint at
       what may have been seen by me in the past from the terraces,
       but when last, for example, at a Semi-Final or a big match, an
       all-ticket game, when last to your knowledge was there a
       schoolboy football match prior to the kick-off? - A. At a big
       match?

    Q. Yes? - A. I would say - again I stand to be corrected - I
       would say the 1988 Cup Final at Wembley when I would have
       thought there would have been a display of football skills by
       b o y s , and g i r l s .

    Q. And was that not something which brought the crowds in and
       entertained the crowds and kept them quiet - not quiet - but
       kept them orderly before the kick-off? - A. That is a matter
       of opinion as to whether they came because there were 8 and 9
       year olds keeping a ball up in the air or whether they came to
       be part of the atmosphere of the big game.  It is a question
       of opinion.

    Q. Have you any idea, for example, of the experience on the
       Continent with pre-match entertainment.  Is it not very
       widespread on the Continent, entertainment live, not canned
       music? - A. I am afraid I d o n ’t know.
                                                      G. KELLY


The Football Association don't know what goes on on the
Continent? - A. I have only just come there.   My colleague may
be able to answer the question better because he has a wider
experience of international affairs than I do.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Shall we say half-time?

     MR. HYTNER:    I think that is a convenient time.

                   (Luncheon Ad j o u r n m e n t )
