                                                                                  frvvw

VALUATION OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

1.      The rateable value of a p ro p e rty is th e re n t at which it might
reasonably be expected to let from year to y e ar. In valuing a p ro p erty
for the purposes of ratin g the assesso r will base the rateable value on
actual r e n t, o r if th is not available, on the general level of re n ts passing
for th at class of p ro p e rty .      There is , however, little if any rental
evidence relating to football grounds in Scotland.               The a sse sso rs,
th e re fo re , have reso rte d to the co n tracto r’s basis of valuation in
determ ining rateable values.
2.     In general, in valuing on the co n tracto r’s basis, the assesso r first
a rriv e s at what is called the effective capital value (ECV) of the lands
and h eritages in question, taking due account of any exp enditure on th eir
construction which is unrem unerative or red u n d a n t so far as the purposes
of the hypothetical ten an t are concerned. He then applies to th a t figure
a ra te of in te re s t, known as the decapitalisation ra te to a rriv e at an
annual value. Finally, an end allowance by way of deduction or increase
may be made to take account of any special fea tu res which have not been
allowed for in the previous stag es of the calculation.
3.      In determining the ECV the objective is to a rriv e at a figure which
re p re se n ts the p resen t value of the subject in term s of a capital sum as
at the date of the valuation. The usual approach is to take th e historical
costs of construction and, a fte r allowing for unrem unerative and
red u n d an t ex p en d itu re, to adjust th is cost to th e date of valuation u sing
an ap p ro p riate index in o rd e r to a rriv e at an estimate of replacement
cost.      In the case of football stad ia, however, th e a ssesso rs have
recognised th a t most of th ese were built at least 60 y e ars ago and th a t
now even the w ell-supported Clubs could do no b e tte r than replace them
with utility stru c tu re s with only the most essential items included.
Effective capital values a re , th e re fo re , determined on the basis of unit
costs from which all unrem unerative costs and obsolete featu res o r
facilities have been eliminated. As a resu lt the effective capital values of
football stadia are of the o rd e r of only 50-75% of full replacement cost.
In addition,         the decapitalisation ra te used is below th a t applied to
com m ercial/industrial su b jects,         but    above th a t    for   philanthropic
o rg an isatio n s.
4.    In determining the ECV consideration is , how ever, given to modern
features of the       stadia, such as th e introduction of       all-seated
accommodation. The actual costs of such modern featu res are included in
the ECV. E xpenditure to meet safety legislation is omitted except where
it also incorporate new fe a tu re s.
5.    Although 3 football clubs appealed to the Lands T ribunal for
Scotland against the rateable values determined for th e ir grounds by the
a ssessor at the 1985 evaluation, the effective capital values were in each
case agreed by the ra te p a y e r and the a sse sso r.     The method of
determining ECV has not, th ere fo re, been teste d at appeal. The question
for the Courts would presum ably be w hether the new features were likely
to increase the re n t which the landlord might reasonably expect and the
ten an t would be willing to pay.




H0401238.129
