                                             cc   Miss Bannister
                                                  Ms Adams
                                                  Mr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Turney
                                                  Mr Bolton
                                                  Mr W h a l e y
                                                  Mr Mould'
                                                  Mr Smith
                                                  Mr Mower
                                                  Mr Lidington



Mr Martin



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT:   ADVANCE COPIES



As you know, Ministers agreed yesterday that publication of
Lord Justice Taylor's interim report would go ahead at 11 am on
4 August and that CFRs would be released in advance at 9.30 am that
day. The arrangements we have made on a provisional basis for
Chief Superintendent Cornmill of HM Inspectorate of Constabluary at
Sheffield to issue advance copies at Sheffield at the same time as
they are being issued in London can therefore be confirmed.

HMSO have confirmed today that 30 copies of the Interim Report will
be ready for collection by the Chief Superintendent at 9 am on
4 August from W Harteley Seed, 154-160 West Street, Sheffield.
You have told me that Mr Cornmill will then set up his base in
Committee Room 4 at the Old Town Hall in Surrey Street, Sheffield
for the purpose of issuing advance and courtesy copies to parties to
the inquiry and to certain other individuals and organisations as
set out in the attached schedule.

I am grateful to you and to Mr Cornmill for your help in all this.




                                             J A GILBERT
                                             Parliamentary Clerk




Private Office
3 A u g u s t 1989
   6703P


E.R.
   CFRs for issue at 9.30 am         Names of those          No to be
                                     collecting from         issued
                                     Sheffield


                                     (V\i cVl
   Sheffield City Council            Maleertm McLean
   Sheffield Wednesday Football      collecting from
     Club                            Home Office, QAG        2
   South Yorkshire Police            Mr Metcalf              2
   South Yorkshire Fire and Civil
     Defence Authority               made- as yot            2
   Trent Regional Health Authority   Mr Kilvington           2
   Dr W Eastwood                     iW       >^AC r         2
  football Supporters' Association Peter Jackson             2
  vHi1lsborough Steering Committee   Doug Fraser or
     (o b o bereaved and injured)    Nicola Harrison         2

•    Lynn Taylor COI Leeds
     South Yorkshire Police Authority6oCr
                                                             2
                                                              1




   Courtesy final copies for issue
   [or delivery arranged bv HMCIC1 at 11 am



 ^ The Lord Mayor of Sheffield
    Dr Stefan Popper Coroner
    Prof Alan Usher Pathologist
  XDr Chris Nicholson Health and Safety Executive
    Alan Goldsack    ) Junior Counsel of
   ^Bernard Phillips)  the Inquiry
    Chair person of Liverpool City Council*
    Secretary of Liverpool FC*
    Lord Mayor of Nottingham*
    Secretary of Nottingham Forest FC*



   Note: The Hillsborough Inquiry Team are advising all the above of
   the arrangements for collecting copies except in the cases of
   Lynn Taylor of the COI at Leeds, who will be contacted by
   Press Office (Mr Sutherwood); and the South Yorkshire Police
   Authority, which will be contacted by the Police Department (as
   agreed with Mr Smith). Arrangements for the delivery of copies to
   the last four on the list will be notified by the Fire and Emergency
   Planning Department (as agreed with Mr Mould).
,    ,.                                                cc   Mr    Turney
                                                            Mr    Bolton
    E.jR.                                                   Mr    Whalley ^
                                                            Mr    Mould
                                                            I* fa CaXcU
          Mr Martin

          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT:   ADVANCE COPIES

          I am grateful to Chief Superintendent Cornmill of HM Inspectorate
          at Sheffield for his help in arranging for advance copies of
          Lord Justice Taylor's interim report to be issued at 9.30 am at
          Sheffield to parties to the inquiry and to one or two other
          selected people on Friday 4 August.  I attach a list of the
          recipients of the advance copies with an indication against each
          of the number they are to be given.

          Thirty copies of the Interim Report will be ready for collection
          by the Chief Superintendent at 9 am on 4 August from
          W Harteley Seed, 154-160 West Street, Sheffield. Three copies are
          spare - at present at least).

           I should be grateful if, after final confirmation later today that
           Ministers are content for publication to go ahead at 11 am on
           4 August, Mr Cornmill will arrange for a room at the Old Town Hall
           in Surrey Street, Sheffield to be made available to him for the
           purpose of issuing the advance copies. As soon as this is
           arranged we should be given the room number so that the Inquiry
           Team can let the would-be recipents know during the course of
           tomorrow, 3 August.  The Secretary to the inquiry, Mr Whalley,
           advises that Mr Cornmill approach Mr Pat O'Neill at the City Hall
           to make the arrangements for a room and further suggests that
           Committee Room 4 would be one which would be familar to the
    <!m 4. parties to the inquiry.

          As to the handling of giving out advance copies, Mr Cornmill
          should be advised to convert the final copies he collects from
          W Harteley Seed into CFRs by tearing off the front covers and by
          affixing on to the lower half of the title page of each copy of
          the Report (ie the new cover) a gummed label.  Sufficient stocks
          of ready-gummed labels are also enclosed. Mr Cornmill may as a
          precaution wish to ask for recipients to sign for the copies. We
          expect that most parties to the inquiry which employed solicitors
          will arrange for their copies to be collected by clerks from those
          firm. At Annex B is a list of the parties and their legal
          representatives. We expect that Dr Popper and Prof Usher will
          send someone from the Medico-Legal Centre at Watery Lane and that
          Dr Nicholson will send someone from the Health and Safety
          Executive. We will let you know of any further details of whom Mr
          Cornmill should expect, if they come to hand.

          I understand that you will arrange for Mr Cornmill to receive the
          enclosures by tomorrow morning.  I shall let you know as soon as
          possible when we have the Ministerial go-ahead for publication and
          for these arrangements.




                                                       J A GILBERT
                                                   Parliamentary Clerk
          Private Office
          2 A u g u s t 1989
E. R.
                                                                  ANNEX A


                                                 27 copies



 y The Lord Mayor of Sheffield                                             1
        Dr Stefan Popper                         Coroner                   1
    -* Prof Alan Usher                           Pathologist               1
        Dr Chris Nicholson                       Health and Safety
                                                 Executive                 2
    M   Sheffield City Council                                             2
     * Sheffield Wednesday Football Club                                   2
        South Yorkshire Police                                             2
 ^      South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
          Authority                                                    2
 M Trent Regional Health Authority                                         2
        Dr W Eastwood                                                      2
    <f. Football Supporters' Association                                   2
*       Hillsborough Steering Committee
          (o b o bereaved and injured)                                     2
*       Lynn Taylor                              COI Leeds                 4
        Alan Goldsack      )                     Junior Counsel   of       1
        Bernard Phillips)                        the Inquiry               1
                                                                    Nf.-V   (0




LIST OF PARTIES AND THEIR REPRRRItmt’ATION


1.    Mr Andrew Collins QC, Mr Alan Goldsack and Mr Bernard
      Phillips of Counsel, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor,
      appeared on behalf of the Inquiry.

2.    Mr Benet Hytner QC and Mr Timothy King of Counsel,
       instructed by the Hillsborough Steering Committee, appeared
       on behalf of the bereaved and injured.

3.    Mr John Jackson of Counsel, instructed by Messrs Hill
      Dickinson, appeared on behalf of the Football Supporters'
      Association.

4.    Mr John Dyson QC and Mr David Gibson-Watt of Counsel,
      instructed by Messrs Freshfields, appeared on behalf of the
      Football Association.

5.    Mr Richard Maxwell QC and Mr Michael Murphy of Counsel,
       instructed by Messrs Keeble Hawsons, appeared on behalf of
       Sheffield City Council.

6.    Mr Edwin Glasgow QC and Mr Stuart Catchpole of Counsel,
      instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper, appeared on
      behalf of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

7.    Mr William Woodward QC and Mr Patrick Limb of Counsel,
      instructed by Messrs Hammond Suddards, appeared on behalf of
      the South Yorkshire Police.

8.    Mr Franz Muller QC and Mr Andrew Robertson of Counsel,
      instructed by Messrs Crutes, appeared on behalf of the South
      Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

9.    Mr Michel Kallipetis QC, instructed by Messrs Dibb Lupton
      Broomhead, appeared on behalf of Trent Regional Health
      A u t h o r i t y.

10.   Mr Roger Toulson QC, instructed by Messrs Reynolds Porter
      Chamberlain, appeared on behalf of Dr W. Eastwood.
v.
