           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
       \   Room 1106
       a   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



G H Mackrell                                                   Your reference:
Secretary
Sheffield Wednesday FC                                         Our reference:
Hillsborough
SHEFFIELD S6 1SW                                               Date:      3o      October 1997




I fear that we forgot to write to thank you and your colleagues for the help you gave us over
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s visit to Hillsborough at the end of September. The visit was
very interesting and the Judge has asked me to say that it will be o f great assistance to him in
writing his report.

        Might I trouble you (or your club’s solicitors) over one minor aspect o f what
happened? We have had a discussion with Mr Roger Houldsworth, who was helping your
club with its CCTV system in 1989 and was present on the day o f the disaster in the club
CCTV control room. Mr Houldsworth has given us a copy o f a statement which we
understand he made on 16 May 1989 to your club’s solicitors. This statement by him was
available to Lord Taylor and is referred to in the transcript o f his Inquiry.

3.      There is an unsigned copy o f the same statement by M r Houldsworth, in retyped form
(but word-for-word identical) in the material which the West Midlands Police, who
investigated the disaster on behalf o f Lord Taylor, later put to the Director o f Public
Prosecutions. We would like confirmation if possible as to whether Mr Houldsworth’s
statement o f 16 May 1989 was made to your club’s solicitors. If it was, did the solicitors
make it available to the West Midlands police?

4.     This is as I say only a minor point but it would help if we could clear it up. Thanking
you again for your help




                                                                                         U u > ''

 C F BONE
                                                                                               a-*-*
 Secretary to the Scrutiny


 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SHEFFWED. 138
