TELLEX MONITORS                                   TEL- 071 490 8592                                    26>06i97                14t40 No.019 p 01

              TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                               - The Broadcast Reporting Service
              NATIO NAL O FF IC E - 0171 490 8018                             This Transcript From: LONDO N O FFIC E   -   0 1 7 1 4 9 0 8013




             FAO:        JEFF COOK                                                       ACCT:           14849                                  |U / ^
             AT:         HOME OFFICE

             PROG: ONE O’CLOCK NEWS                                                      DURATION: 00:02:00

             DATE: 26/06/97                       TIME: 13:00                            JOB:           A97-061755

             STN:        BBC TV 1                                                        ORDliR.        RUSII BY FAX


                                                                  HILLSBOROUGH




             EDWARD STOURTON;
                        The Home Secretary is to make a statement on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on
             Monday; the Home Office won't give details of what Jack Straw will say but relatives o f some
             o f the 96 fans who died hope that there'll be a fresh inquiry based on new medical and video
             evidence.


                                                                          - FILM -


             JOHN THORNE:
                        The responsibility for the fatal overcrowding o f the Hillsborough FA Cup semi-final
             has been bitterly contested for years. Neither the inquest nor the inquiry into how 96 Liverpool
              fans died on the terraces has satisfied their families. Now they believe the forceful fresh
             evidence from two sources has persuaded Mr Straw to take action.


                                      EXTRACT FROM GRANADA TV S "HILLSBOROUGH"


                        Jimmy McGovern's drama-documentary challenged the police version o f events,
              alleging that evidence was suppressed. Joan Traynor*s two sons, Christopher and Kevin, died
              in the Lepping's Lane crush. She explained why a new review o f the disaster was so important.


              JOAN TRAYNOR:
                        The truth wasn't told at the first inquest and that's what we're asking for, the truth - and
              if we gel the truth justice will automatically, or should, follow and we didn't get the... we didn't
              get justice for our children. It's our children that we're fighting for.

CO PYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by
Tellex for private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast In part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holderor
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent

Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days froni broadcast date.
                                                                                                         Job Number: A97-061755 - Page : 1
    TF 1' EX MONITORS                                                               ^
                                                          TEL:    071-490-8592                   26.06.97   14:40                           No.019        P
               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                               - The Broadcast Reporting Service
              NATIO NAL O F F IC E - 0 1 7 1 4 9 0 8018                        This Transcript From: LONDON O FFICE -0 1 7 1 4 9 0 8013




                                       EXTRACT FROM HILLSBOROUGH SECURITY VIDEO



                        This security video, once thought to have been lost or stolen, helped bolster the family's
              campaign earlier this year. They claimcd it contradicted inquest evidence and suggested that
              police officers had lied. Today, South Yorkshire Police wouldn't be interviewed but,they said
              the forcc would co-operate with any new inquiry.
                        For over eight years, those bereaved by the Hillsborough tragedy have contended that
              vital physical and medical evidence was never properly disclosed.                                   Now, people here in
              Liverpool believe that an injustice is going lo be thoroughly re-examined. John Thome, BBC
             News, Anfield.



                                                                              ***




C O PYRIG HT: Tellex does not own any copyright tn any audio or visual material provided (o the client. Reports and audio-visual material an* supplied b.
Tellex for private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast In peri o r as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holderc
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio o r Video cassettes o f this Item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.

                                                                                                          Job Number:A97-061755 - Page :
TELLEX MONITORS                                    TEL: 071-490-8592                                    26,06,97              14:16 No.018 P.01

              TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                               - The Broadcast Reporting Service
              NATIONAL O F F IC E -0 1 7 1 4 9 0 8018                         This Transcript From: LONDON O FFICE     -   0171 490 8018




             FAO:        JEFF COOK                                                       ACCT:          14849
             AT:         HOME OFFICE

             PROG: ITN LUNCHTIME NEWS                                                    DURATION: 00:02:15

             DATE: 26/06/97                         TIME: 12:30                          JOB:             A97-061753

             STN:        ITN                                                             ORDER:         RUSH BY FAX


                                                        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




             DURING HEADLINES:


             CAROL BARNES:
                        Hopes o f the Hillsborough families: will the Home Secretary order a fresh inquiry into
             the disaster?


             LATER IN THE PROGRAMME:


             DERMOT MURNAGHAN:
                        The Government gave a clear indication today that it plans to launch a fresh inquiry into
             the Hillsborough disaster. The Home Secretary, Jack Straw, said this morning he’d make a full
             statement on Monday.                 The families o f the 96 fans who died in the tragedy have long
             campaigned for a new investigation; they claim new evidence has emerged in recent months
             which backs their belief that policc incompetencc was to blame.                                           Our home affairs
             correspondent, Kevin Dunn, reports.


                                                                          - FILM -


              KE-VIN DUNMl
                        For eight years, the events o f that semi-final Saturday afternoon have haunted the
              relatives o f the 96 people who died, crushed to death on Hillsborough's Lepping's Lane
              Terrace. The campaign for a fresh inquiry into the tragedy was given impetus by a drama
              documentary which alleged policc covered up their handling o f the emergency.
                        It said, contrary to police evidence, a closed circuit camcra focused on the terraces was

CO PYRIG HT: Tellex does not own any copyright In any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by
Tellex for private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced o r re-broadcast in pari o r as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holderor
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio o r Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast dete.
                                                                                                           Job Number: A97-061753 - Page : 1
 TELLEX MONITORS                                    TEL: 071-490-8592                                    26,06,97             14:16 N o ,018 P.02

              TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                               - The Broadcast Reporting Service
              NATIONAL O FFIC E- 0171490 8018                                 This Transcript From: LONDON O FFICE-0 1 7 1 4 9 0 8016




              working properly. The tape from that camcra was found in Yorkshire Television's archive.
             The relatives say it provides crucial visual evidence which warrants a new inquiry.


             TREVOR HICKS: (Hillsborough Family Support Group)
                        We're not actually looking for heads on spikes; we’re asking for a proper, clean and fair
              investigation into what happened at Hillsborough and in the aftermath, sadly, because we are
             conccmed at the way that some o f the evidence has been presented.


             KJh
                        At the time o f the inquest, the coroner made a controversial ruling that all o f the victims
             must have been dead by 3:15 on that afternoon, but a doctor not called by the inquest has since
             come forward to say he treated victims still alive after that time.
                        South Yorkshire Policc this morning declined requests for interviews but said if there is
             to be a fresh inquiry, South Yorkshire Police have always said that they will do everything they
             can to assist.
                        So, when the relatives o f the Hillsborough victims come here on Monday, they cari
             expect to be told what they've long wanted to hear, that there will be a fresh inquiry into
             whether the deaths o f their husbands, wives, sons and daughters could have been prevented.
             Kevin Dunn, ITN, at the Home Office.



                                                                             +*♦




CO PYRIG HT: Tellex does not own any copyright In any audio or visual material provided to the client Reports and audlo-visuat me ferial am supplied by
Tellex for private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast In part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holder o r
the broadcasting authority first ha ying boen obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent


Audio o r Video cassettes o f this item am available for 28 days from broadcast date.

                                                                                                           Job Number: A97-061753 - Page : 2
R + S .STEWART              TEL =-01353777652              26 Jun 97       8:42 No .004 P .01




           TO:                     MIKE GRANATT, DIRECTOR
                                   COMMUNICATIONS HOME OFFICE
                                   FAX NO: 0171 273 4660

           FROM:                   ROBERT GIBSON - GALLERY NEWS
                                   TEL NO: HOME 01923 772054
                                           WORK 0171 839 4784
                                           WORK 0171 219 2908

                                   PAGER        01523 523 523 No. 850447

           NO OF PAGES:            2   (Including this page)


           Transcript of discussion on the Hillsborough disaster
           Interviewer: Sue McGregor
           Today Programme, 26 June 1997 at 7.47am

           SM: Now the Home Office has said this morning that Jack Straw, the
           Home Secretary, Is going to make a statement about the 1989
           Hillsborough disaster on Monday, and he Is expected to announce
           whether the enquiry Into the deaths of 96 football fans then will be
           reopened. Well on the line Is the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family
           Support Group, Trevor Hicks, who sadly lost two daughters in that
           accident. Mr Hicks, I take it you hope very fervently the enquiry will be
           reopened.

           TH; Yes we do. I mean obviously there Is a lot speculation this morning
           and people are saying that It definitely will be. All that we know Is that we
           will be meeting Jack Straw on Monday prior to him making a statement
           to the House of Commons which, as you say, we very much hope will be
           that they will reopen the enquiry.

           SM: And if It does, what Is the fresh evidence that they can look at.

           TH: Well there are several (unclear) of fresh evidence. There Is fresh
           video evidence, there Is fresh medical evidence and of course, there Is a
           mixture of the two. So we are hoping very much that they will look at all
           of It.

           SM: The fresh video evidence Involves, you believe, a camera that
           actually was working at the time which people thought wasn't.
                                                 1
f i + S . STEbJART             TEL .'-01353777652            26 Jun 97      8 =42 N o .004 P.02




              TH: That Is right. One of the Items which the coroner himself said was
              pivotal to the whole Inquest was whether a camera mounted on the score
              board that was set up there to look at the terraces was working, and
              evidence was given by various police officers that It was faulty and as you
              know, we now have video footage from the police control box that shows
              that camera was working extremely well.

              SM: And this could, you hope, lead to a different jury verdict.

              TH: It Is that plus the medical evidence. We have had a doctor come
              forward who was actually working In the accident and emergency unit and
              again, his evidence is totally contradictory to that which has been given.
              So yes, there Is several Items which we think is a very strong evidence
              and they need to be looked at with great care.

              SM: Mr Hicks, thanks very much.




                                                    2
  ID:      03 July 1997 12:38
                                                                                                                                 l i o k ^                10'6 U
                                                                                                                                     I                         f ~
               TE LL E X M O N IT O R S LTD                                        - The Broadcast Reporting Service                                          j■
               NATIONAL OFFICE-0171 490 8018                                 This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922



              FAO:       SARAH JO N E S                                                   ACCT:               14849
              AT:        H O M E O F F IC E

              PROG: N O R T H W E ST T O N IG H T                                         DURATION: 00:10:45

              DATE: 30/06/97                          TIME:        18:30                  JOB:               C97-074002

              STN:       BBC TV NW                                                        ORDER:             N/A


                    IN D EPEN D EN T IN V ESTIG A TIO N IN T O T H E EVENTS AT H IL L S B O R O U G H :



              G OR D O N BURNS:
                         'We owe it to the families of those who died to get to the bottom of these matters once and
              for all.' The words o f Home Secretary Jack Straw as he announced a new independent investigation
              into the events at Hillsborough in April 1989. The families o f the 96 people who died have broadly
              welcomed the news which comes after a long campaign to unearth the full truth behind the tragedy.
              They had been hoping for a new public inquiry and a fresh inquest, that might still happen but it
              depends on this new investigation.
              JA C K STRAW M P THOME SECRETARY'):
                         (VV House o f Commons) I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the
              Director o f Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public interest that there should be
              an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to the
              disaster which was not previously available.
              G.B.:
                         The new investigation led by Lord Justice Stuart Smith will consider new video evidence
              which challenges the police version of events, new medical evidence which claims to show that
              people were still alive after 3.15, the time at which the coroner decided all victims had died, whether
              a new public inquiry and a new coroner's inquest should be held, if criminal charges should be
              brought and whether there should be fresh disciplinary proceedings against senior police officers.
                         Our Merseyside reporter Allan Urry has been following the day's events.
              ALLAN URRY:
                         Early morning in Liverpool and families were preparing to leave for Westminster with
              guarded optimism. They'd suffered disappointment before in their campaign for another inquiry.
              D O R EEN JO N E S :
                         (Mother of Hillsborough Victim Richard) How do you live without your son but we have to
              leam to do that but fighting the authority has been very difficult and when your son is called, like
              they were in the beginning, drunken hooligans and you know this is not true that was just a guise,
              that was just a cover up for the mistakes that they made and that is unforgivable.
              A.U.:

COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holder or the broadcasting
authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                                Job N um ber : C 97-074002 - Page : 1
      ID:      03 July 1997 12:40                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 6



                   TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                - The Broadcast Reporting Service
                   NATIONAL OFFICE-0171 490 8018                                 This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE-0161 228 6922



                             Some said it would be a difficult day for them whatever the outcome. Les Jones works
                  nights so he couldn't travel with his wife Doreen to Westminster but what he heard on the radio at
                  home in Huntscross gave him some hope.
                  LES JO N E S :
                             (Richard's Father) As long as the evidence is presented and the families have a chance to
                  input into that inquiry and has access to the evidence that has been in the hands of the police for so
                  many years I'm quite happy.
                  A.U.:
                             Paul Robinson's brother Steven was among the 96 who died.                                     Paul was cautious in
                  welcoming new scrutiny.
                  PAUL R O B IN SO N :
                             (Brother o f Hillsborough Victim Steven) I am a little disappointed that the fresh evidence
                  available wasn't enough for the Home Office Minister or indeed the DPP to look to order an
                  independent inquiry before this scrutiny goes ahead.
                  A.U.:
                             It was a television drama documentary written by Jimmy McGovern and broadcast last
                  December which gave the families campaign fresh impetus. Three months ago the Hillsborough
                  Family Support Group found a video footage they say wasn't seen by the original inquest and they
                  say their case has also been strengthened by evidence from a doctor who believes some victims were
                  still alive after 3.15, the time the coroner decided all had died.
                  D R RO G A N TA Y LO R :
                             (Football Research Unit, University o f Liverpool) My hope very much is that it will lead to
                  what the families want here which is a reopening o f the coroner's court o f the inquest into the deaths
                  of these people. If it doesn't I dont think the resentment will go away, I don't think the interruption
                  in people's lives will go away, in fact it may well lead to private prosecutions.
                  A.U.:
                             That prospect means no easy resolution for the families concerned. Allan Urry, North West
                  Tonight, Liverpool.
                  G.B.:
                             Well joining me now is the Home Secretary Jack Straw. Home Secretary why couldn't you
                  have gone for what the families wanted which was a full public inquiry? •
                  J.S .:
                             Because I thought that it was appropriate to have the allegations o f new evidence examined
                  fully by an independent senior member o f the Court of Appeal in the way that I'd proposed and that's
                  partly because four possible causes o f action could follow such an examination. There could be a
                  recommendation for a new full public inquiry, there could be a recommendation to the Attorney
                  General for him to apply for a new inquest or a recommendation to the Director of Public
                  Prosecutions for criminal proceedings or to the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire for disciplinary


    COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
    private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holder or the broadcasting
    authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

j Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
|                                                                                                        Job Number : C97-074002 - Page : 2
       ID:      03 July 1997 12:41                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 6



                    TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                     - The Broadcast Reporting Service
                    NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                                This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922



                   proceedings against police officers. It seemed to me that it was important to have a focus and a
                   funnel if you like for a consideration of these allegations of new evidence and I think that Lord
                   Justice Stuart Smith is a man who is ideally placed to conduct that investigation. And although I
                   understand...
                   G.B.:
                             Well...
                   J.S.:
                              ...if I may ju st say this, that the family support group would have liked me to go, go further
                   they made it clear to me in my meetings today with them that they welcomed what I'd done.
                   G.B.:
                             Yes, but will this new investigation or examination deal only with what is regarded as new
                   evidence or will it consider what the families feel was evidence ignored or not given enough
                   importance in previous inquiries or inquests?
                  J.S.:
                             Well it'll, it'll deal principally with allegations that there is new evidence which was not
                  before the original inquiries and in particular as far as the families are concerned before the...
                   G.B.:
                             The new medical evidence...
                  J.S.:
                             Yes and that, and that principally, not exclusively but it principally relates to the video
                   evidence, that there is, there are claims now that there was video evidence which was available at the
                  time which was not shown to the inquest or to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and also evidence about
                  the time o f death which is obviously critical so far as the families are concerned in then establishing
                   other issues including for example culpability o f those who did not allow the, or would not permit
                  the ambulances to go onto the field. So it's those issues which will be among the items which will be
                  examined by Lord Justice Stuart Smith.
                  G.B.:
                             And if this investigation feels that there is significant new evidence like for instance the
                  video that you talked about then could it then lead to disciplinary action or indeed criminal
                  proceedings against the South Yorkshire Police?
                  J.S.:
                             Yes is the answer, that will be a matter for Lord Justice Stuart Smith to make a
                  recommendation as far as criminal proceedings are concerned to the Director o f Public Prosecutions.
                    If Lord Justice Stuart Smith makes a recommendation to me as Home Secretary for there to be a
                  further full public inquiry then I've already given an undertaking that I will act on that and in any
                  event I will ensure that his advice to me is made public.
                  G.B.:
                             Home Secretary thank you very much indeed for joining us.


    COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
    private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holder or the broadcasting
    authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

    Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
|                                                                                                        Job Number : C97-074002 - Page : 3
     ID:      03 July 1997 12:43                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 6



                 TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                  - The Broadcast Reporting Service
                 NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                                This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922




                J.S.:
                           Thank you.
                G.B.:
                           Well Phil Hammond who lost a son at Hillsborough was one o f the relatives who met Jack
                Straw before his announcement. Earlier I asked him for his reaction to today's news.
                P H IL IP H A M M O N D :
                           (Hillsborough Family Support Group) We're happy with what Jack Straw has come up
                with, it's not everything we want but we're happy, it's open the door for us and we're about to just
                walk through it now.
                G.B.:
                           Yes, I mean it does fall short o f what you were actually asking for doesn't it?
                P.H.:
                           It does, does fall short but it's up to Lord Justice Stuart to how, how he's going to do this
                inquiry, how he's, how he's going to do this. We'll have to get in touch with our barrister and our
                barristers are getting in touch with him to put pressure on that we want legal input into this.
                G.B.:
                           I mean do you have worries about that inquiry as to what evidence might be admissible and
                what evidence might not be admissible?
                P.H.:
                           No, Jack Straw has said all the evidence that we put forward will be admissible so all the
                evidence we've got he's going to take on board.
                G.B.:
                           So how did the Home Secretary break this news to you because he did this before his
                Commons statement didn't he?
                P.H.:
                           He took us up to his private room, seven committee members, and read to us exactly what he
                was going to put to the floor and then we asked questions then about full disclosure o f evidence and
                all that and he said, you know, he can't see no problem with that.
                G.B.:
                           And did any o f you say to him that it wasn't the full inquiry that you wanted and why wasn't
                it?
                P.H.:
                           Well we told him that we wanted a full inquiry, we wanted to... but he said it was up tothe
                Attorney General, he said this way you're getting the best o f both worlds, let this Lord Justice Stuart
                look at it and he, he can recommend then to the Attorney General, to him self and to the Attorney
                General exactly what we want.
                G.B.:
                           So it's taken eight years or so to get this far, are you happy now with the outcome?


  COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
  private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holder or the broadcasting
; authority first having been obtained by the client. Tel/ex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

  Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                                  Job N um ber : C 97-074002 - Page : 4
   ID:      03 July 1997 12:44                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 6



               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                 - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE-0171 490 8018                                  This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922




               P.H.:
                         We're happy, we're happy but not over the moon, it's another fight for us and we'll carry on.
               G.B.:
                         Phil Hammond thank you very much.
               P.H.:
                         Okay, thank you.
               G.B.:
                         Well much o f the recent television documentary was based on the research o f Professor Phil
               Scraton who runs The Hillsborough Project and a short time ago I asked for his reaction to the news.
               PR O FE SSO R P H IL SCRA TO N :
                         (Director, The Hillsborough Project) Well it's a qualified welcome, I mean I think that the
              door is slightly ajar now so that at least we can go forward and present some o f the new evidencefor
              independent scrutiny. However I am concerned that it hasn't gone far enough, what is needed here is
              a full public inquiry into all aspects o f the Hillsborough disaster and the aftermath which
              particularly will focus on the evidence presented, presented to those, the inquiry into the inquest and
              also will focus on the suppression o f a whole range of evidence which is yet to see the light o f day...
              G.B.:
                         But it's the families, it's the families who are saying look we have got vital new evidence
              here and the Home Secretary is saying fine, we will look at that and if you're right we will havea
              full inquiry.
              P.S.:
                         Well I think that some o f the evidence that is there at the moment is only a small pail of
              what exists. There has been no disclosure o f the full extent o f the evidence that Taylor did not use
              and didn't come before the inquest. At the same time as that there was no cross-examination o f that
              inquest, it was presented at the inquest o f that evidence, it was presented simply by the West
              Midlands Police from their summaries, so the families were denied their fundamental right to cross-
              examine evidence, so that cannot be right and I think that's what I mean by a wide ranging inquiry.
              G.B.:
                         But if the new evidence is as strong as the families say there will be this new inquiry in
              which all those things can be taken into consideration, is that not right?
              P.S.:
                         My problem is that we are getting tied up in the quality o f this 'particular piece o f evidence
              when in actual fact the entire process, the way in which the evidence was collected, the way in
              which... that certain bits o f evidence were selected, the way in which it wasn't cross-examined, they
              are the key issues.
              G.B.:
                         Professor Scraton thank you very much indeed.
              P.S.:


COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied-by Tellex for
private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holder or the broadcasting
authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                               Job N um ber : C 97-074002 - Page : 5
   ID:      03 July 1997 12:46                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 6



               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                 - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922




                         Thank you.
              G.B.:
                         And this new investigation announced by the Home Secretary into the Hillsborough tragedy
              is the subject o f tonight's Talkback on your BBC local radio station, call 0345-951951 with your
              views on the announcement, the lines are open now and the programme starts just after 7 o'clock.




COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holder or the broadcasting
authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                                Job N um ber : C 97-074002 - Page : 6
    ID:        03 July 1997 12:48                                                                                                                    Page 1 of 3

                                                                                                                                      IH
                   TE LL E X M O N IT O R S LTD                                        - The Broadcast Reporting Service
                   NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922



                  FAO:        SARAH JO N E S                                                ACCT:               14849                                                        \
                                                                                                                                                                        ,     \
                  AT:         H O M E O F F IC E                                                                                                                            M

                  PROG: GRANADA T O N IG H T                                               DURATION: 00:04:50

                  DATE: 30/06/97                          TIME:        18:00               JOB:                 C97-074003

                  STN:        ITV GRANADA                                                   ORDER:              N/A


                                      G O O D NEW F O R F A M IL IE S O F H IL L S B O R O U G H V IC T IM S



                  LU CY M E A C O C K :
                             First tonight though, some good news at last for the families o f the 96 football fans whodied
                  in the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. The Home Secretary Jack Straw has appointed a seniorjudge
                  to see if there should be a full public inquiry into the tragedy which happened on April 15th1989.
                  He said he was determined to get to the bottom o f the disaster once and for all. Ina moment we'll
                  have reaction but first this report from our Political Correspondent M ark Lyons.
                  M A R K LYONS:
                             The families o f the victims o f the Hillsborough disaster arrived at Westminster this afternoon
                  hopeful that after an eight year battle they were finally on their way to getting to the truth o f what
                  happened on that fateful Saturday afternoon, confident new evidence that's emerged since the
                  tragedy would warrant the Government and authorities to look at the case once again. At the
                  original inquest a verdict o f accidental death was recorded, the coroner declaring none o f the 96
                  victims were alive after quarter past three. New evidence now challenges that decision, as does the
                  Granada drama documentary on the subject which uncovered that the police camera overlooking the
                  Lepping Lane terraces where the fatal crush took place wasn't broken, as the public inquiry was told.
                   In the Commons with the families watching on the Home Secretary told Parliament it was time to
                  look again.
                  JA C K STRAW M P:
                             (Home Secretary, speaking in the Commons) I can therefore tell the House today that the
                  Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public
                  interest that there should be an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any new
                  evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously available.
                  M .L:
                            The Home Secretary announced that he was appointing a senior Appeal Court Judge to re­
                  examine the case.
                  J.S:
                             ... To advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f such significance as to
                 justify establishment by the Secretary o f State for the Home Department o f a further public inquiry.


 COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
 private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holder or the broadcasting
 authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

j Audio or   Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                                  Job N um ber : C 97-074003 - Page : 1
       ID:      03 July 1997 12:49                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 3



                   TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                 - The Broadcast Reporting Service
                   NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE - 0161 228 6922




                  M .L:
                             After his statement the Home Secretary went straight to see the families to discuss his
                  decision. In private he outlined to the families what, as Home Secretary, he could and couldn't
                  authorise but promised he wanted to finally get to the bottom o f what happened.
                  V IC T IM ’S PA REN T N O .l:
                             Well I'm quite pleased, yes. Jack Straw has opened the door for us, what we've been waiting
                  for for eight years. He's given us the chance now and we'll prove our case now in court.
                  V IC T IM ’S PA REN T NO.2:
                             Kevin didn't die until 4 o'clock that day and I've got all the evidence to prove that and it has
                  been to the Attorney General, Sir Nicholas Lyell, three times and I've been refused so hopefullynow
                  if it goes back they'll do something about it this time.
                  M .L:
                             Relatives tonight are confident that justice might finally be round the comer.
                  L.M :
                             And we now go over live to Westminster where we can join Mark. Mark?
                  M .L;
                             Thank you Lucy.               Well how did Jack Straw's comments go down today here at
                  Westminster? Joining me, Phil Hammond, whose 14 year old son died at Hillsborough and local
                  Merseyside MP Peter Kilfoyle. First o f all Phil was that enough today, what Jack Straw said to
                  you?
                  P H IL H A M M O N D :
                             (Hillsborough Families Support Group) We're quite happy with it. He's appointed Lord
                  Chief Justice Stuart-Smith to look into this new evidence. We'll be getting our barrister to get in
                  touch with him because there's no format set for how this is going to go ahead and we'll be getting
                  our barrister to get in to him him to see could we have some more input into it.
                  M .L:
                             So there was slight concern. Was there anything more, Peter Kilfoyle, that Jack Straw could
                  have done?         Was there anything else that he was able to do through legislation or is this the
                  maximum he could have offered the families left after Hillsborough?
                  P E T E R K IL F O Y L E M P:
                             (Lab, Liverpool Walton)                I think in a very difficult situation' Jack Straw has shown
                  exemplary judgm ent and great sensitivity.                      I think what he's actually done in appointing an
                  independent senior judge to assess the new evidence, he actually complies with the constraints o f the
                  law as they currently stand and yet meets the initial concerns o f the parents and the families
                  involved. It's now a matter obviously for the Lord Justice to report on what steps, if any, need to be
                  taken after that assessment.
                  M .L:
                             So Phil Hammond, for the families o f the Hillsborough victims, what is the bottom line for


    COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
    private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent o f the copyright holder or the broadcasting
    authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

j Audio or Video cassettes o f this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
j                                                                                                         Job Number : C97-074003 - Page : 2
  ID:      03 July 1997 12:50                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 3



               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                                 - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: MANCHESTER OFFICE-0161 228 6922




              you?
              P.H:
                        The bottom line is, as I say, Hillsborough was no accident. We want to know what happened
              after 3.15, all the ones that were alive after 3.15. We've got witnesses now to prove that they were
              still alive. We want to know why that wasn't brought up in the inquests.
              M .L:
                         Peter, it was always said that Merseyside and the people o f Liverpool didn't get justice, that
              they never knew the full facts around it. Do you think finally the door's being opened now?
              P.K:
                         I think Jack Straw has given the opportunity now to hopefully, once and for all, get to the
              bottom o f what was and remains and always will, particularly for the families, be a tremendous
              tragedy but I think that Jack Straw's conduct today, the way in which he handled himself and the
              substance o f his statement to the House, will go a very, very long way towards assuaging the doubts
              o f those on Merseyside and indeed far beyond about the Hillsborough tragedy.
              M .L:
                         Just a quick word Phil, you're happy with the situation so far but more can be done?
              P.H:
                         Oh more can be done, yes, we'll be, go and do more.
              M .L:
                         Okay, great. Thank you very much. That's all. Back to you in the studio.
              SO RA H M EN :
                         Thank you M ark Lyons, our Political Correspondent there.

                                                                                       ***




COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied by Tellex for
private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holder or the broadcasting
authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                               Job N um ber : C 97-074003 - Page : 3
