 SCHEDULE 8


 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS



8.1     .r.ose parts of      stadium, including those fittings, services
        or equipment, which are specified in the tables to Conditions
        S.2 and 8.5 shai_ be inspected by the Holder, or his competent

        :     esen native, .z> ensure that they are in good order, maintains
        ±ree of danger, ana /or that they function properly to protect
        the safety of spectators.    Such checks shall include whatever
       testing is required to verify these conditions and any check or
       testing which is specifically required by the Local Authority at

       any reasonable time.     Tests of the strength or stability of any
       pan. of the stadium specified, shall be supervised and reported

       upon by a Chartered Structural Engineer on behalf of the Holder.
       Inspections shall be carried out at least at those times or

       maximum intervals indicated in the relevant tables, and after
       the repair of any defect found, that part of the stadium shall
       be similarly re-inspected.



8.2    lhe inspections set out in the table to this, condition are those
       ior which a record is required to be kept by Condition 1.5(2) of
       this Certificate.


       Table to Condition 8.2

       Inspection Required                              Maximum Interval

(1)   The whole of the electrical installation.         12 months.

(2)   The detail condition of the general

       fabric of all buildings or other
       structures of the stadium not
       mentioned in items 6 or 7. below.                12 months.

(3)   The manned or Police-controlled exit
       gate/door bells and the turnstile
       warning systems.                                12 months.

(4)   The condition and operational efficiency

       of all portable fire extinguishers and
       hose reels.                                     12 months.
                       -   23   -




Inspection Required                            Maximum Interval

The closed circuit television installation,
including the six cameras and screens and
the two (video) monitor screens (one of the
later beir.g located adjacent to the
attendance counter).                           12 months.


The detail condition and strength of
crush barriers, balustrading and
handrails to all raised levels and stairs,
and the fences and barriers provided
between the separate enclosures of the
stadium listed in Schedule 2, and the
blocks of seating in the Anfield Road
Stand and the separated ingress and
egress routes thereto, and the pitch
perimeter fencing.                             6 months,


The detail condition of all standing
surfaces, seats, steps, stairs, ramps
and all those doors, gates, gate posts,
boundary :r other walls accessible to
the public within or outside the stadium.      3 months.


The public address system.                     3 months.


The apparatus for recording the number
of spectators present (referred to
in Condition 2.2).                             3 months.


The fire alarm installation.                   3 months.


The emergency lighting and emergency
electric supply generator.                     1 month.



The records required by Condition 1.5(2) shall include any

reports or recommendations made by persons carrying out an
inspection and a record of any defect found and of the
re-inspection of that part after its repair.
                              -   24   -




Arrange- cr. „s shall be made to carry out the inspections

numbered       1), (2),    (6) and (7) ir. the table to Conditicr. £.2,

at a tire convenient to the Local Authority,             to enable it
to be   represented at those, or parts of those           inspections.


The inspections set out in the table to this             Condition are

those fcr which a record need not be kept.              Nevertheless, any
defects fc-jp.d which cause a contravention of Condition 1.11 shall
be remedied and the facts reported to the Holder.


Table to Condition 8.5


A.-— -Inspections required following          each certified use of the Stadium



(1)      A general visual inspection of the stadium as defined in
         Condition 1.11,          including all those items mentioned in

         iter.s (2),      (6) and (7) of the Table to Condition 2.2, for
         any damage       which might impair its safe    condition.



      Inspections required before each certified use of the Stadium


(1)      i..e operation     of the manned or Police—controlled exits
        bells referred to in Condition 3.5.


(2)      Tr.e manual operation of the fire alarms, using successively

        a different call point each time, so as to check all call
        points periodically.


(3)      Tr.e operation     of the emergency electric supply,     including
        the batteries and generator, to

        (a)      the emergency lighting
        (d )     the public address system

        (c)      the manned or Police-controlled exits bells
        (c)      the turnstile warning bells
        (e)      the fire alarms.


(4)      The clear andeasy opening of all 'manned exit' doors/gates.
31
!*                              25




     (5)    Tr.e operation of the public address system,     ir eluding

            tr.e cut-in and volume control located ir. the ? *   *   : r* o




            cir.'crol room.


     (6)    Tr.e operation of the six Police-operated clos;
            circuit television cameras ar.d screens,   includ ing the
            t.
             o    (video) monitor screens.


     (7)    Tr.e operation of internal telephone lines, ir.: luding
            those to and between the Police control room, the
            Pclice detention rooms, and the first aid rcor:


     (8)         i operation of the hand radio transmitter/i   ceiver
                 :s provided to comply with Condition 6.7.


     (9)    The operation of the six loud hailers kept ir. the
            Pclice control room.


     (10)   Tr.e operation of both the healthy/defective ir cicators
            for the fire alarm system, one located in the Pol ice
            c:ntrol room, and the other above the attendar ce counter
            cr. the first floor of the main stand.


     (11)   Tr.e operation of the spectator attendance cou: ter repeater
            located in the Police control room.


     (12)   The operation of the turnstile closing signal; from the
            Pclice control room.
