HILLSBOROUGH: “The Cook Report” 2 June 1994: “Kevin’s Mum”

The programme originated with Mrs Anne Williams, who lost her 15 year old son
Kevin at Hillsborough. The Cook Report alleged that there was evidence that Kevin
Williams was alive beyond 3.15pm, the cut-off time at the Inquest.

2.     The main evidence was a statement by SPC Deborah Martin of South
Yorkshire Police. In her first statement she said that at about 3.50pm Kevin Williams,
whilst in the mortuary, he made a noise, opened his eyes and said “Mum”. West
Midlands Police, investigating the disaster, felt this did not fit in with other evidence,
including a video recording of the mortuary, and interviewed Deborah Martin again.
This resulted in a second statement which did not support the evidence in the first
statement. Both statements were available to the Inquest.

3.      Deborah Martin subsequently said that she was put under pressure to make the
second statement. West Midlands Police believe that she was traumatised when she
made her first statement and they it was reasonable to try to reconcile the conflict of
her statement with other evidence.

4.     A n n e Williams’ MP Sir Malcolm Thornton agreed that Deborah Martin’s
evidence was ground to re-open the Inquest, and subsequently raised the issue in an
adjournment debate.

5.      The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police examined the allegations in
The Cook Report but concluded that there was no significant new evidence in the
programme on which to base further enquiries. [The allegations of improper conduct
and the suppression of evidence were examined by the High Court in November 1993,
after the families of six victims applied for a Judicial Review, but it dismissed claims
that the original inquest was flawed.]

6.     The Chief Constable complained to the Independent Television Commission
about inaccuracy and bias in the Cook Report. The ITC rejected the complaint, but
accepted that there were some errors of fact in the programme.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\MISC\JD-0374.DOC
