INQUIRY     INTO        THE           HILLSBOROUGH

       S T A D I U M            D I S A S T E R




                       Before


               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (A S S E S S O R S )




                          At

                The Town Hall,

                  Sheffield,

                          on

            Tuesday,    16th May,         1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                     (Morning s e s s i o n )

                                                Page
P.W. JACKSON Recalled
     Examined by Mr. Collins (Cont)              l
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Jackson             5
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Woodward            7
     Cross-Examined by   Mr. Glasgow            18
     Re-Examined by Mr.Collins                  29

MISS ALISON BENNETT Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                   31
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Hytner              37
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Jackson             38
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Woodward            38
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 42

D.J. HENNESEY Called

     Examined by Mr. Philips                    42
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Hytner              49
     Cross-Examined by  M r .Woodward           50
K. GOLDING Called

     Examined by Mr. Goldsack                   53
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward             58

I.J. CLARK Called

     Examined by Mr. Philips                    60
     Cross-Examined by  Mr. Woodward            73
     Cross-Examined by  M r .Glasgow            77
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 78
                            SECOND D A Y ’S PROCEEDINGS

                             TUESDAY,   16th MAY,    1989

                                (Iflorninq Session)

                      PETER WILLIAM JACKSON,        re-called

                      Examined    by MR.   COLLINS    (cont.)

Q.   Mr. Jackson, I think we had just got you through the
     turnstiles when we a d j o u r n e d ;y e s t e r d a y . When you got
     inside, you came through, can you remember which number
     turnstile?    Itwas one of          the ones, clearly, on the
     left-hand side.    A.     I think it is 3/4.

Q.   I am sorry?      A.     3 and 4,    the double   set.      I think     I
     came through     No.   4.

Q. When you got inside,          did you see any police         Officers?
   A.   Yes.

Q. Did you speak to any fsolice (Officer? A.      I made a
   passing comment that they would be better: lb ed outside
   but there were several people going to the turnstiles                        talking
   to Police (Officers.

Q. What was the attitude of people having got in through the
   turnstiles?  A.   Concern for what was happening outside.

Q.   I am sorry? A.         Concern      for what was happening       outside.

Q.    Was there any anger that you could see at the situation
     which had arisen?    A.   Not at that stage, no.    People
     were trying to make themselves understood to police
     officers who were not taking that much notice, to be
     honest.

Q. Was    there any signing that you could see to indicate where
   you    should go because you were making, I think you told us,
   for    the North Stand.    A.   I was going to the North Stand
   and    on my ticket it said to go through Gangway C.

Q.   Could you see Gangway C?    A.    I couldn't see a sign
     pointing to Gangway C.     The sign that I recall seeing
     was not in sequence.     I remember seeing A, B and then
     another letter but it wasn't C, so we went the other way
     and ended up facing the courtyard at the entrance to the
     West Stand.

Q. We know that there is a fence or - I am sorry, not a
   fence - a wall with a gate in it that divides effectively
   inside the Turnstiles 1-16 from A - G.  It is a sort of
   c ontinuation of that divide.   Did you go through that
   wall?    A.   No, we went as far as where the pointer is
                                      2



                                                         P. W. J A C K S O N
         now,   that wall there at the end of 1-8.   We went             that
         way,   realised it was the wrong way and came back.

    Q. So you then went round, did you, it would be the side of
       A.   Side of the North Stand.   The entry to the gangways
       is actually under the North Stand.

    Q. So you have     to go sort    of behind the North        Stand,   do you?
       A.   Ve s .

    Q. Did you see on to the terracing        at all,    the way you went?
       A.   No.

    Q. What sort of time was        this by now?    A.         Abut   five to
       three.

    Q. The teams then were just about on the pitch?   A.   I
V      heard a roar while I was outside to indicate the teams
       had come out.   By the time I got to my seat, they were
       still warming yp.

    Q.   Before you reached your seat and as youwwere looking
         to see where you could go, did you see any Police activity?
         A.   Yes, a large number of Fblice Officers - about 20 -
         came out from under the North Stand, as I was about to
         enter under the North Stand.

    Q. Where did they appear to be going?   A.   They appeared to
       be going towards the turnstiles.   They had a sense of
       urgency, as if they knew they had a purpose in going towards
       the turnstiles.

    Q . No doubt you did not know what the purpose was unless
        anyone said anything?     A.  No.

    Q.   Anyway,   did you eventually     get up to your seat?           A.     Yes.

    Q. Was it empty when you reached it?          A.    No, there were
       two people in the seats that I knew were mine and my
       b r o t h e r -in-law's who didn't have tickets.

    Q.    Didn't have tickets at all or didn't have tickets for the
         Stand?    A.Well, they didn't have    tickets for our
         seats.    I got the impression they did not have tickets
         at all for the Stand.    I don't know whether they had
         terrace tickets.

    Q. Did you ask them wh ether they had tickets?   You simply
       ejected them from your seats.    A.   I moved themaLong
       and Peter Garrett, who joined us later, ejected them
       from the row, never mind the seats.

    Q.   I see.     Do you know where they went?          A.      No idea.

    Q. Were there still empty seats in the Stand when you got
       there?   A.   When I arrived, yes.
                                 3

                                                         P. W. J A C K S O N

Q. And where exactly were your seats in the Stand?
   A.   Row 5, I think I was Seat 55.

Q. Which end of the Stand is that?            A.      That is the end
   that is close to the West, Stand.               It is the Liverpool
   end.

Q. The Liverpool end of   the North Stand and five rows up
   or five rows back.     By the time you got into your seat,
   what stage had been reached on the field?      A.  They
   were still warming up, about two or three minutes before
   kick-off.

Q. Were you aware of anything going on in the terracing and,
   if so, when?   Anything untoward, that is.      A.     As
   soon as I got to my seat I could see the centre two ---
   Well, I didn't realise there were two pens but the centre
   pens were very, very   full.   At that stage people were
   trying to climb out into the pens at the side and people
   were being pulled up into the West Stand.     What was
   surprising was that the pens on either side of the two
   centre pens looked quite empty, relatively e m p t y .  You
   could see spaces, you could see terrace, plenty of room
   for people.

Q. At this stage, just before the game started, the picture
   you paint is of people getting out over the sides ---
   A.   Getting out over the sides.

Q.   That is to say, to 1 and 2 and 5, 6 and 7, and some being
     pulled up into the Stand behind. A. That is correct.

Q.   At that stage, were you aware of anyone trying to come
     over the front?  A.    I wasn't aware of anybody, no.

Q.   Did that change?       A.   Yes.

Q.   At what stage were you  first aware of people trying to get
     over the front and onto the    pitch. A.     About one or
     two minutes into the game.

Q. What drew your attention to that?   Was that because
   someone said it or because you kept your eyes on the
   terracing or what?    A.  I was watching the terracing,
   rather than the match.   I could see something wasn't
   right - I don't know what it was.

Q. Were you aware       that it was because    of a crush or
   because of ---         A.    No, not at      that stage. No.

Q.   When you saw people beginning to go over, what did you
     think was happening?   Did you think in terms of a pitch
     invasion or not?   A.     No.I believed  it was people
     trying to get out from what looked to be a too full pen.
                             4


                                                P. W. J A C K S O N
     Whether it was a crush from the back, I didn't know, but
     that was my impression, that there was no hooliganism
     that I could see or fear.

Q. Could you see the reaction of the Police Officers         on the
   perimeter as people were first trying to get over         on to
   the pitch?   A.   I remember one chap coming over         and
   being led away as if arrested but other than that         I
   have no recollection - no precise recollection.

Q. Were you aware of the gates    in the perimeter    fencing
   opening at anystage?   A.      No.

Q. And then, as I think we all know, it developed, did it
   not, with Officers and fans standing on the perimeter
   fence?   A.   That's right.

Q.   Making gestures like this, that is  trying to apparently
     persuade people to go back.    A.   That's right, and
     fans on the edge of the pitch trying to attract the
     players' attention.

Q. Did you hear any tannoy    announcements   at any stage while
   this was going on?   A.      No.

Q.   The game stopped at shortly after five past three - we
     know that - and the situation developed.     Did you stay
     in the  Stand and watch, it develop?   A.We stayed
     in the  Stand until about 4 o'clock.

Q.   I am sorry?   A.   We stayed in the Stand until about
     4 o'clock until after the game was  called off, postponed.

Q.   I do not think I need ask you in detail about the situation
     on the pitch, it is really all on the video and we have
     had a    description from the last witness.  Suffice it
     to say that there were a large number of people obviously
     in a state of collapse and there was the make-shift
     use of advertising hoardings by fans and, indeed, Police
     Officers trying to assist to resuscitate people.
     A.    That is correct.

Q. Eventually an ambulance, and then more than one arrived,
   and some order was put on the scene of considerable
   confusion.   Is that a fair description?   A.   Eventually,
   ye s .

Q.   The only thing I would like to ask you is the use of the
     tannoy.    You were sitting there from the time the game
     stopped until, you told us, about 4 o'clock.   What use
     did you hear of the tannoy during that time?    A.   The
     first I recall hearing was when Kenny Dalgleish went into the
     Police O bservation Point and appealed to the fans - I 'can't
     remember exactly what he said - but to keep calm and
     co-operate.
£\
                                           5


                                                               P. W. J A C K S O N

     Q. That, I think we will hear from other evidence, was not
        until about 3.45.    A.   I remember it being about what
        would have been half-time, yes.    The next I recall hearing
        was about 15, 20 minutes later when they announced that the
        game would be postponed, that people had to keep their
        tickets and would everybody stay in the ground for a
        reasonable period longer to avoid clashing with the
        emergency vehicles.

     Q.   There is, I think, some suggestion maybe from other
          witnesses, that at some stage there was an announcement
          for people to get off the pitch.   Did you remember that?
          A.I remember people saying that    they had heard that
          but I personally did not.

     Q.   You did not hear it?            A.    No.

     Q.    There was, we know, quite a lot of noise, continuing   noise,
          from the Nottingham Forest end and, indeed, from the
          Liverpool end.    Did that continue?    A.    The noise from
          the Nottingham Forest end continued forLabout 15 minutes,
          20 minutes into what would have been the game until they
          realised that it was not perhaps what they thought it
          was and that there was a serious incident going on.
          Then they were very muted.

     Q.   I think you, because of your position with Mr. Taylor,
          then went afterwards and were interviewed on the local
          radio and so on?   A.   That's correct.  We went on the
          pitch, looked at the gates and went up to the press box.

     Q. And,   yes,    you investigated afterwards            the scene.
          A.   Yes.
               MR.    HYTNER:      I have no questions,         thank you.

                           Cross- e x a m i n e d   by MR.   JACKSON:

     Q. Mr. Jackson, I would like you to wear the same hat but
        at rather a different angle for the moment.   Pursuant
        to the Government's request that there be an inquiry
        into this incident, were you aware that in the national
        and local press there were what turned out to be a
        large number of reckless statements made about the
        incident?   A.   I am aware that statements were made,
        ye s .

     Q. Are you aware that those statements have caused the
        deppest resentment upon Merseyside about the incident
        we are concerned about?   A.   I am aware of that.
                             6


                                            P. W. J A C K S O N

Q.   In addition, has there been a feeling on Merseyside
     that the appointment of the West Midlands Police to take
     the statements for use in this Inquiry could lead to an
     unfortunate slant being put on the evidence that we
     shall hear?   A.   Some people have voiced that opinion,
     ye s .

Q.   Because of that, have you taken something in excess of
     200 statements from people who suggested that they
     would prefer to give their evidence direct without
     going through the Police?     A.   From a combination
     of sources, yes, the Football Supporters' Association
     has taken its own statements.     We have liaised with
     the solicitors acting for the families and obtained
     statements from that quarter.     We have also liaised
     with the Liverpool City Council and obtained statements
     from them.   All in all, aoout 200 statements.




                                     (But are you now happy
                                 7

                                                  P . JACKSON'


Q. But are you now happy to be able to say that after all those
   precautions have been taken, that the outline given by
   Counsel to the Inquiry yesterday reflected almost exactly
   the views of the 200-odd statements that you collected
   yourself? - A. Exactly.

Q. Pursuant to the observations that we must make this thorough
   but swift, is it the position that if required you could
   produce 200 as it were independently taken statements that
   would confirm the matters that you anticipate will be called
   before  this Tribunal? - A. Subject to the practicalities
   of getting 200 people here, certainly.

Q. And further than that have you made as many of those state­
   ments available to the Inquiry as you feel proper and they
   have sought from you? - A. They have all been made available.

Q. Bearing those matters in mind are you quite content that
   the fears that have been expressed publicly as to the possible
   bias in this Inquiry have been completely and thoroughly
   dispelled? - A. I am content.

          MR. JACKSON:    Yes,       thank you.

          MR. MULLER:     No questions.

           MR. DUGGAN:    No questions.

          MR. MAXWELL:     No questions.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Mr. Woodward?

          MR. WOODWARD:     May I please, my Lord.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q.    Mr. Jackson, you have been to many many football matches.
     You have been to Hillsborough before? - A. I have been to
     Hillsborough before this game twice.

Q. So far as you are concerned were you at the semi-final the
   previous year? - A. I was.

Q. What time did you arrive at the ground in 1988? - A. About
   half-p a s t - 2 .

Q.   Did you make the same sort of progress to the ground over
     the same sort of route in 1988 as you did in 1989? - A.
     Not quite the same route.   We took a slightly different
     traffic route.   We went on the M62 to start with.

Q. But having got to Sheffield? - A. Having got to Sheffield
   exactly the same route.

Q. What time did you get to the gates to the Leppings Lane
   enclosure? - A. This year or last year?
                                     P. JACKSON



Q. In 1988? - A. About 25-past-2 to half-past-2.

Q. So that was a little later than your arrival this year?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Because you told the Inquiry that you got there about 2.15?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. You have said yesterday in your evidence that unlike last
   year there was something different about the policing.
   What was the difference? - A. The difference I noticed
   was that this year there was no checking of tickets until
   you got to the turnstile.  Last year my recollection is
   that the checking point was at the outer gates.  Now
   D.C. Foster yesterday seemed to think it was further away
   but my recollection is at the outer gates.

Q. So if we can ask the Usher to point to it those are the
   outer gates, the blue gates that allow to the enclosure
   to go to the turnstiles? - A. In the vicinity of those
   gates.

Q. At 2.25 or the time you arrived in 1988 was there much
   of a crowd of people present? - A. There was a crowd of
   people, yes.

Q. And on their approach to those gates was it the similar
   sort of crowd as you experienced in 1989? - A. No.

Q. What was   different? - A. There was less of   a crowd in 1988.
   Although   it was later the crowd was not as   big in volume.

Q. In 1988 you say that you were asked to have your ticket,
   you had your ticket checked at about the gates? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. Was that just by an Officer that you happened to pass or
   did you get the impression of something more organised?
   - A. I got the impression it was an organised operation
   to check tickets.   It certainly happened at previous semi­
   finals I have been to before that.

Q. It is this one I am asking you about.    Do you follow? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember it in 1988? - A. I do remember it in 1988.

Q. Can you tell the Inquiry how many Police there were
   checking? - A. No.

Q. Were you only aware of the Officer that actually asked
   you? - A. No, I recall there being what I remember as a
   line of Officers.

Q. So at the later time that you arrived in 1988 you were able
   to see, were you, across the arc of those gates? - A. At
   that time, yes.
                            9

                                       P. JACKSON



Q. It was as clear as that?  You could see that there was a
   line of Officers? - A. I could see in my immediate vicinity
   as I was progressing to go in there was a line of Officers,
   yes.

Q. As close as we are here?     What sort of gaps were there? -
   A. I can't remember.

Q.    Could it be that on your approach in 1988 what had happened
     was that you had gone through two or three or a couple of
     Officers who had happened to stop you and ask you? - A. That
     was not the impression I got.

Q. And they may have asked other people in your vicinity? -
   A. They did ask other people in my vicinity.

Q.    But were you able to see that there was a line of Officers
     actually doing that in 1988? - A. I could see there was a
     line of Officers in the vicinity that I was doing that,
     certainly.   Whether I extended across I don't know.

Q.   Are you able to say how many Officers? - A. No,   I am not
     able to say how many Officers.

Q. Was it more than two? - A. It was more than two.

Q. Were there many people being ....  What happened with these
   people that were being checked by the Officers.  Did you
   notice? - A. I did not see any without tickets.  Those
   with tickets went in.

Q.   You saw no one being turned away? - A.   I did not see any­
     body being turned away, no.

Q. In 1988 you then went through this check that you have
   described.  Are you sure there was such a check being
   carried out? - A. I am sure in my own mind there was such
   a check being carried out.

Q.   May it not have been you were asked by a couple of Officers
     who happened to be there when you were going through:
     "Got your ticket?  Can we see it?" - A. That was not the
     impression I got, no.

Q. But that is the sort of thing that does happen in the
   proasimity to football grounds, isn't it, the Officers may
   stop you and say:   "Have you got a ticket?"  - A. That
   does happen, yes.

Q.   If you have not got a ticket at an all ticket match those
     Officers saying:  "Well you had better go away"? - A.
     Sometimes, yes.

Q. In 1988 having gone through those gates that you have
   described, that are being indicated now by the Usher,
                            10

                                     P. JACKSON



  were you going to the stand or to the terraces? - A. I was
  going to the north stand but the opposite end to the end
  I was in this year.

Q. Having gone through the gates did you just make your w a y
   to any turnstile? - A. It was in the vicinity of the
   turnstiles I entered through this year but yes.  There
   was no crowding as such in the in&er perimeter.

Q. Within that area between the gates and the turnstiles last
   year at the later time it was significantly freer of people
   than in 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. And the situation in 1988 was that you were able, with
   reasonable convenience, to go through the gates and get to
   the turnstiles? - A. That is correct.

Q. Without having to go through a great throng of people? -
   A. I don't recall going through a great throng of people
   at all, no.

Q. But that was quite different in 1989? - A. Very different
   in 1989.

Q. When you approached the ground in 1989 you arrived at the
   gates at about 2.15? - A. About that time, yes.

Q. Was there a crowd before you actually got to the gates,
   as being indicated by the Usher? - A. Sorry?

Q. On the pavement as it were, between the pavement and the
   road? - A. Not at that time.

Q. So you were able to walk to the gates were you without
   being impeded by people? - A. There was no line of people
   waiting to go through at that stage.  People were still
   proceeding through the gates.

Q. At 2.15? - A. At 2.15.

Q. What was happening inside the gates at 2.15? - A. There was a
   mass of people about 30-35 yards long trying to get to
   Turnstiles A-C, 1-8.




                                    /Q. You   wer e
                                             P.   W.   JACKSON




Q. You were given a statement about this? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. Would it be right to describe what you saw on this
   occasion in 1989 as you were going to the turnstiles from
   the gate that it was crowded and although there was a
   crush building up, it was no worse than you had
   previously encountered at other football grounds? - A.
   Once I joined the back of the line, yes.   That would be
   correct at that time.

Q. Once you had joined the back of the line?   What do you
   mean by that? - A. There was a mass of people trying to
   get to the turnstiles.   I joined the back of that crowd.

Q. That is the crowd, the crush, you are talking about? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That crowd and crush, was that no worse than you
   experienced at other football grounds? - A. It was not
   pleasant, but it was no worse than I had encountered.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is within the perimeter
     gate? - A. That is within the perimeter fence, my Lord.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   However,   that started to get
     greater? - A. That is correct.

Q. The throng increased? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers in that area? - A. Yes.

Q. That is the area between the gates and the turnstiles 1
   to 16? - A. Yes.

Q.    On foot? - A. On foot.   I saw four Officers.   Four or
     five Officers.    I recall there being one by each of the
     double turnstiles.    I recall distinctly there being one
     Officer at the side of the line of people, the mass of
     people.

Q. I am sorry? - A. The mass of people, at the side, by the
   concertina gate A.

Q. You keep talking about a line of people.   Which
   direction does this line go in? - A. The line is a mass.
   I apologise if I am misleading you.   It is a mass.
   There is no line or queue at that stage whatsoever.

Q.   However, you noticed the Officers by the turnstiles,
     distributors, as you have described.    At this time in
     that area there were not only those few Officers that you
                                             P.   W.   JACKSON


     have described but there were mounted Police about, were
     there not? - A. I did not see any mounted Policemen.

Q. You did not see a single mounted Policeman? - A. I did
   not see a single mounted Policeman.

Q. Before you got to the... - A. I did not see a single
   mounted Policeman, full stop.

Q. In the area of the gates and the forecourt there were
   some 47 Policemen and you saw how many? - A. Five.

Q. Did the crowd that you joined appear to be orderly? - A.
   It was not disorderly.   Its spirit was all right.

Q. Did the crowd appear to be well behaved? - A. Certainly.

Q. Could you see any reason why they were not progressing
   towards the turnstiles in an ordered manner? - A. Other
   than there were no queues, which obviously assist.

Q. Could you see any reason why there should not be queuing
   to go to the turnstiles? -A. I cannot explain why no
   attempts were made to form queues.

Q. Yes, but the objective is clear.     There are a number of
   gates there, 1 to 16? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you need to be told to form a queue?   Did you
   personally need to be told to form a queue? - A. I did
   not, no.   I would be surprised if anybody did, but it
   was not possible to form a queue.   There was a crowd of
   people trying to get in.

Q. This was at 2.15.   Were they pushing forward? -A. No,
   they were not pushing forward.   They were orderly in
   that respect.

Q.    Were they keeping a reasonable distance from each other?
     - A. When I first arrived the distance was reasonable.
     It was not comfortable, but it was reasonable.

Q. Were you being pushed? - A. I was being pushed in the
   later stages of my attempts to get in, certainly.

Q. These must be people who have come on and thrust
   themselves upon you? - A. No, they are people from the
   back, pressure from the back.

Q.    Well, the   back is   definable? - A. Well,I could not
     define it because I could not see it.

Q. You joined and people came and pressed up and thrust
   against you, is that what you are saying? - A. No, I am
                                        P.   W.   JACKSON



saying there was pressure from behind and it did close
people together.   There were no distinct thrusts or
surges as such.   There was a gradual increase of
pressure.

Do you mean a gradual increase of numbers? - A, Possibly
the same.   It is synonymous, yes.

Well, it may not be the same.   Are you intending to
describe a build-up of numbers or a build-up of fans who
are pressing and thrusting against the turnstiles, not
troubling to think about themselves and forcing their way
forward without any kind of order or queue? - A. I cannot
describe the build-up of numbers because I did not look
behind me.   I got the impression, as I said yesterday,
there was a build-up from the pressure I could feel on me
as I proceeded forward.   There was no overt pushing.
Nobody was pushing to get in, as such.

You did not push and nobody around you pushed? - A. That
is correct.

Could you see any reason, accordingly, why they weren’t
going through the turnstiles if it was ordered but not in
lines? - A. The turnstiles seemed to be slow but I could
not explain that, no.

Were people struggling to get in through the turnstile
entrances? - A. I could not see that from where I was at
quarter past two.   When I eventually proceeded towards
the mouth of the turnstiles there was a bit of jostling
for position but people were ordered.   They were helping
each other to get through.

At some stage you could get    from the edge ofthe queue,
the edge of the people, to the turnstiles and there comes
a point where from being a person at the back you are a
person at the front.    At the back before you got
concerned about the pressure, did you turn round to say
to anybody, "Back off a bit.     Give me some space.    It's
not necessary"?   Did you do anything like that? -A. I
personally did not, no.    I remember there being shouts
for people to back off but at the stage I heard those
shouts it was not possible to do that.

You did not ask anybody to give you a bit of space? - A.
No.

You just pressed on with the others, did you? - A. I did
not press on, as such, but I proceeded onwards, yes, at
the shuffling pace the line was moving.

Then you heard people being  asked to move back, did you?
- A. I heard people shouting to move back.
4   -



                                      14




                                                    P.   W.   JA CKSON


        Q. Did people move back? - A. As I say, it was not possible
           to move back, as such, at that point.   It was possible
           to move because as I explained yesterday, a young lady
           felt faint and space was made for her.   An elderly
           gentleman felt ill and space was made for him to get out.

        Q. From the description of that it would seem as though the
           crowd was able to order itself as necessary? - A. But
           that was difficult to do that.   It took a long time to
           get the young lady through the turnstiles.   I say a long
           time, she was only 5, 10, 15 yards away, but it took
           minutes rather than seconds.

        Q. Did you have any difficulty going into the turnstile? -
           A. No great difficulty, as such, no, once I got to the
           mouth.

        Q.    Were the turnstiles you saw, the one you went through,
             the ones adjacent to it, did they appear to be operating
             properly? - A. They appeared to be when I went through
             them, yes.

        Q. A steady flow going through the one you went through? -
           A. As I say, from the back it seemed unnaturally slow,
           but as I said, when I got to it there were people going
           through smoothly.

        Q.    When you heard the calls for people to move back, where
             were the Police Officers, could you see them? - A. I do
             not recall seeing Police Officers at that stage.

        Q. At what stage did you see the Police Officers by the
           turnstiles? - A. I recall seeing the Police Officers when
           I first arrived at about quarter past two.




                                    /A. Those by the turnstiles
                                             P.W. JACKSON



Those by the turnstiles? - A. By the turnstiles,   and within
minutes of that the Police Officer at the side.

At about 2.15, whilst you were having your ticket checked, you
could see the Police Officers down by the turnstiles, could
you? - A. I did not have my ticket checked at 2.15.

I beg your pardon.  As you arrived at the gate where you were
liable to get checked. - A. Last year.  I could see Police
Officers there.  I remember there being a Police Officer in
the vicinity of the gate throughout, because people were
shouting to him in some way to open the gate.

Which gate was that?   - A. Gate A.   The blue concertina gate
A.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The one on the extreme left? - A.
The extreme left.  That corner gate.

     MR. WOODWARD:   So the position is this, as you go
through the gates to go to the turnstiles you can see the
Police Officers? - A. I can see four Police Officers on
turnstiles.

H q w long did it take you to get from the gate to the
turnstiles? - A. From the gate to the turnstile?

Yes? - A. And in to the turnstile?  I arrived about quarter-
past-2 and I was in by about 10-to or 5-to-3.  So 25 minutes
at l e a s t .

When you got inside you were asked by Mr. Collins about what
was happening then, and you told the Inquiry there were Police
Officers about? - A. That is correct.

Did you speak to any Police Officer? - A. I recall, as I say,
making a passing comment that the Police Officers might be
better employed outside, or words to that effect.

Did you speak to a Police Officer? - A. Not to a specific
Police Officer.  There were two or three grouped round the
turnstile I went through.

There were quite a lot of people going through the turnstiles.
To whom was this passing comment directed?  Did you speak to a
Policeman? - A. Not face to face, no.

To whom did you utter this comment? - A. To the group of two
or three Police Officers that were outside the turnstiles I
came through, or inside the turnstile.

Which was it? - A. It was 3 or 4.     I think it was turnstile 4.

Outside or inside? - A. The ground side of the turnstile,    my
Lord.
                                              P.W. JACKSON


You actually approached them, did you? - A. I had to walk past
them.

And you spoke to them face to face? - A. No, as I say I did
not speak face to face.  I did not stop an individual
Policeman and say anything, but there were people speaking on
a face to face basis with several Police Officers, and the
gist of the conversations they were having was clear to me.

You listened to the conversations, did you? - A. I did not
stop and listen to the conversations, no.  People were
actually gesticulating outside as well at that stage.

You noticed that there was a number of Police Officers who
seemed to be making their way in a particular direction? - A.
Y e s . S u b sequently, y e s .                ,

At what point was that? - A. That was as I went under the
entrance to the north s t a n d s , so that would be may be a
minute or two minutes, if that, later.

Was the crowd orderly? - A. At that stage, yes.

Well behaved? - A. Yes.   The crowd inside or outside?

At any stage? - A. At that stage I don't know what the crowd
was like outside.

The crowd you were in? - A. The crowd I was in was orderly.

You started to go to the wrong entrance, did not you? - A.
That is correct.

Was that the entrance you were going to, the entrance into      the
north end of the west stand terraces? - A. I am sorry?

Having gone through the turnstiles and you then started to
make your way to ;the wrong entranced? - A. I turned right
instead of left.

Taking you where?  Towards the centre tunnel? - A. Could you
jump the pointer over, please.  Towards that.       This side.
Through the turnstiles towards that gate t h e r e .

The gate in the wall, do you mean? - A. The blue gate that
runs through and divides the west stand and north stand
entrances.  The blue railing fence.

Did you get up to that fence? - A. I got    to the railing fence.
I could see the courtyard b e y o n d .
                                   /



So you turned to your right or your left as you came through
the turnstile? - A. Right instead of left.

And then having realised your mistake you started to make your
way along? - A. That is only a very short distance, in fact.
                                17


                                                   P.W. JACKSON


Q. You found your place and you found someone sitting in it,         in
   such a position he should not have been in? - A. Yes.

Q.   You saw   the kick off, did you? - A. Yes,   I did see it.

Q.   Did you   see the team come on to the pitch? - A. No.

Q.    Was the team on the pitch when you arrived on your seat? - A.
     When I arrived in my seat the team was on the pitch, yes.

Q.    And the team came out at, I think,   about 2.54? - A. I take
     your word for that, yes.

Q. Did you notice any difficulties in the west stand - in the
   west terraces? - A. In the west terraces.     I noticed that the
   two centre pens seemed to be very f u l l . People were trying to
   get out at that stage.

Q. What do you mean by that? - A. What do I mean by what?

Q. Going out in which direction? - A. They were going up into the
   stand, the west stand.  They were being pulled up.  At that
   stage I could see people trying to climb out into pens 1 and
     2.

Q. Are you sure about that? - A. I am positive about that, my
   Lord.

Q. That they were trying to climb out of the stand, out of the
   terrace up into the stand? - A. They were being pulled up,
   when I say "climbing".

Q. This is before the match had started? - A. This is minutes
   before the match starts, yes.

Q. In the period whilst the team is on the pitch? - A. The team
   is on the pitch.

Q. You saw people climbing up from the terraces to the west
   stand? - A. That is my recollection, yes.

Q. I suggest to you that did not happen until some time later? -
   A. Well, that is not my recollection.

Q. Were there many people combing up? - A. Not many as such.          It
   was individuals climbing up rather than a steady stream.

Q. I must put this to you, that that sort of climbing up to get
   from the terrace up on to the stand did not happen until after
   the kick off had occurred and the game was under way, and in
   fact the crisis had already happened down at the front? - A.
   That is not my recollection.  My recollection is when I
   arrived at my seat people were being pulled up, perhaps more
   accurately.

Q. In numbers? - A. One or two, certainly.
                                 18


                                                      P.W. JACKSON


Q. Did you notice whether there was any flow of people from the
   centre pens to the wings? - A. I did not notice a steady flow.
   N o , I could see people trying to get o u t .

Q. Did you notice any surging or swaying in the central pens? -
   A. Not that I recall, no.

Q. Were you present in your seat at the time there was a beach
   ball being bounced up and down? - A. I don't remember a beach
   ball.

Q.   In pens 3-4? - A. I don't remember the beach ball.

Q.   You did not see that? - A. I did not see it. I may have         been
     there.  I don't recall seeing it.

Q. It is not unusual to see swaying in a terrace crowd,         is it? -
   A. Not unusual at all, no.

Q. And of course it may depend upon precisely where one looks in
   a terrace what the impression is of the state of the terrace?
   Was it packed towards the back, pens 3 and 4? - A. It looked
   full at the back.

Q. Did there appear to be room for more to come in? - A.         I don't
   recall making that observation.

Q.   That there was not room? - A. That there was.

Q.   It did not strike you? - A. It did not strike me that   at the
     back no more people would get in.   At the front they looked on
     top of each other.

Q. On the question of gates being opened in the perimeter fence,
   what are you saying about that at the time you were sitting in
   your seat? -A. I am saying I don't recall seeing gates being
   opened.  I am now saying they were closed.  I don't recall
   seeing it.

Q. You don't recall it.     Thank you.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. G L A S G O W :

Q. Mr. Jackson, you had something of a bird's eye view of the
   horrific scene that developed underneath you, did not you? -
   A. Yes, I suppose that is fair.

Q. I expect it is a horrible thing to recall, but the fact
   remains that you were in - dare one say - a good vantage
   position to see what was going on on that terracing? - A. I
   would not describe it as such, but possibly yes.

Q. I am sure you appreciate I don't mean in any sense to be
   facetious about that, but the fact is you are able to help us
   because you were in a relatively safe position from which you
   could see at relatively close hand what was going on? - A.
   Yes.
                              19


                                                P.W. JACKSON



Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am not sure I am very clear
     where you were.  Would you mind going over.   Is that where you
     were? - A. About t h e r e .

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   So you are looking across to your right
     with the scene developing from a position in which you can see
     almost the entirety of the terrace right back to the entrance
     to the tunnel? - A. Yes.  At 2-minutes-to-3, yes.  The vision
     became blurred as people came up.  Well, not blurred, but the
     observation point became worse, if you like, as more people
     stood in front of the terrace.

Q. I am sure nobody means to be critical, Mr. Jackson, but the
   fact remains that even those who were physically present on
   that day had different recollections, and I am sure you will
   accept there are honest and different recollections of
   precisely the way in which the scene developed? - A. That is
   undoubtedly true.

Q. But even allowing for those differences it was difficult even
   for you even with your advantaged position to get a clear idea
   of precisely what was going wrong? - A. Yes, that is a fair
   comment.

Q. And even after it had become apparent to you that something
   very serious had gone wrong, you really had no idea of the
   mechanism by which that had developed, which is what we are
   all looking into now, had you? - A. No idea as to any idea of
   causation, no.

Q. But because of your interest particularly in the game and your
   responsibility as a solicitor to some of the supporters, you
   had an interest to go round and make your own enquiries
   immediately afterwards, I think? - A. That is correct.

Q. And again I mean no criticism, but after you had formed an
   impression and from what you had been told, you sought out the
   publicity of the radio vans in order to make your views plain
   on that day? - A. We thought it wise for us to do that, yes.

Q. Again I stress I am not criticising.  That was something which
   you thought was helpful to do? - A. We thought that would be
   useful, y es.

Q. And the views which you expressed at that time, I am sure
   honestly and sincerely held, were very critical of the way in
   which the situation had been Policed? - A. I can't remember
   what I said at the time.    You may have me at a disadvantage,
   but I remember saying that I had been told - I stress it was
   only what I had been told - that a gate had been opened.    I
   remember being critical of the organisation of the game.
   Sp e c i f i ca l l y . ...

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Of the gate? - A. Of the game.
     The match.   Anything more specific I don't recall with any
     clarity.   It was a difficult time.
                                    20


                                                         P.W. JACKSON



     Q.        MR. GLASGOW:   Please don't be apprehensive.   I am not
          about to cross-examine you as to what you said.   It would
          provide no useful purpose, Mr. Jackson, of course.   I just
          simply wanted your general recollection that you had been very
          critical in the course of your interview of the way in which
          the situation generally had been controlled? - A. That would
          be fair.

     Q. And the justification which you had sincerely for making those
        criticisms at that time was as a result of what you yourself
        had seen and then what you had been told about the
        circumstances in which the gate had been opened? - A. That is
        correct.

,s   Q. And additionally, at that time, equally sincerely, you were
        critical and you were annoyed about the way in which the
        situation had been Policed outside the ground which you
        thought had been wrong in your experience? - A. I don't
        remember actually specifying that particular allegation, if
        you like.

     Q. It was the opening of the gate that rather preoccupied you? -
        A. The opening of the gate was surprising.            It was difficult
        to understand at that stage why it had been done, and it was
        gates rather than gate even at that stage.            We were told that
        gates A and C, by the supporters we saw outside at about half-
        past-4, q u a rt e r - t o - 5 . One supporter told me gate A.  I was
        present whilst somebody else said gate C.            So there was a
        suggestion at that stage it was two g a t e s .




                                    /Q. Your own personal experience
                                21



                                               P.    W.   JACKSON
Q.   Your own personal experience of the build-up to the
     trouble had been limited to seeing a phalanx of Officers
     moving urgently from one part of the ground towards
     another?   A.   From inside the ground, yes.   I mean,
     outside, obviously I had been in a crush.

Q. You had had your own experiences       outside,    I understand.
   A.   Yes.

Q. Could you just help us again, where was that phalanx
   of Officers, as you describe, moving from when you first
   saw them?   A.    From the gangway under the North Stand,
   the long gangway.

Q.   I wonder if the usher can blp us again.   Is that where
     you actually mean?   A.   They came out from under further
     on, from around that area, and were moving towards the
     turnstiles.   That is the general route.

Q. Which, coincidentally, was going in the direction in which
   you personally felt that there ought to have been more
   policing because you yourself had been trying to encourage
   Police Officers ---   A.  That's correct.

Q.   -- to go outside.    We have been told by Mr. Collins very
     fairly, and of course we all accept, that the general
     behaviour of the fans outside had not been violent or
     offensive in any way, and I am sure that was your experience
     as well.   A.    That was my experience.

Q.   There is, as Mr. Collins himself said, one problem that
     repeatedly occurs and it is the obstructing and offensive
     habit that people have of urinating in public in these
     central areas.   Did you see that for yourself?
     A.   Outside or inside the ground?

Q.   Inside the ground.    A.    Inside   the ground,      I did.

Q.   It is, of course, something, is it not, which does cause both
     offense and obst r u c t i o n ? Would you accept that?   A.   I
     would accept it can cause offence.         I would accept it can
     cause obstruction.         On this particular occasion, I wouldn't
     have -----   What I saw was no obstruction, if you understand
     what I am getting at.

Q.   There are very clearly signed and numerous toilets with
     large lettering over the top of them all the way round
     under the Stands, are there not?   A.   I don't know.

Q.   Would you like to look at a photograph to refresh your
     memory?   A.   Well, I will take your word for it.

Q.    Perhaps we had better have a look.      I have got one here
     that shows them both, on both sides     of the gate that you
     would have come through.    It is 21    of the Police photographs.
                                           P.    W.    JAC K S O N

Just have a look at that because, for the sake of the note,
Mr. Jackson, that identifies the gate in the wall through
which you wrongly turned.   Do you remember?   A.   That
is wrong.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I just interrupt?   E v e rybody
who is appearing here to represent parties has got both
volumes of photographs, I hope?

     MR. COLLINS:   I think we must be looking at a
different volume because my 21 is that, which is ---

     THE WITNESS:        Is that the photograph, Mr. Glasgow?
That is incorrect,      in fact.   South Yorkshire Police
Document 1.

     MR. COLLINS:   This is the South Yorkshire                        Police?
I am sorry, this we have not got.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           I want to get this question
of photographs sorted out,         if we can at an early stage.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, it would be very helpful and,
sir, it is not critical, again of anybody, if we could
have one combined volume, if at all possible, of photographs
because they are being handed round.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Let us get the position clear.
I, at the moment, have only got two volumes of photographs,
one of which is outside the ground and the other, which
runs to a much larger number - up to 51 photographs -
inside.   Has everybody got those?

     MR.   GLASGOW:   Are they,       first of all,             sir,   West
Midlands   Police photographs?

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      They are.

     MR.   GLASGOW:      With those clear             fronts?

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      Yes.

     MR.   DYSON:                We don't       even have those,          sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           This    is what        I feared.          Are
there more copies?

     MR.   GOLDSACK:      There are a further 20 copies                   being
produced   today.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, you will have them today,
so that is those two volumes but they do not run consecutively
                                 23


                                             P. W. J A C K S O N

because the first volume goes up to 13 and the second
one starts at 1 again.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, in addition there are two
bundles of photographs of approximately the same size
as the other two - one larger and one smaller - produced
by the South Yorkshire Police which are rather more
contemporary photographs, they themselves which are
being put in.   Now, I think that the distribution of
them has been more limited.

      MR. COLLINS:         No, the position is that there are
a number of p h o t o g r a p h s _which iwere handed by South
Yorkshire to West Midlands.               South Yorkshire themselves,
as I understand it, produced their own c ompilation of
those that they have considered to be valuable and those
were taken, as I understand it, on the day, some as things
were going on, some afterwards to show the scene.
Those, I have not seen, except in the raw form.                I
have not seen the bundles.             They have not been produced
to us.    They are not before the Inquiry in any way
and, of course, if it is wanted to put them to witnesses,
they should have been served in advance.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Let us just see where we are.
I will come back to you in a moment, Mr. Woodward.  There
are some South Yorkshire Police photographs and I think
maybe one bundle of them is a bundle that was briefly
floated yesterday and then I think you got it back, did
you?

     MR. WOODWARD:        I have got it back, sir, thank
you, yes, but that      is not one of the bundles that has
been referred to.

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:        Not?

     MR.   WOODWARD:      No.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not want a deluge of
bundles of photographs but I do want to know what we
are going to have in total, so you will have some - we
will come back to what in a moment.   Has anybody else
got any photographs that are going to be put in?

      MR. HYTNER:   As you will recall, sir, I did put
in one large photograph.    My instructing solicitors
took photographs of the view and there is an album.
I am not sure that it helps very much more than the
ph otographs that we have got.   I used it because
there was a close-up of the gate at the back.
                                        P. W. J A C K S O N

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What I suggest is that over
the adjournment perhaps counsel could get together and
decide what photographs in total it is going to be
necessary to put before the tribunal and how it is best
to number or label them.   I suspect it will be better,
Mr. Woodward, if yours were put in separately rather
than that we simply have a numbering that goes right
through.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, it is regrettable if our
en deavours have led to confusion- In the haste to try and
have as much material available, we have done all that
can be done and although, with respect to my learned
friend Mr. Collins, he says he has only just been served
with it, perhaps we ought not to get into that sort of
language because this matter is proceeding apace and
if one is to get to the right conclusion ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That's     right,    discovery     is
taking place as we go along.

     MR.   WOODWARD:      There are no lists of documents.

     MR. HYTNER:     Could I just add this, sir?   I am
very anxious about one thing, and that is that we are
supported by public funds.     It seems to me, at any
rate, that it is quite senseless to have these p hotographs
duplicated simply so that everybody can have a copy.     I
hope that that will not preclude my using the bundle if it
is necessary.     Everyone can clearly see a copy of these
photographs.    It does seem to be an awful waste of public
funds to have them duplicated.

     LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:   Very well.    What    about   yours?

       MR. WOODWARD:      What we have done, the West Yorkshire
Police, sir, have prepared a bundle of background material
to w h i c h ,are annexed as much material as seems to be
relevant and helpful.        It is sought to avoid going into
contentious and detailed matters.        Sir, that c ompilation
has been provided to the Treasury Solicitor.         We have
furnished those who are here with as many copies as humanly
can be got in the time and we will get as many more
copies of that which we have produced.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I do not know what your
compilation includes but obviously photographs are one
part of it and as long as I can have, and everybody who
needs to can have, copies of the photographs so that we
know what we are talking abalit when a witness is asked
about it, that is a good start.
                                                   P. W. J A C K S O N

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, I do not want to cloud the
matter more than can be avoided.   You, sir, were
referred yesterday to what was called a composite,
with time -- some photographs in a bundle which may
be referred to as a composite bundle.    That is just
a word that identified the bundle;   they are not
composite photographs but they contain timings at
the bottom.   They are not the photographs that are
annexed to and exhibited to the background material
but they, too, will be made available, sir.


      LORD •JUSTICE 'TAYLOR: Thank you.         Well, I do not
mind how you all do it but I do not want there to be
coristant hiccups w'ltrr somebody saying t h a t he' has- not
had a copy of something or does not know which p h otograph
a witness is looking at, so if we can get whatever
p hotographs are going to be used clearly identified
and we know that it is South Yorkshire Bundle ,1, or
whatever it may be.      I leave that to counsel to sort
out.    Now, we are on some photographs at the moment,
are we?

     MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, I am s o r r y 'that it should be
I who introduced the complication.         Let us return to
the bundle that we all have and we will use the larger
bundle, if we may, sir, of the West Midlands photographs.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    It might help if we call
those by something or other.    We will call the outside
one West Midlands 1 - alright?

       MR.   GLASGOW:   Thank yotj, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And the thick one, which is
inside, West Midlands 2, and then we all know what we
are referring to.   Now, you are on ---?

       MR.   GLASGOW:   We will go to 2,          if we may,     sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         Yes.

     MR. GLAGOW:   Photograph         No.   16.      May the witness
have a copy of that.

       MR.   COLLINS:   Yes,   he may.       (H a n d e d )

       MR. GLASGOW:    It is just this point, Mr. Jackson,
that   is an illustration of the sort of signing that we
have   got round the ground, is it not?    These would
have   been ones that you would have actually seen ---
A.     Well, no, I wo uldn't have seen those.

You did not see those?         A.     I wouldn't       have seen those.
                                  26


                                                        P. W . J A C K S O N

     It is the wrong side of the wall.   The way I understand
     that photograph, that is the entrance to the West Stand terrace.

Q.   That   is correct.    A.    I wouldn't       have been there.

Q.   Mr. Jackson, did you ever come through the wall with the
     gate in it on the right-hand side,   when you turned right
     and went the wrong way?   A.   No.

Q.   Forgive me,   have   I got you wrong?         A.        You are taking
     me too far.

Q.   I see, you were always on the left-hand    side --     A.                  I
     was always on the left-hand side. I wouldn't       see that
     at all.

Q.   Is it within your knowledge - and again it is really only
     asking for your help with the photographs - that that
     sort of sign of toilet arrangements is fairly typical
     of what you have around the ground - we can see them
     onthe plan - in a    large number of places?
     A.   I have to say   it is not within my own knowledge.
     I don't remember seeing signs like that in the area I was
     entering on the day.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I suppose the problem is
     that, as everybody knows who has been, it may say "Gents"
     on the outside but there is limited accommodation
     inside.   A.   That's right.

Q.   You get a lot of people going in, it gets crowded and
     some people think they, are not going to be able to get
     in or get out and so they do not go that f a r     A.                     That's
     correct.

Q.   They just go against the     wall.      A.         They do.

Q.        MR. GLASGOW:       That was one of the problems I wanted
     you to deal with, Mr. Jackson.       Is that the position, that
     the toilets were full and people could not get into them?
     A.    I don't k n o w .

Q.   Or was the position, as I think Mr. Collins was indicating,
     that some people had the unfortunate habit of just
     urinating against the walls anyway?    A.   The position
     from the person I know who did it was that we could not
     find a toilet, we couldn't see a sign.    That may be, I
     think, incorrect of me to say that in that there may have
     been a sign on top of us but we could not see it.

Q.   Yes, it may be that I was misled by theJlanguage which
     you used yourself in your statement where you simply said,
     "We could see that rather than going to the lavatories
     large numbers of people were urinating against a wall."
                                             P. W. J A C K S O N

A.   Yes, I can't explain the actions of those people
but the chap I was with who joined them did try to
look for a sign for the Gents and couldn't find one.

You will appreciate it is not a personal criticism of
you in any sense, Mr. Jackson.   A.  I accept that.

It is simply if I can deal helpfully with something
which counsel to the Inquiry raised at the opening
because it concerns us on behalf of the ground.
A.   I accept that.

Whether you would accept that it is a problem that however
many toilet  facilities there are, there are large numbers
of people who do not bother to use them but simply urinate
against the walls.

     LORD JUSTICE        TAYLOR:   And in people's   gardens       on the
way there.

        MR.   GLASGOW:   Sir,   yes.

     THE WITNESS:   I didn't see any of that, my Lord.
That supposition, if there were adequate ---   I don't                 know
whether you would describe the facilities as adequate
and I don't know enough about the toilets in that part
of the ground to assist you, I am afraid.

        MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you, Mr. Jackson, for taking
it as    far as you can.   May I break off for one second?

     Sir, might I, through you, just seek guidance on
one matter?   Where we have matters which: are clearly
illustrated on photo graphs or on plans, whatever the
facility may be, it would be my respectful submission
that it is a waste of time to put it to witnesses that
X or Y is the case because it will simply take time.
Will you allow us, with the appropriate witness, to
give you that evidence when the time comes without the
point being taken that it has not n ecessarily been
challenged.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We are rot in the business
of things not being put here.

     MR. GLASGOW:   If you will forgive         us for rot doing
that, then we can take things very much         more shortly.
Thank you.

Mr. Jackson, back to you.  Forgive me for turning my
back on you for a moment.   There is one other matter
and it is a question of noise.   We have had the great
advantage of seeing the video and I expect you yourself
                                28


                                                    P. W. J A C K S O N

     have seen it, have you not?     A.   I have.

Q.   It is very helpful but innocently misleading in one
     respect that it is almost eerily silent throughout large
     periods.   A.   That is correct.

Q. Because, of course,     it is not an audio ---         A.      Closed
   circuit tape.

Q.   There was, at the start of this game,       an incredible        level
     of noise, was there not?   A.   Yes.

Q. Even by your standards as an enthusiastic and loyal football
   supporter, it was a louder noise than even you were used
   to?   A.    I cannot recall thinking it was louder than
   normal.    It was loud, certainly - I wouldn't argue with
   that.    Unnaturally loud?   Not necessarily, no.

Q.   I see.    One of the matters whichvconcerns us - and I put
     that in a neutral rather than a political way - is the
     adequacy of loud-sp eakers because, as you know, over
     various inquiries, one of the matters that concerns
     people r esponsible for ground design is to attempt to
     ensure that l o u d -speakers are adequate.     Is your
     experience of this ground sufficient for you to be able
     to help the Inquiry as to the adequacy of the loud-sp e a k e r s ?
     Because if you can recall what they are like, I would like
     to ask you a few questions to help us, but if you say, "I
     really cannot d istinguish this from any other ground," I will
     ask the questions of somebody else.        A.    All I can say,
     and I will leave you to judge, is that from my seat in the
     West Stand, I certainly did not hear an announcement to
     the effect of, "Keep off the pitch", which I understand was
     made.    I heard Kenny Dalgleish and could recognise
     Kenny Dalgle i s h ' s voice but had difficulty recognising
     what he was saying.        Subsequently, 20 minutes ,later, I
     understood - I could hear clearly the police request
     for the game to be called off.




                                      (But Mr.    Jackson      ...)
                                 29
                                            P. JACKSON



    Q. But Mr. Jackson, Kenny Dalgl ei sh is rather like Lord Justice
       Taylor in that everybody stays quiet when he speaks because
       he commands such respect, you see? - A. They did eventually,
       yes, but not to start with.

    Q. By the time he was called on as a recognisable voice and
       a public figure to make an announcement that would be
       acceptable to everybody, things had quietened down a
       great deal, hadn't they? - A. I accept that.

    Q. And even I might have been heard, even an ordinary member
       of the public might have been heard making an announcement
       even if they were not a personality, but at the time when
       this trouble was at its highest and people were screaming
       at the tops of their voices, some to get the Police to do
       things, some Police Officers genuinely and urgently trying
       to urge the crowd back in large quantities, one had in
^      addition to the usual enthusiastic football crowd noise,
       hundreds of men shouting at the tops of their voices with
       great urgency trying to save life in opposite directions?
       - A. I accept that.

    Q. It would not surprise you would it if in that situation
       attempts to make Tannoy announcements had been drowned?
       - A. It does not surprise me.  All I was trying to help
       by saying was that was my position in the west stand.

    Q. I entirely appreciate that you were trying to help, sir,
       but I wanted to know the extent to which you were able
       to do so. ~ A. I mean the north stand.

             MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much, Mr. Jackson.


                       Re-Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

    Q. Mr. Jackson, Photograph 35 could you just turn up in that
       bundle.  That shows on the right the east end of the north
       stand, I think.  You say you were five rows up, well we
       can count that.  Does that roughly show where you are on the
       far right-hand side of this photograph? - A. Slightly
       further along.

    Q. But the level would seem to be about the same level as
       or just a little higher than the level of the terraces?
       - A. Yes, that is about right.

    Q. It is a little difficult to tell? - A. Yes,          that is about
       right.

    Q. Mr. Jackson, can you help about this:  was it your
       impression that last year as many people came as this year,
       that is from Liverpool, or was there any appreciable
       difference as far as you are aware from your knowledge
       and involvement?  - A. As far as I am aware there was no
       appreciable difference.
                            30

                                    P. JACKSON


Q. Was it a sell out last year? - A. As far as I am aware,      yes.

Q. You are used to going to Anfield, obviously? ~ A. That is
   correct.

Q. And 24,000, well more than 24,000 is fairly common.     Is
   that right? - A. In?

Q. In Anfield? - A. In Anfield, yes.

Q. How many is the average on a good match? - A. Anything
   between 36,000 and 42,000/43,000, possibly more.

Q. One appreciates of course that there are more ways in
   for the Kop, I think it is, which is the main Liverpool
   supporters end at Anfield.    Is that right? - A. That is


Q. We have heard some evidence that there is a tendency for
   some Liverpool supporters to arrive late at the last
   minute.  Is that a phenomenon that you recognise.    It
   is evidence that may be given? - A. I would not say that
   is necessarily the case.  It is easy to get into Anfield.

Q. That is what I was coming to.  It may be that there are
   more turnstiles and that really is the key to it? ~ A. I
   would suspect that.  Certainly a lot more than that end,
   the Leppings Lane end of Sheffield Wednesday certainly.

Q. This phenomenon we had here of the huge mass you have
   described and the lack of queueing, is that something
   that happens in your experience at Anfield? - A. No.

O. Because there is not a bottle neck as there is here into
   Leppings Lane? - A. There is certainly no bottle neck
   at the Kop end and it is policed.  Mounted Police do attempt
   to form queues-and do form queues.

Q. Finally this:  we know that very shortly after you got in
   Gate A and indeed Gate C were opened.  You now know that?
   - A. I now know.  Gate C may have been opened before I
   was in.

Q. Possibly but that was on the other side of the barrier so
   it would not have affected the crush on your side.

   Looking back on it and reliving your experiences in that
   crowd outside, does it now surprise you it was felt
   necessary to open that gate because of the crush outside?
   - A. Gate A would not have surprised me.

Q. That is the gate that affected you.  That is the only one
   I am concerned with because you weren't involved in the
   situation outside? - A. I can't go any further.  So as
   I said people were asking for it to be opened.
                                    31

                                                P. JACKSON


    Q. So the situation is the crush outside was such that the
       opening of a gate was in your view unsurprising and possibly
       even necessary to avoid injury to people in the crowd o ut ­
       side? - A. I would not have gone so far with Gate A to
       say "necessary", but not surprising.

                MR. COLLINS:    I follow.    Yes,   that is all I wi s h to
         ask.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much, Mr. Jackson.


                          MISS ALISON BENNETT Called
                             Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:


€
    Q. Are you Alison Jane Bennett? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think you live in the Mansfield area? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you are a supporter of Liverpool? - A. Yes,           that is
       right.

    Q.   Did you decide to go to the football match on         the 15th
         of April? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q.   Who did you come with? - A. My boyfriend, his         brother, his
         friend and his girlfriend.

    Q. And did you come into Sheffield by car? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you have tickets? - A. No.

    Q. Had you been to similar matches before without tickets?
       - A. I had been to some matches before without tickets,
       yes.

    Q.   Did you expect to     be able to obtain tickets near to the
         ground? - A. Yes,     because we had gone early.

    Q.   Is that something you have done in the past gone early
         and managed to buy tickets outside the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q. So what time did you arrive near to the ground on this
       occasion? - A. 11 o'clock.

    Q.   And were you successful in finding tickets? - A.         Straightaway.

    Q.   Whereabouts did you purchase them? - A. Just behind the
         Spion Kop end.

    Q.   Did you know the person from       whom you bought them? - A. No.

    Q.   For which part of     the ground did you obtain tickets? - A.
         The Spion Kop.

    Q. And how many did you buy? - A. Five.
                             32

                                         A .J . BENNETT


Q. Do you know what the face value of the ticket was? - A.     £6.

Q. And how much each did your group pay? - A. £20.

Q. Do you know whether the man from whom you bought them only
   had the five or did he have a whole batch? - A. He had a
   load up his sleeve.

Q. "A load up his s l eeve”? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there other people buying from him at the same time as
   you? - A. Yes, there was other ticket touts round there as
   wel 1.

Q. So at that time, just after 11 o'clock in the morning, how
   many ticket touts were there at the Spion Kop end of the
   ground? - A. About half a dozen at the most.

Q. Can you say whether or not they all had a lot of tickets
   up their sleeve? - A. No, I would not know that.

Q. Whereabouts at the Spion Kop end of the ground was he?     - A.
   Near the corner towards the north stand.

Q. On the corner towards the north stand but on the main road?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any Police presence at that stage? - A. No.

Q. Was it generally busy or not then? - A. No, not really.

Q. Had you wanted tickets for that end of the ground? - A. No.

Q. Well having obtained those tickets I think you and your
   group then went to a local pub? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you leave the pub? - A. About q uarter-past-1,
   just turned.

Q.   Had the pub itself been busy? - A. Not to start off   with, no.

Q.   It had built up, had it? - A. Yes.

Q.    Both supporters or just one team's supporters? - A. There
     was a lot of Liverpool supporters but there was some
     Nottingham Forest supporters as well.

Q.   A lot of drinking? - A. Yes, quite a bit, yes.

Q.   Was some of your group drinking? -A. Yes.

Q.   Now when you left the pub to which    part of the   ground did
     you go? - A. We walked down past the Leppings Lane end;
     past the North Stand; we walked right round the Spion Kop;
     round the South Stand/ spoke to a Policeman.

Q. So in effect you went right round the outside of the ground?
   - A. Yes.
   0- ' r " '>
'P o

                                               33

                                                        A.J. BENNETT


                 Q. What were you hoping to do at that stage? - A. We w anted to
                    go in the Leppings Lane end because we were Liverpool
                    supporters.

                 Q. Did you make any attempt to swap your tickets with anybody?
                    - A. No.

                 Q. Who did you eventually speak to somewhere near the South
                    Stand? - A. I asked a Policeman.

                 Q. What did you ask him? - A. We asked him if there was any
                    chance of getting in the Leppings Lane end because we were
                    Liverpool supporters.  The year before when we had been
                    they had put the Liverpool supporters in a paddock near the
                    Spion Kop and they told everybody that they had got the
                    wrong tickets but with being Liverpool supporters they would
                    be safer in there but they weren't, they were fighting and
                    I did not want to go in there this year.

                 Q. Let me just make sure I have got that.  Last year if you
                    were Liverpool supporters with Spion Kop tickets you were
                    put in a separate part of the Kop? - A. Yes, there is a
                    little paddock to the right-hand side of the Kop.

                 Q. Where you were told you would be safe but you say you
                    weren't? - A. No.

                 Q. So that is why you did    not want to go in that end this year?
                    - A. Yes.

                 Q.    What did    the Policeman tell you to do? - A. He told us to
                      go round to the West Stand and ask a Steward or a Policeman
                      and see if they would let us in.

                 Q.   So did you then go to the Leppings    Lane end? ~ A. Yes.

                 Q.    What sort of time did you    arrive there?   - A. About half-past-1
                      going on q uar ter-to-2.

                 Q. Who did you see? - A. A Steward.

                 Q. Whereabouts? - A. On the gate.

                 Q. Is that the perimeter gate? - A. Yes.

                 Q.   How did you know he was aSteward?     - A. Because he had   got
                      one of those yellow vests on.

                 Q. Does that have "Steward" written on it or just a yellow
                    vest? - A. I don't know.  I think it is just a yellow vest.

                 Q.   When you    explained your situation tohim what did he say?
                      - A. He said to try the turnstile, the furthest one on the
                      left which is Turnstile A.

                 Q. Did you do that? - A. Yes.
                               34
                                         A. J. BENNETT




Q. At that time were there many people near the turnstiles?
   - A. No.

Q.   Was there a Steward on each turnstile? - A. No.

Q.    Did you find a Steward or someone to speak to? - A.   We went
     straight to the turnstile and they said:    "Sorry, I can't
     let you in with this ticket", so we went back to the Steward
     on the gate.

Q.   The same one you had spoken to earlier? - A. Yes.

Q.   What did he suggest you do now? - A. He told us to try the
     far turnstile on the right he said because he had been
     letting people in.

Q. So do you know the letter or the number? - A. It would be
   'H'.  It was the last one.

Q. You say 'H', I think it only goes up to 'G'? - A. It would
   be 'G' then.

Q. Did you speak to the person on that turnstile? - A. No, we
   were searched by the Police and then we just handed our
   tickets in and they let us in.

Q. Was the Policeman on the outside of the turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. What did he actually do? - A. Just searched you.

Q. And then you went through that turnstile? ~ A. Yes.

Q.   And no questions asked? - A. No.

Q.   Was half of your ticket        taken away? -   A. Yes.

Q.   Once you found yourself inside the ground were there many
     people at that stage? - A. No, it was not packed, no.

Q. Did you go through the tunnel? - A. Yes, after David and
   Dale had been to the toilet.

Q. Between the turnstile and the tunnel did you see any
   Stewards? - A. No, there might have been a few but no,        I
   don't think so.

Q. None you were conscious of? - A. No.

Q. What about Police?  A ny Police in that area? - A. Yes,
   because we got searched as we come out of the turnstile.
   There was a couple there.

Q. You were searched both sides of the turnstile? - A. Yes.

Q. Anyone at the entrance to the tunnel? - A. No.
'>
                                    35
                                             A. J. BENNETT


     Q.   Anyone at the other end of the   tunnel? - A. No.

     Q.    Having gone through the tunnel whereabouts did you go    to?
          - A. We went to the left-hand side, Pen 4.

     Q.   And the time by now is what,   20 or quarter-to-2? - A.   Yes.

     Q.   How full was it at that stage?   - A. Not very full.

     Q. Whereabouts did you position yourselves? - A. Just over half­
        way up.

     Q. In the middle,   to one side or the other? - A. Nearer to the
        left.

     Q. Well now did a time come when you were conscious that the
        crowd had built up? - A. Yes, about quarter-past, half-past-2
        we started to move forward, people were coming in./

     Q.   At     what stage did you feel    that pen was full? - A. About 20-to
          quarter-to-3.

     Q. From that stage onwards did more people continue to arrive?
        - A. Yes.

     Q. And what effect did that have on you? - A. We got shoved
        further and further forward and we had to duck under a crash
        barrier to stop ourselves getting squashed on it.

     Q. What sort of time was it when you had to duck under the
        barrier? - A. Not long after, about quarter-to, lOTto.

     Q. Did the pressure continue after that? - A. Yes, then there
        seemed to be one big push about five-to-three.

     Q.   Do you know whether or not the players were on the field
          when that big push came? - A. I could not see nothing by
          that time.

     Q. You could not see anything? - A. No.

     Q. By the time that big push came do you know how far back from
        the perimeter fence you were? - A. Yes, there was one person
        in front of me.

     Q. And just tell us physically what was your position at that
        stage? - A. Well I was sto&d like this and I just could not
        move.  It did not matter what you were doing at that time.
        If your hand was in the air it had to stop in the air.
        Whatever you were doing that was it.

     Q. So you had both your hands in front of you? - A. Yes.

     Q. Were you still with the people you had gone into the ground
        with? - A. I was with David and Steven his brother, but
        by this time Dale had taken Julie to the front because s'he
        was .not feeling very well.
                            36
                                    A.J. BENNETT


Q. What was the next thing that you were conscious of? - A.
   I can remember being on the fence and I can remember you were
   being squashed till it hurt, not just uncomfortable, I
   mean it really hurt.  You could not breathe.  I was frightened.

Q.How eventually did you get out of it? - A. Two boys, one was
   on the fence by this time on the side fence.

Q. Is that between the next pen? - A. Yes, and one boy pushed
   me up and the other boy pulled me and he chucked me down
   to somebody else.  It was quite some time before ....

Q. How long do you think you were in that crush before someone
   got you out? - A. About ten or so minutes, may be more.

Q. And during that stage were you aware of what was happening
   to other people around you? - A. Everybody was the same.
   Nobody could move and everybody was screaming.  There was
   little children being passed over the top and girls.

Q. Could you see anything of what was happening outside the
   perimeter fence? - A. There was people on the pitch and
   there was some Policemen there.

Q. Whereabouts did you see any Policemen? - A. In front,   the
   fence in front.

Q. Did you see what if anything they were doing? - A. To
   start off with when people were climbing on top of the fence
   they were telling them to get back in,   but at that time
   really when I got out they were not really   doing nothing.
   I don't think they knew what was going on.    We didn't.

Q. Were you aware of where the perimeter gate was? - A. No.

Q. So you cannot help us as to what was happening around there?
   - A. No.

Q. Did all those in your group manage to get out eventually?
   - A. Yes, eventually.

Q. Once you had got into the next pen   did you   remain there and
   watch what was going on? - A. No, they told me to go through
   a gate and I went on to the pitch, well the track in front
   of the fence.

Q. Did you at any stage notice any ambulances? - A. No, not
   to start off w i t h , :ithere was later.

Q. That is what I was going to ask you. When did you first see
   an ambulance? - A. It must be about ten or fifteen minutes
   after it all started really, somewhere round there.  There
   was not one straightaway.



                                 /At what stage
                                                  A.    B E N N E TT




Q. At what stage did it appear to you that people did
   realise what was happening? - A. It seemed to take a good
   ten minutes or so, really, before the Police realised it
   was not a pitch invasion.

Q. Can I just come back to where we started, the question of
   the tickets?    You told us what the position was at
   eleven o'clock.    Between then and going into the ground
   at half past one and quarter to two, did you see or hear
   other people asking for tickets? - A. Yes.    It was a big
   match.   Everybody wanted to get in.

Q. Just one or two or were there a lot of people? - A. There
   were quite a few, yes.

Q. Where were they asking for tickets? - A. Anywhere they
   could get one.

Q. Was that both at the ground and in pubs?             - A. Yes.

Q. After you had got your ticket, did you see other ticket
   touts selling tickets? - A. No, I never looked for one
   after that.

Q. Did anyone ask you if you      had got tickets? - A.They   were
   asking around in the pub,      but not directly. They  were
   just asking in general.

Q. Just a general request? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. H Y T N E R :

Q. Miss Bennett, from what you have told us you seem to be a
   regular away traveller? - A. I do go away.

Q. So you have been to a lot      of grounds? - A. Yes.

Q. Obviously Anfield, Goodison? - A. Yes.

Q. Main Road? - A. Yes.

Q. Old Trafford? - A. Yes.

Q.   And a number of other grounds? - A. Yes.

Q.   It is common now for there to be an electronic scoreboard
     to give the half time scores? - A. Yes.

Q. Those electronic scoreboards are also used, for example,
   toadvertise the next match?   - A. Yes.

Q.    So they have both figures and letters flashing across?           -
     A. Yes.
                                  38




                                                    A.   BENNETT


Q. They are used to give messages to the crowd, so the crowd
   can read the message rather than hear it over the tannoy?
   - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. J A C K S O N :

Q. Just one matter, Miss Bennett.   Did you provide the
   stubs of the tickets you had? - A. I gave them to the
   Police Officer.

Q. So they are available to check their source? - A. Yes.

           MR. MULLER:     No questions.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. W O O D W A R D :

Q. You were a regular supporter of Liverpool, were you? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Did you go to the Liverpool/Sheffield Wednesday match on
   Saturday, 8th April? - A. Yes.

Q. At that match, as, indeed, at other matches at other
   matches, programmes and publicity material is available?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Do you know the magazine called "The Anfield Review"? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Do    you buy and read it? - A. I do, yes.

Q. At   the Anfield ground is it on sale         this publication?     -
   A. Yes.

Q. Do you make a habit of buying it each time you go?              - A.    I
   buy all the programmes wherever I go.

Q. You collect them, do you? -         A. Yes.

Q. Do    you read them? - A. Yes.

Q. You had gone to the match without a ticket,             the semi­
   final? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you read the "Going Places" - Anfield Travel Club? -
   A. I always knew where Liverpool were playing.

Q.   Towards the back  of "The Anfield Review" there is a
     section called "Going Places"? - A. Yes.

Q.    You are familiar with that.   It gives information about
     routes, problems about the ground, indicating where you
     might go, that sort of thing in advance, so thefans know
     what they are likely to encounter? - A. Yes.
3                                     39




                                                     A.   BENNETT


    Q. How most easily to get to where they have got to go? - A.
       Yss •

    Q* When there is an all-ticket match for a forthcoming
       fixture, that is something "The Anfield Review" tells you
       about? - A. Yes.

    Q. In relation to the semi-final it contained this advice:

               "This is an all-ticket game.   Tickets will not be
               on sale at the ground and if you have not got a
               ticket please do not travel."

         A. I do not come from Liverpool though.   I do not have
         to travel down from there.   It is easier for me to come
         down and see if I can get a ticket from Sheffield.   If I
         cannot I would have gone home.

    Q. That was a piece of advice      given to people because it was
       being said there would not      be any tickets available
       unless, of course, you can      get other tickets by other
       means.   It was telling...      - A. There are always tickets,
       though, off ticket touts.

    Q*        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         I am sorry, where do you
         come from? - A. Mansfield.

    Q*        MR. WOODWARD:    It is your experience that there
         are always tickets available from ticket touts? - A. If
         you want to pay that price you can always get a ticket.

    Q. If you have got the money you can get it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Anyway you came from Nottingham to the ground and you
       managed to get your ticket.   Is that piece of advice
       that appears in "The Anfield Review" generally ignored? -
       A. I would not know.

    Q. Do you have close links with Liverpool? - A. I go as
       often as I can to Liverpool.   I have got no relations up
       there.

    Q. Were you in Liverpool during the week before the
       Hillsborough game? - A. No.

    Q. You cannot assist the Inquiry as to what may have been
       put out over the radio advising people not to go if they
       hadn't got tickets? - A. No.

               MR. COLLINS:   If it helps, sir, I do not suppose
         there is any dispute that people were advised not to go
         without tickets, but it did not stop them doing so.
                              40




                                             A.   B E N N E TT


Q«         MR. WOODWARD:   When you arrived at the ground you
     were searched? - A. yes.

Q.   Eventually you managed to get in? - A. Yes.

Q.    It may be I misheard what you were saying, but was it
     your evidence there were a number of turnstiles that were
     not manned? - A. No, they were all manned.

Q.   With a steward? - A. There was somebody on the
     turnstiles.   There was not a steward outside every
     turnstile.

Q. Forgive me, it was something I misheard.   Can I ask you
   now about what happened inside the ground?    What you
   went through is something that will be very difficult
   ever to forget. - A. Yes.

Q. It must have seemed to you like an eternity that you were
   there? - A. Some things happen quickly, some seem to last
   forever.

Q. I want to ask you about whilst you were   down at the front
   and trapped. You had with you at that     time Steven? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You had been separated from your other friends? - A. From
   Dale and Julie.   David was there as well.

Q. Steven resulted in a position up against the         fence, is
   that correct? - A. Yes.

Q. He was facing you? - A. Yes.

Q. The   position you were in when you were caught there meant
   you   could not see the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. So you were not able to say what stage play had got to? -
   A. No.

Q. What was it that was preventing you from seeing the
   pitch? - A. There was Steven but I could see over
   Steven's shoulder.   There were people on the pitch.

Q. You had a little chink of daylight,     did you? - A.Yes.

Q. Not giving you a very broad view? - A. No.

Q.   You mentioned the Police's part in this? - A. Yes.

Q.   There did come a time when they were doing what they
     could to help to get people out? - A. Yes, after a while
     they started pulling people out.
                                               A.   BENNETT


Q. There seemed to be a period when there was a lack of
   understanding about what was happening? - A. Yes.

Q. You mention that the Police were causing people to go
   back? - A. When they were on the top of the fence,
   telling them to get back down and get in.

Q. Would that be above you, or to your right or to your
   left? - A. It was all along the fence.

Q. So you could see up there, could you? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you see on to the pitch? - A. No.

Q. Could you see where these Policemen were? - A. I could
   see them in front of me.

Q« There was a time when the Police were saying, "Back.
   B a c k " , wanting people to go back, and waving their arms
   and doing anything to encourage people to go back? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Were you able to see to whom that was directed? - A.
   People on top of the fence.

Q. They may have been telling people behind them to go back,
   may they not? - A. How can people right back there see
   those at the front?

Q. How can people back where? - A. Right at the back see
   those Policemen right at the front when people were on
   the fences.

Q. Were the Policemen standing on the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You had your friend directly in front of you? - A. Sort
   of there, yes.

Q.   You were not in any position to see any of the game? - A.
     No.     I could not see down that way to the pitch. I
     could see in front of trie and up.

Q. At this stage is this just one Policeman you are talking
   about or a number? - A. I saw a couple.   You could not
   turn when you were squashed.

Q.   No, you were caught.     What you saw was a very   limited
     vision? - A. Yes, but it is what I saw.

Q. You saw a couple of Policemen saying, "Back.         Back"? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Could it be that they were endeavouring to encourage
   other people to go back? - A. They could have been.
                               42




                                                    A.    BENNETT


                 Re-Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

Q. Of course, the bottom of the pen is below the level of
   the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. So if you have someone standing outside the pen and you
   are near the bottom you cannot see further than the
   people just in front of the pens? - A. That is right.

Q. That is the position,    as I understand it, that you are
   describing? - A. Yes.

         MR. COLLINS:      I have no more questions.

         A. BENNETT:   Can I say something?    I do not think
   it is right that everybody should be tarred with the same
   brush, not Liverpool fans or anybody.    Just because of
   what a few fans do, everybody should not be classed the
   same.   I did a sponsored walk for the Hillsborough
   disaster with Manchester United fans and Nottingham
   Forest fans.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       You did a sponsored walk?

         A. BENNETT:   For the Hillsborough disaster with
   Manchester United fans and Nottingham Forest fans.   They
   all feel the same way about it.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes,   thank you.

         MR. PHILIPS:      May I call Daniel Joseph Hennesey.

               DANIEL JOSEPH HENNESEY Called

                  Examined by MR. P H I L I P S :

Q. Are you Daniel Joseph Hennesey? - A. I am.

Q. Do you live in Crosby in Liverpool? - A. I do when I am
   at home.   I am a student at Leeds Polytechnic.

Q. In fact you went home from the Polytechnic at Leeds the
   day before this match? - A. That is correct.

Q. So you were at home on the Friday night,              the 14th? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. Did you go to the game with some friends? - A. Yes.

Q. How many people travelled together? - A. There were five
   of us, including myself.
                               43




                                              D»J. HENNESEY


Q. Did you have tickets to go to the game? - A. We did.

Q. Where had you got those? - A. We had got them the Friday
   before - not the Friday I came home, the Friday before
   that.

Q. You had bought them in Liverpool, had you? - A. We bought
   them at the ground.

Q.    Did you travel, all five of you,   in   one vehicle?    - A.
     That is correct.

Q.   A motor car? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you coming across on the motorways? - A. No, we came
   down the East Lancashire Road.   We had been the year
   before and had been caught up in traffic, so we came down
   the East Lancashire Road and coming into Sheffield we
   came on to the roundabout of the M63, the roundabout at
   the end of the M63, or somewhere in the M63.

Q. You    had been the year before you say? - A. Yes.

Q. Had  you gone by motorway on that occasion? - A. Yes,             we
   went by car.    I drove the year before.

Q. You found that that was congested? - A. Yes, very
   congested.

Q. So you thought you would go across the East Lancashire
   Road and then what, across Woodhead or the Snake Pass? -
   A. The Snake Pass.

Q. Did   you have any difficulty on your journey? - A. Yes.
   When we came to the roundabout which I think was
   somewhere on the M63 there was a holdup and coming round
   that roundabout we were just sort moving every so often.
   The car broke down and we had to push it along the road.
   Traffic was moving very slowly.     We pushed it along
   there to a garage which was on the left hand side of the
   road.

Q» This was all on the Manchester side of the Pennines, of
     course? - A. No, I would say this was nearer Sheffield
     than Manchester.

Q. So you were delayed at any rate whilst you got your car
   repaired.   What time did you in fact get to Sheffield? -
   A. We parked the car at Sheffield at 2.25.

Q. How far from the ground was that? - A. We were told by a
   shopper - we were by some shops - we asked them how far
   it was to Hillsborough and they said it was fifteen
   minutes and they directed us to Hillsborough.
                                         D.J. HENNESEY

So you walked the fifteen minutes, did you? - A. Yes.

Gan you tell   us what time you got to  the entrance tothe
ground? - A.   It was about fifteen to  twenty minutes later
than when we left the car so that would be what, twenty
to or quarter to three.

On the way did you see other people going towards the
ground? - A. Yes, that was the reason why we parked the
car.   We had seen other people parking their cars and
walking, obviously fans with scarves on.   We decided we
would do the same.

How were the people going along the road towards the
ground? - A.   Just walking.   We were walking quicker than
I would walk   normally because I just  sort of saunter
along, like, but they were walking with urgency - not
with urgency but knowing the kick-off was close.   It was
coming up to three.

On your way to the ground did you see any Policemen? - A.
Quite a distance away from the ground, just before we
went into a park there were Policemen there.   We asked
the way and then once you got into the park you could
actually see Hillsborough in front.

Which way did   you come along Leppings Lane?    Did you
come from the   Middlewood Road end, the south end, or from
the Penistone   Road end? - A. To tell you the truth I do
not know.   I   did not really make a record of the way I
came.

You got to the forecourt before the turnstiles, did you?
- A. Yes.   Well, no.   What happened we got to the
kerbway before we even got to the perimeter gates and
then there were a lot of people around there.




                              /Q. Before you actually
                                              K.J. HENNESEY



Before you actually get through the outer gates? - A.    The
perimeter g a t e s , y e s .

And were they confined to that forecourt or were they out on
the road as well? - A. I would not say there were a lot on the
r o a d , but there were a few as they crossed over the road to go
on to there, but there were not that many.      They were mainly
on the forecourt, I would say.

Were people still arriving when you were arriving? - A. Yes.

Were there people behind you as you walked on the roadway? -
A. There were people walking alongside us and behind us,
yes.

When you got there did you see any Policemen? - A. Yes, just
inside the perimeter gates there was one mounted Policeman and
then in the courtyard there was another mounted Policeman.   So
I only saw two.  Then I think there were two by the
turnstiles, but I am not sure about the two by the turnstiles.

On the outer side of the turnstiles, do you mean? - A. I did
not see any.   On the outer side of the turnstiles, yes, they
were on the outer side of the t u r n s t i l e s .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mounted Policemen? - A. No, there
were two standing and then there were two also outside the
D turnstiles again sort of thing.

     MR. PHILIPS:   Did you get into the crowd that was
waiting to go through to the turnstiles? - A. Yes, I would
describe it as an hour glass.  There were a lot of people
getting through that gate, and then as they got through the
gate they were let out again so people were not pushing. They
were squeezing, so they got through a confined space and then
they were coming out of that confined space like t h a t .

Were all the outer perimeter gates open when you got there? -
A. I can't be sure.  One might have been shut, but I can't be
sure.  I can't be sure whether that was railings or a gate.

Which turnstiles were you aiming for? - A. Any of them.  There
were no queues, so we were just aiming for the turnstiles.

They are in two sections, you see. - A. I was aiming for the
smaller set of them, the A to G ones going into the terraces.

Your tickets were for the terraces? -    A. Yes, they were.

And you knew, therefore, to   go to the turnstiles marked with a
big letter "B"? - A. Yes, I did.

And were those the ones you    went for? -A. Those are the ones I
went into, yes.

When you were in the crowd did you hear anything said by any
                                                 K.J. HENNESEY


of the Policemen? - A. Yes, when I was just inside the gate
there was a Policeman in front of us on a horse, and he was
shouting to the crowd to stop pushing, and then a minute or
two later he said, "Stop pushing, the start will be delayed
until you all get in".  He just put his hand to his mouth and
shouted that.

Did that make any difference to what was going on outside? -
A. Not that I could see, but I did not look behind me, and
there was not really a push.  It was just a lot of people.

Just a lot of people? - A. Yes.   If you look     at the area of
that court yard there is also the turnstiles      and then there is
a bit to the side.    So people were getting      in   just by   the g
and then they were   all over that area sort      of   thing.

Did you get close to the turnstiles? - A. Not at all.    What
happened was, there was a Police horse just about the middle
where the pointer is now, and we tried to avoid that because I
don't know whether   you know but Police horses    sort of    have
tendency to nip and use their teeth to nip people,  so we moved
over towards the fencing to try and avoid that horse.

Towards the middle fencing? - A . N o , the other e n d , the other
side.  We moved over that side.

Towards the river? - A. Towards the river.       That is right.

What sort of fencing was there there then? - A. I don't know.
We were just in a crowd.  I could not see fencing.  It could
be small.  There were a lot of people in the way.  I did not
know.

Were you actually moving forward at all towards the ground? -
A. Yes.

What happened then?  What happened next? - A. It was starting
to get tight.  There was a lot of people in a small area.   I
was feeling tight and all.  I have been in a lot of football
crowds, and it was tight for me.  Then all of a sudden it was
just as if the weight was lifted and we looked up, and because
we were over that far over we could see the other gate, gate
C, and that had been opened, and we just walked through it.

You walked   through with others? - A.     With one of my friends.
The others   had   been split up because   of the twisting and
turning to   try   and get away from the   Police horse. They were
aiming for   the   turnstile and we were   aiming to miss the Police
horse.

So what time would this been when you started to go in? - A.
It is hard to say.  I would say it was close to 3 o'clock.   I
only have a normal watch.  I don't have a digital or anything
like that, so I don't know whether my watch was right or
whatever.

During the time you had been in that outer forecourt there,
                                                  K.J. HENNESEY


that is to say between the perimeter fence and the t u r n s t i l e s ,
had you seen the blue gate open on any other occasion? - A. i ’
did not see the gate open, no.

Just the occasion when you.... - A. I did not actually see the
gate open.  I felt the pressure was lessened on me, and on
looking up we saw the crowd was going that way and we saw the
gate was open.  I was not watching the gate.

You went in with the crowd? - A. I went in with the crowd
walking.

Still with your ticket? - A. Yes, which I gave to the
Policeman when I was questioned, fully intact.

Yes,    later on you mean? - A. Yes.

When you gave your statement.      But you had it    with you at the
time? - A. Yes.

How were you going through with the crowd?        Walking? - A. Yes
just walking.

Where did you go to when you got inside? - A. I don't think
that model is a fair description, because when   you get inside
that gate the turnstile is almost - it was the first thing I
saw.

You mean the tunnel? - A. The tunnel, yes.  That was the first
thing I saw, and we just went straight into that tunnel.

Was there anybody there to give you any other directions? - A.
no, not at all.

Did you see any Policemen or stewards? - A. Not inside,         no.

You had been the year before, did you say? - A. i had.

Had you been in through this entrance the year before? - A.
No, I was in the north stand last year.

In the north stand last year? - A. Yes.  I have been through
the next set of turnstiles, not the turnstiles we are talking
about now.

Had you been through the Leppings Lane entrance to get to it?
- A . yes.

But you were obviously going in a completely different
direction then? - A. I was going into, if you move the pointer
down, into the next area.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     1-16 you were going in? - A. Yes.

       MR.   PHILIPS:   So you went into the tunnel? - A. Yes.

And some of your friends were with you,      I think? - A. One of
                                 48


                                                    K.J. HENNESEY


     ray friends was with rae.

Q. Were you able to see what was happening ahead of you? - A. I
   could see the tunnel ahead of rae. There was ;daylight ahead
   of rae, and the players were actually out on the pitch.

Q.    Was the tunnel full of people as you went through it? - A.
     There were people going in, but I don't know whether it was
     full.   I don't know what it would look like if it was full.        I
     am not in the position to say.

Q.    Was there any pushing and shoving in the    tunnel itself? - A.
     Not while I was in it, no.

Q. When you got to the end of the tunnel what did you see? - A. I
   turned to ray friend and I said, "Alan Hanson is playing",
   because I had not heard on the radio and we had not heard the
   team n e w s , and I was pleased about that because I respect that
   player.

Q. What did you see when you got to the end of the tunnel? - A.
   When I got to the end of the tunnel there were     people at the
   end of the tunnel - the tunnel sort of did not end, if you
   know what I mean.  There were still people in the end of the
   tunnel.  But I just thought they thought that was a good
   position to stand to see.

Q-   So what did you try to do? - A. I squeezed through.   I said,
     "Excuse me", and squeezed   through, and raoved slightly to the
     right of the t u n n e l .

Q.   Into pen 3? - A. Yes.  I was on the right-hand side of the
     tunnel all the way through.

Q. When you got into     pen 3 where did you go to in pen 3?   - A. To
   the right and may     be down one or two steps.

Q. You were towards the back of that pen? - A. Yes,       I suppose you
   could say that.

Q. Were you near a barrier? - A. No, but you could not see them.
   There were people around.  You could not see them.

Q. How close were you to the right-hand fence? - A. The right-
   hand fence between 3 and 4?

Q.   Between pen 3 and pen 2? - A. I would say if anything I was
     right in the middle of the terrace.   I would say if anything
     I was nearer to the one which divides 3 and 4 than 3 and 2.

Q. What happened to you then? - A. Then ray memory is very vague.
   I remember being pushed, and I don't remember actually
   travelling down the t e r r a c e s . I remember the next thing which
   is very clear in my mind is being crushed with my hands - with
   my elbows dug into my ribs and my hands like t h a t . Then in
   front of me I saw that the perimeter gate was open.         I
   actually felt as if I was going to die.         I could not breathe.
                                                       K.J. HENNESEY


I had my head up to try and get some air, but every time I
breathed the air was pushed out of me.  I knew somehow I had
to force my arm up.  I forced my left arm up, and because of
the position in the terraces which goes up I actually on
level with the perimeter fence, level ground.  I just stuck
my arm out and a Policeman at that gate grabbed my arm.

Where was the Policeman? - A. He was standing at the gate
leaning in trying to pull people out.

Leaning through the gate? - A. Leaning through the gate.

What was between you and the gate? - A. People.

Were they standing or what? - A. No.   My legs were planted on
the floor but my body was bend forward like t h a t , and the ones
at the front were actually lying.   Some were crushed against
the front and some were lying.   The person in front of me as I
was being pulled out, as I lifted my legs up to try and help
him get some leverage, I put my foot on his shoulder, knocked
head, and he just fell limpless.   His head sort of dropped
forward as if he had no life left in him.

You were dragged out then by the Policeman at the gate? - A.
Y e s , that is r i g h t .

Do you remember much of what happened to you afterwards? - A.
No.  As soon as I knew he had got me near that gate I passed
out.  I said I was going.  I don't know what that means.  I
passed out and the next thing I remember was waking up in the
hospital.

And when you were in hospital - how long did you have to say
in hospital? - A. I stayed in hospital until the mid-day of
the Sunday.

Did you see any particular marks on your shirt? - A. Yes,
there was a footmark on my T-shirt, just about t h e r e . and then
the T-shirt has still now got a lot of dirt on the back which
we can't get off.

Do you recall being stood upon? - A. No, not at all.

Yes, thank you very much.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. H Y T N E R :

Can you just help us.  As you came through the tunnel on to
the terrace, the tunnel extends slightly on to the terrace
itself, does not it? - A. Yes, it does.

You remember that? - A . Y e s .

The brick wall on your right or on your left, whichever side
you are going on, when you reach the end of the brick wall you
are already three steps into the terrace? - A. Yes, but as I
said the end of the tunnel and the beginning of the terrace
                               50

                                                      K.J. HENNESEY


   was indefinable because people were standing there, and as
   I thought they were standing there to get a better position
   of the g a m e .

Q. As you enter the terrace itself, as the brick wall ceases, if
   you looked to your right or left you are not actually looking
   along the back wall of the terrace at a l l . You are looking
   into the terraces? - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

Q. Having got through the turnstiles and into the tunnel you made
   your way towards the pitch? - A. Well, yes.

Q. You went straight down the tunnel? - A. Yes, there are no
   bends in it.

Q. Had you got an intention to go to your left or your right at
   that time?  Did you know where you were aiming for? - A. When
   I entered the tunnel I knew that led up behind the g o a l , and
   that is where I wanted to stand, behind the goal, but at that
   time I did not actually know there were pens.  I did not know
   it was sectioned off.  I thought it was like the Kop or the
   Park End at Goodison that once you get in you can move
   anywhere.

Q. You thought it would be completely open, but you really wanted
   to be in the centre? — A. Yes, I wanted to be in the centre
   because that is where I stand when I go to the Kop.

Q. By the time you got to the end of the tunnel the team was
   already on the pitch, was not it? - A. Well, yes.

Q. Had the game started? - A. No, they were still warming up.

Q. It may be I misheard you, but did you say,        "Excuse me" to
   somebody? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. "Excuse me", and make your way..... - A. I said "Excuse me",
   and we both went through, and we just wormed our way along, as
   you do in any football crowd.  That is what you do.  You have
   to.

Q. At that stage as you are coming out of the tunnel on to the
   terrace you are adopting your normal practice in order to get
   the best viewpoint as far as you can? - A. The best position I
   feel best, not the best viewpoint

Q. Your preferred place? - A. Yes.

Q. As you came out of the tunnel there did anything strike you
   about the state of the terrace? - A. Thinking people were in
   the tunnel still I thought was strange, but when I got in
   there I thought it was very full.  I have been in the Kop.   It
   is full when you go to a derby or a game like that, and you
   feel a bit squashed.  So I did not think anything of it at the
   time.
                                              K.J. HENNESEY



It was the sort of density and atmosphere that you expected to
find? - A. Yes, you do.  We don't expect any crush b u t . ..

But at that stage? - A. The game was just about to start.  The
crowds were excited because the players were on the pitch, and
it was a sell-out match.  You expected it was going to be very
full.

And when you said to people, "Excuse me", they perhaps moved a
little bit and you were able to make your way to where you
were going? - A. Well, you move a little bit.  You turn your
shoulder so you don't knock your head into them, because when
people say the same to you you don't want them to take your
position, so you just sort of move like that and you do your
best to get p a s t .

As you were moving your way that way at that time that was the
sort of normal experience you would find or expect to
encounter on a game like that, up to this point? - A. Yes, I
would say so.  I would not really say any different because i
am not sure how crushed I was at that time.

But there was no pushing down the tunnel? - A. There was no
pushing down the tunnel when I was in it.

And there was no pushing by  the crowd or those you came with,
apart from finding your way  to where you wanted to go? - A.
There was no sudden surges like you would get in the Kop.    You
get sudden surges when the game is on, and there was none of
that.  People were waiting for the kick-off.  People had got
in their position and did not want to be moved out of i t , so
there no surges as I was moving to my position.

At that stage did you see any beach ball   being play around
with? - A. No, I did not.

Did you see any of that? - A. A beach ball?

Yes. - A. no, I did not.  I was looking at the players.    You
watch them train.  You watch them kick the ball around.    I had
one eye on the players and one eye on where I was going.

Where in fact did you go to? - A. I went to the right.  I
suppose down one or two steps, but I don't know how far I went
to the right.  I could not tell you that.

Did you go past any barriers? - A. As I say, I don't know.       I
could not see them.  There were a lot of people.

Did you go diagonally down? - A. No,   I went more across than
diagonal.

More across as the usher is pointing with his pointer? - A. I
don't know whether I was that far down, but I went across like
that, yes.   Not that far over.
                                                   K.J. HENNESEY


And then took up your position? - A. Yes.  The game started
and so we stopped and started watching the game.

You were not part of any surge pouring out of the tunnel? - A.
I was not, certainly not.

And then the game started? - A. I believe the game started.  I
don't remember the kick-off.  My memory is clouded about the
kick-off and then moving down the terrace.

Do you remember the near goal at the other end? - A. No,           I
don't.  I don't remember any of the game at all.

There came a time when you passed out. - A. It is fair to say
I might have passed out on the top of the terrace and then
woken up again for the Policeman to pull me out, but I don't
know whether that happened.  I could not tell you.

You did get some concussion,        did not you? - A. Yes, I was
c onc u s s e d .

     MR. G L A S G O W :   No questions.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Thank you very much.




                              /MR. GOLDSACK:   Keith Golding
V -$> '
                                                 53




                                     KEITH GOLDING,             called

                                   Examined      by MR.       GOLDSACK:

          Q. Are you Keith Golding?            A.        Yes.

          Q.   I think you live in the wAlton               area of Liverpool?            A.      That's
               right.

          Q. Andvyoucame      to the match     on the 15th April?                 A.     Yes.

          Q.   I think you came    in a group         in which     your g irlfriend was
               one? A.  Yes.

          Q.   Nichola?       A.   Yes.

          Q.   How many others were inyour group? A.                   How        many   others?

          Q.   Yes.A.     Four others.                There was six altogether.

                     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:             Mr. Golding, it will             help if you
               can try and speak loudly.              I mean,  that helps a            little bit
               but you have to speak up.

          Q.         MR. GOLDSACK:   There were six in your group?
               A.   There were six in total, yes.

          Q.   Did you have tickets?        A.         Yes.

          Q.   For the Leppings Lane standing area?                    A.       Yes.

          Q.   What time did you arrive outside Leppings                     Lane?
               A.   It must have been about 20 past 2.

          Q.    And what was the scene outside when you arrived?
               A.   At Leppings Lane end?

          Q.   Yes.      A.    It was just chaos.               There were people        everywhere.

          Q.    Can you estimate how many people?                 A.        I put the    figure
               in thousands.

          Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Did     you say       "a thousand"?
               A.     In thousands.

          Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   When you first arrived, how close
               to the turnstiles could you get?   A.   It was just before
               the outer perimeter fence, the gate.

          Q.   Were those gates open      at that stage?               A.       Yes,    I believe
               they were.

          Q.    Did you see any or many policemen around?  A.   All   I could
               see when 21 arrived at Leppings Lane was the two Mounted
               Police inside the compound area.
\'   y * '* '
                                                       54



                                                                         K. G O L D I N G

                Q. Did you eventually      reach the turnstiles?                   A.       Yes.

                Q. And go through      them?      A.         Yes.

                Q.   How    long did that take from the back of the crowd to
                     get    through the turnstiles?    A.   I couldn't really
                     say.      All I can give a time on was from getting off the
                     bus    and getting to the ground.    We got actually on to
                     the    terracing just before the players came on to the
                     pitch.

                Q.   Once you had gone through the turnstile, was there any
                     delay in reaching the terrace itself?   A.   Only for
                     members of the party to go to the toilet, that was all.

 (__)           Q.   So most of the delay was in getting               to the turnstile?
                     A.   Yes.

                Q.   How would ypmdescribe the experience of going from the
                     back of that crowd to the turnstile?    A.   It was very
                     frightening.

                Q.   In what p a rticular way?   A.   Well, we were just ___
                     The crowd seemed to be moving left and right backwards
                     and forwards.     At times you just weren't getting anywhere
                     and then all of a sudden you would go forward.

                Q. Did you have any control            at all over your own movements ?
                   A.   Hardly any.

                Q.   Did your group remain together or were youfseparated?
                     A.    There was three of us who actually got through : *
                     virtually .fcogether but I had to wait for the other two to
                     come through.

                Q.   And during that time that you were trying to reach the
                     turnstiles what did the police appear to be doing?
                     A.   Well, as I say, I only seen the two Mounted Policemen.
                     They didn't seem to be doing -- well, couldn't do
                     anything.

                Q.   Did you see any policemen standing at any stage outside
                     the ground?   A.   I can't recall any.   There was
                     probably policemen standing round on the way to the
                     ground but, as I say, I wasn't looking out for policemen.

                Q.   Once you had gone through the turnstiles, did you see any
                     policemen inside?   A.   I seen a policeman and a p o l i c e ­
                     woman.

                Q.   Did you see any stewards      inside?          A.       No.

                Q. Did you say some of your group went                 to the toilet?
                   A.   Yes.

                Q. And you waited     for them?         A.      Yes.
                                55



                                            K. G O L D I N G

Q. What then happened?    A.  As we come through the
   turnstiles, there was me and Nichola got through
   together and my brother and one of my uncles.    They
   went to the toilet and I stood with Nichola,ljust to
   shake herself off, and I seen |he gate.    It was round
   the side of the river.

Q.   Gate £.   A.   Yes, Gate C.     That one was opened       and
     people come through.

Q.   Now, did you see how it was opened?   A.   No, I just
     thought it had been kicked in.   I don't know why I
     thought that but, as I say, I just seen a gate open and
     people just come through.

Q. Did you seeany stewards or police near to the gate?
   A.   I can remember seeing a policeman's helmet as one
   of the gates were closing but I can't rdmember whether
   that was the first or the second time.

Q    When the gate was opened the first time,     how many people
     came through?   A.   A hundred or so.

Q.   How was it closed?     A.   I couldn't really say.    It was
     closed back over.     I don't know how it was closed.

Q. Were you still in the same position when that gate opened
   again?   A.   Virtually, yes.   I just pulled Nichola
   out of the way in case anything happened, like.

Q. Did you see who opened     the gate or how the gate opened Ion
   the second occasion?       A.   No.

Q.    You simply became aware it was open again?  A.    Yes.
     All I can remember is seeing a policeman's helmet when
     it was getting closed.    As I say, I don't know whether         it
     was the first or second time.

Q.   On the second   occasion, how many people   came through?
     A.   A couple   of hundred again, I would   imagine.

Q.   And how would you describe the way they came through?
     A.   Well, I wouldn't exactly say once they were in
     they were legging it to get into the ground;  it was
     like a stumble through the gate and then just - one of
     those, you know -just shake themselves off again.

Q.    When did you group go into the terraces?       A.   As I say,
     I waited for one uncle to come through the      turnstile.
     The other two had gone to the toilet.     We     waited until
     we were a l together and then we walked down     the tunnel.
\

                                                   56


                                                              K. G O L D I N G

                Q.   Had the people who came in through the gate already made
                     their way into the tunnel by then?   A.   Yes, the tunnel
                     was clear when we walked down.

                Q. Were there other people, other than the odd person or so,
                   behind you?   A.   I would imagine so, yes.  They were
                   coming through the turnstiles, I wouldn't say regularly
                   but they were getting through.

                Q. Well now, what was the situation when you got to the end
                   of the tunnel?    A.   It was ---   I don't know whether
                   it was exactly that I thought it was very full - not what
                   I an used to going to Anfield, anyway.   At the end you
                   are just seeing people and then the ground, the pitch
                   itself, so we just - as the last one said - you just
    O              worm your way through.

                Q.   On your own or with the others?   A.    Well, we tried to
            1        keep together.   Oneuncle we lost - I d o n t know which way
                     he went.   The other uncle went off to the left but we
                     got him back with us and all four of us ended up virtually
                     down the front.   Well, we were at the front.

                Q.   Which pen was   that?   A.         It was Pen 3.

                Q.   How close to the front did you go?   A.   When we e v entually
                     stopped, I think there was one row of people before the
                     fence.

                Q.   You say "when you eventually stopped."   How were you
                     moving through the crowd?   A.   At first, we were worming
                     our way in then all of a sudden you had just no control;
                     it was just as though you were getting sort of carried
                     down as well.   We hit one barrier on the way down and we
                     got under that.

                Q.   Do you know what stage we are at by then?    Were the
                     players on the field?   A.    I think the players had
                     come out on to the pitch when we had actually got into
                     thd crowd.   It was about half way down into the crowd
                     that the players had come out.    I remember Bruce
                     Grobbelar coming into the goal.

                Q.   At the stage you were being pushed through the crowd,               what
                     were people in the crowd doing?   A.   Just cheering.

                Q.   Cheering the players?        A.    Just cheering        for the crowd --
                     for the players, yes.

                Q. At what stage did the cheers turn to shouts for help?
                   A.   When I noticed, when I finally stopped at the front,
                   it was just like a gradual build-up of pressure and
                   people just couldn't take it.

                Q.   Were you conscious of a particur surge or was it a gradual
        ^            build-up?    A.  My impression was just a gradual build-up
                     of pressure.
\   SV:
                                              57

                                                                K. G O L D I N G

            Q. From where you ended up, were youa ble to see through
               the perimeter fence?     A. Yes.

            Q. Do you know where you were in relation to the p e r imeter
               gate?   A.   I would say, since being back at Hillsb o r u g h
               about 10 ft. away from it.

            Q.   Could you see it?    A.      Which   perimeter         are you           ?

            Q.   the perimeter gate in Pen 3.         A.         Yes, we were about
                 10 ft. away from that.

            Q.    Could you.see it on the day?  A.   Just about,                   yes.       We
                 were at, like, a sort of 45 degree angle.

    ^— y]   Q. Could you see any policemen         outside      the perimeter       fence?
                A.   On the cinders, yes.

            Q. What was their reaction when the first shouts for help
               came?          A.    Well, it was      They seemed to look but
               t h e y d i d n ' t know what was going on or they was oblivious
               to what was going on, actually.

            Q. What were people around you trying to do?   A.   They were
               screaming for help and shouting for them to open the gates.

            Q. Was the gate opened?     A. I can remember the gate opening
               once, a couple of people getting out and then a policeman
               actually leaning on it to shut it  again.   In fact, there
               were two policemen leaning on it.

            Q. Did you see people around you trying to climb over the
               perimeter fence?   A.   Yes, there was people standing
               on our heads to try and get out.

            Q. Was anyone    outside the fence saying anything to them?
               A.   Well,    I don't know whether they were saying anything.
               As I say,    I was shou ting myself for help.  It was as
               though the    people were trying to get on the fence and
               they would    sort of try and get knocked back again at first.

            Q. Did you remain   upright?       A.     Until      the pressure eased,
               yes.

            Q. Were those around you       upright?        A.      Yes,     there was dead
               people standing up.

            Q.   How close to you?   A.   Well, virtually jijst behind.
                 My own uncle, who was --   Well, I knew at the end he was
                 dead.   He was, like, next to me.

            Q.   So all around you standing but some you were conscious
                 had died.   A.   Yes, there was three lads in a huddle
                 and they were on the darker side of purple and I automatically
                 thought they were dead.   They couldn't fall - the pressure
                                              58



                                                                K. G O L D I N G

     was   too much,   they were still standing.

Q.    And you have said people were actually climbing over you
     to get out.    A.   Yes.

Q.    Did you know where your girlfriend was at this stage?
     A.She was     at the front of me.   I had one arm round
     her and the other arm was up here.

Q.   Can you say for how long that real                        pressure was m a i n t a i n e d ?
     A.   I couldn't honestly say, no.

Q.   Do you know how the pressure on you did ease?   A.   Only
     when I did sort of manage to fallbackwards and I noticed
     that there was a large gap behind - ths people had either
     gone back down the tunnel, I just don't know.

Q.   So it had eased from the backather than from the front?
     A.   Yes.   When the gate was o p e n e d ., as I say, you couldn't
     get that many people out.   it was one at a time, sort of
     thing.

Q.   You had been aware, had you, that the gate was opened a
     second time?     A. Not the second time, just the  first
     time, you know, a couple of people just getting out.

Q.   When you were able, did you go back up to the top                              of the
     terrace?   A.   No, I couldn't stand up.
                             /
Q. Which way did you eventually leave? A.   I was passed over
   the side railings into the sort of pen next to us by a
   policeman.

Q. Where did you go          from there?                 A.      I was passed out on to
   the pitch.

Q. And I think eventually you discovered that one of your
   group had been amongst the fatalities?   A.   That was
   when we eventually got round to the gymnasium, the uncle
   we actually lost getting into the ground was there to tell
   me.

                       Cr o s s - e x a m i n e d   by MR.       WOODWARD:

Q.   Just one matter, sir, if I may.   You got through the
     turnstiles and then you waited a while and you told the
     Inquiry that Gate C opened and a hundred or so people
     came in.   A.  Yes.

Q.   And it closed.          A.        Yes.

Q.   And then   it opened         again?            A.        A couple     of minutes
     later.

Q. And more people came              in.        A.        Yes.
                                       59



                                                    K. G O L D I N G

    Q. And that quantity       of people went away towards             the tunnel
       A.   Yes.

    Q. Did the gates close?   A.   I cannot remember the gates
       being closed a second time because after they had gone
       through I just took no notice.   I carried on with the
       party.

Q. And you followed on towards where you', web intending to no
   into the tunnel and by that stage those who had come throuqh
   the gate the second time, they had cleared away.      A.  The
   tunnel was clear when we went down.

Q. It was clear      down the tunnel.         A.    Yes.

Q. And I think having got through from the tunnel on to the
   terrace you decided where you wanted to go.   A.   Well
   my brother was a lot bigger than me and hesaid, "It looks
   okay on the right" so we sort of tried to make our way to
   the right-hand side.

Q.    He is a big    fellow.      A.     He is tall.

Q.    So he got a better view of where the space might be and
      he said it looks alright down to the right.   A.   Looks
      alright down to the right, yes.

Q. So that       determined    where   you went.    A.        Yes.

Q.    And it was   then you wormed      your way through.              A.   Yes.

Q.     At that stage had the team come on to the pitch?
      A.    Not at the end of the tunnel;   it was about when we
      were half way down the terrace.

Q.    Whislt   you were making     your way down?        A.     Yes.

Q. And you took up your positions and as you were worminq
   your way through did it strike you as p a r t icualrly heavily
   crowded or not?   A.   Only when I eventually stopped,


Q     But not until you got to the point where             you' stopped?
      A.   Not really because I could, move.

           MR.   WOODWARD:       Thank you.




                                                       (Apart    from offering...)
                                 60

                                           I.J. CLARK



           MR. GLASGOW:  Apart from offering you our sincere
     sympathies, Mr. Golding, I have gotno further questions.

                        IAN JOHN CLARK Called
                      Examined by MR. P H I L L I P S ;

Q.   Is your name Ian John Clark? - A.       Yes.

Q.   Are you 16? - A. Yes.

Q.   And a student? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you live in Liverpool? - A.     Yes.

Q. You have been a keen supporter of Liverpool, have you? - A.
   Yes, all my life.

Q. Did you in fact get yourself a ticket for this semi-final?
   - A. Yes.

Q. On the 7th of April? - A. 7th of April.

Q. Who were you going with? - A. A friend of mine who lives by
   my n a n 1s .

Q. Were the two of you just going together? - A. We were going
   together, yes.

Q. Do you often go away to these games together? - A. We don't
   usually go to away games, only important away games.

Q. How were you going to get to Sheffield? - A. By coach.

Q. Did you book yourself on to a coach? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did the coach leave? - A. It was supposed to leave
   at 11 o'clock but it never arrived till 10-past-ll so we
   left about half-past-11.

Q. Can you say whether you had a reasonable journey from
   Liverpool? - A. The journey was disrupted several times
   due to roadworks and traffic jams.

Q. Did you come along the motorways to get to Sheffield? - A.
   We come along the M62 and then we seemed to go through
   Manchester and we were stopping all the time so for most
   of the journey I decided to have some sleep because we
   were no longer starting than we were stopping again.

Q. What time did you get to Sheffield? * A. We got to Sheffield
   about 25-past-2.

Q. Do you know where the coach parked? - A. It parked up on
   the road towards Barnsley opposite the Gateway Stores
   which are on the right.
                            61


                                     I.J. CLARK


Q. That is up Halifax Road then,   is it? - A. I am not too sure.

Q. How far away was it from the ground? - A. Well we sort of
   hurried down.  Like I walked and with my legs being so
   long it made me sort of running, so it took just over five
   minutes.

Q. When your coach got to Sheffield did you see any Police
   Officers? - A. The coach was stopped and two Police Officers
   got on the coach.

Q. Was that before it got to its final parking place? - A. Yes.

Q. What did the Police Officers get on the coach for? - A. They
   just looked around but I presumed that they were looking
   for alcohol.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers after you had got off the
   coach? - A. Outside the ground.

Q. Before you got to the ground did you see any? - A. No.

Q. Were other people on the coach with you going the same way,
   walking? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there other people as well going down that road? - A.
   Yes.

Q. So what time do you say you got to the ground itself? - A.
   We got outside the ground about half-past-2.

Q. How many Policemen did you see then? - A. There was about
   two dozen Policemen on foot.

Q. Where were they? - A. They were positioned outside the
   gates, 1-16.

Q. Outside Gates 1-16? - A. Yes.

Q. That is Turnstiles 1-16? - A. Turnstiles 1-16.

Q. Were they inside or outside the perimeter gates? - A. Outside.

Q. And what were these two dozen Policemen doing? - A. They
   seemed to have the crowd in queues ready to go into the
   courtyard.

Q. Is that in relation to the 1-16 turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that the area that you were making for? - A. No.

Q. Where were you going to go? ~ A. I was going to the Leppings
   Lane terrace.

Q. So you would be wanting Gates A-G? - A. Yes.
fp,   K
                                        62

                                                I.J. CLARK



          Q. Now you say they were putting these people into queues.
             Were they succeeding? - A. Yes, because there did not seem
             as many people going in to them turnstiles as what there
             was going into the others.

          Q. Did you see any Policemen other than those on foot? - A.
             Yes, I saw about six on horseback; tv/o were by the gates
             leading into T.urnstiles A-G.

          Q. Where were the other four? - A. Inside,   inside the cou rt­
             yard itself.

          Q.   Did you see any foot patrol Officers on that side of the
               dividing fence? - A. No.

          Q.   Did you see any queueing on that side of the dividing fence?
               - A. No.

          Q. How many people were there? - A. I could not say.

          Q. Well was it full that area? - A. The courtyard itself was
             full and there were people still outside waiting to get in
             and the way the horses were positioned the Policemen said;
             "Don't move till the horse moves" and you could not stay
             still, so as the horse is moving you have still got people
             walking in all the time.

          Q. How far back did the crowd go from the turnstiles on that
             side, as far as the roadway? - A. Yes, out into the road,
             about there.

          Q. Did you see any Stewards outside the ground there? - A. No,
             none at all.

          Q. Would you have recognised a Steward if you had seen him?
             - A. Yes.

          Q. What would you have been looking for? - A. Well usually a
             yellow or red bib.

          Q. Did you get into the area beyond the outer perimeter gates?
             - A. Yes.

          Q. How did that happen? - A. It was as the horse was moving
             everyone sort of normally just walked forward.

          Q. Did you go through the turnstile? - A. Yes.

          Q. And give your ticket in to the Steward? - A. Yes.

          Q. Was there a Policeman there at the turnstiles? - A. No.

          Q. Just the Steward operating it? - A. Just the Steward
             operating it.

          Q. Did you have any difficulty going through the turnstiles?
             - A. It was only beforehand in the crowd itself.
'j'f
                                     63

                                             I.J. CLARK


       Q.   Beforehand in the crowd? - A. Yes.

       Q.   Once you got to the turnstile entrance  itself you were
            able to get in all right were you? - A. Yes.

       Q. Of course you knew which turnstile to go to, didn't you?
          - A. Well as you walk along the Leppings Lane on Turnstiles
          1-16 there is a big sign saying "Home Supporters" and I
          already knew that the terrace where we were going was for
          the home supporters so I kept on walking and then just
          above the Turnstiles A-G you have got the little letters
          and you just follow the letters.

       Q. So you had no trouble at all? - A. No.

       Q. Did you see anybody getting in in any other way apart from
          through the turnstiles in that time? - A. No.

       Q. Can you say what time it would be that you got through
          the turnstiles? - A. I got through the turnstiles about
          20-to, just after 20-to.

       Q. Was anybody climbing in at that time? - A. No.

       Q. When you got through to the other side of the turnstile
          did you know where to go then? - A. I did not know where
          to go but as you walk through the turnstiles all you can
          see is the tunnel so I automatically headed to the part i­
          cular tunnel.

       Q. Had you been to that ground before? - A. No.

       Q. So you did not  go for example         to any of the corner pens
          or how to get there? - A. No.

       Q. Did you particularly want to go to the area behind the
          goal? - A. Well what usually happens is normal grounds the
          entrances are from the sides so from the sides you can
          make your way in to wherever you want to go, so I normally
          go behind   the goal but if I had gone to the side pens I
          would not   have been able to get through, so just seeing
          the one tunnel it did help.

       Q. So you went straight for it? - A. Yes.

       Q. When you got down the tunnel what did you see when you
          got there at the other end? - A. Well as you get to the end
          of the tunnel you see the fence that divides the two pens.

       Q. Which side did you go on? - A. The right-hand side, Pen 3.

       Q. How   many people were in that pen at that time.  Would you
          say   it was full or part full or what? - A. I would say
          you   could probably squeeze in another 100 people, so it
          was   quite full.
                              64

                                      I.J. CLARK



Q.    Now when you got there were there any Stewards or Policemen
     about? - A. None at all.

Q.   Had you see any in the yard before   you got to the tunnel?
     - A. No.

Q.   Were you still with your friend at the time? - A. Yes.

Q.   Where did you go to in that pen? -   A. It was just in front
     of the second set of barriers.

Q. Can you say how far you were from the side fences? - A. About
   9' a w a y .

Q. What from both of them or one of them? - A. From the one that
   is on your left.

Q. 9' away from the one that is on your left? - A. Yes.

Q. And about just beyond halfway down? - A. Yes.

Q. Now was there much crushing at that time? - A. There was
   quite a bit of crushing and it was just after that that
   you could see the people at the front, you actually knew
   there was something wrong  because the people at the front
   were shouting and as you looked down you could see their
   faces turning yellow and then from yellow to blue and then
   from blue to purple.

Q. Was that when you first got into the pen? - A. Just after
   I got into my position for the match.

Q.    Could you see the pitch from where you were? - A. Yes.

Q. Had any of the players come out on to the pitch then? - A.
   No.

Q. Did you feel more people coming into the pen afterwards?
   - A. I felt more people coming in but you could not really
   feel it to much of an extent because everybody was so
   jam packed together.

Q.   Did you feel getting more jam packed? - A.You    could    not
     get more jam packed than you already were.

 Q. Did you see around you anybody that particularly took
    your attention? - A. Not really, no.  There was people
    there whose faces were turning colours and that is all you
    could really see.

 Q. Were they still upright or did they move? - A. Still up­
    right.

 Q. Did you see anybody go down? - A. It was about five minutes
    afterwards when it seemed as though a barrier had given
    way.
                                     65

                                              I.J. CLARK



       Q. Can you tell us about this barrier?   Were you close to it?
          - A. Yes, I was close to the barrier.

       Q. How far away from it were you? - A. It seemed to be the
          front barrier that fell that gave way and as it gave w a y
          the people in front of the barrier had been sort of pushed
          downwards with the force and the people behind the barrier
          had automatically gone forward and fell over the people.

       Q. We know it was the barrier to the right-hand side of the
          pen towards the centre and right of the pen that gave way.
          What I want to know is how close you were to the barrier
          itself? - A. By that time I had been pushed down to within
          say 6 1/ 7 1 of that barrier.
i?—•
       Q. Were  you directly in line with it or to the left or right
          of it? - A. I was to the left of the barrier.

       Q. What about your friend Kirk, I think     his name is,i s n ’t   it?
          - A.    By that time I had lost them.

       Q.   You did not see what happened tohim? - A .No.

       Q.   Did you actually see the barrier go?   - A. No.

       Q.   Did you see it break? - A. No.

       Q.    You saw it after it had broken? - A. I had never seen the
            actual barrier, just the actual surge of the people.

       Q. Falling over on top of each other? - A. Yes.        That made me
          think it was the barrier.

       Q. Had you seen people close to that barrier before it went?
          - A. Yes.

       Q. What did you see about those people? - A. You could see
          that they were crushed but they still looked in perfectly
          good health.

       Q. Did they appear to be able to stand upright? - A. Yes.

       Q. Did you see anybody hanging over the barrier or leaning
          over it? - A. There was people hanging over the barriers
          but the people in front of the barriers seemed to be
          okay.  It was as if as people had been pushing with the
          barrier on their chest they were sort of like limping
          over.




                                          /Q. Yes, did you see
                              66
                                             I.   J.   CLARK




Q. Did you see any of those people in any obvious distress?
   " A. Y e s , there was one man who was shouting because his
   arm was dangling and he had no feeling or anything in it
   at all, as if it had been just ripped out of his -joint
   completely.

Q. When the barrier went, the people who were there, what
   happened to them? - A. The people who were in front were
   sort of pushed down.

Q. To the ground? - A. To the ground.   Those from behind
   sort of came forward and fell on top of them.

Q. Was there anything you could about that at the time? - A.
   No.

Q. Were you caught up in this falling forward? - A. I was
   caught up in the pushing but not the actually falling of
   barriers.

Q. Where did you end up? - A. I ended up about say, 7', to
   the left of the left hand barrier, the fencing, and about
   6 or 7 from the front fencing.

Q. From the front fencing.    Can you recall when this
   barrier broke by reference to what was happening on the
   pitch? - A. No.

Q. Did you see anything happen on the pitch, by way of the
   game I mean? - A. No, the game had not started and I
   could not see any players on the pitch either.

Q. You could not see any players on the pitch when        the
   barrier broke? - A. No.

Q. Did you see anybody trying to get out of the pen? - A.
   Yes.   There were several people climbing over the front
   fence and people passing little children up over the
   fence and all the Police were doing was pushing them back
   in.

Q.   Pushing them back in? - A. Pushing them back in.

Q.    Did you hear the Policemen saying anything to them? - A.
     No, not at first.     It was after the players came out
     that they started shouting, "Push back.     Push back".

Q. So people were climbing before the players came out on to
   the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q.   When the players came out on to the pitch did you see
     that? - A. I saw the players coming out, yes.
                        67
                                        I.   J.   CLARK


You say they were telling them to get back? - A. Yes.

Were people actually getting over on to the trackside of
the fence? - A. Not really, no, because there were
Policemen there and there were not that many people
climbing over to the extent that if one Policeman pushed
one back, one would be able to stay over.   There were
not that many people climbing over at that point.

Did anything change then? - A. After the match had
started?

Yes. - A. The crush had become so severe and that many
people shouting out for help that if there was somebody
at the front and they had a child with them and they were
pushing against the front fence they would get the child
out and as somebody who had already climbed over had got
the child, everybody sort of used them as a human bridge.
There were that many people climbing over then there was
nothing the Police could do.

Were the Police there at the front of the fence? - A.
There were about four Policemen.

What were they doing then? - A. They were trying to keep
the crowd off the pitch.   It seemed as though they did
not realise what was really happening.   It was as if
they thought it was a pitch invasion.

That was after play had started on the pitch? - A. Yes.

Do you recall when play was stopped? - A. When play was
stopped it seemed as though the pushing had stopped and
as I turned round there was like a space of two or three
steps so then automatically seeing the situation just
started pulling people out.

Who did?   You did? - A. I did and several other fans.
By that time there was a Policeman who had got into the
ground who was also helping.

Do you^remember seeing the gate, perimeter gate, to that
pen being opened? - A. I do not remember  it being opened,
but I remember it being open.

Do you remember seeing anything that was happening at
that gate? - A. They did not seem to be taking people out
of the ground, which surprised me a lot.

Out of where? - A. Out of the terraces.   There were that
many people crushed up right across the front it was
quite obvious that there were people in distress.
                          68/69
                                        I.   J.   CLARK


What was happening at the gate if people were not being
taken out? - A. They seemed to be getting passed over
instead of getting passed through the gate.   It was only
after a couple of minutes after seeing the gate that
people who were sort of in the middle were getting passed
over through the gate.

Were the Police there at the gate? - A. There were two
Policemen.

What were they doing? - A. In the end they were dragging
people out, as many as they could.

Did you see any Policemen come into the pen? - A. I never
saw any come in, but by the time the game was stopped
there was one Policeman in the pen.

Was he helping you pull these people out of the tangle? -
A. Yes.

Were you able to see whether the people you were dragging
clear were alive or not? - A. People s faces were that
many different colours it was difficult to say whether
they were just unconscious, they had just fainted or they
were actually dead.

Can you say how many people you moved? - A. I cannot
really say, no.    In situations like that you do not
think of yourself.    You just sort of see the situation
and act.   You do not think of anything at all.

Where were you taken to? - A. By that time fans had
climbed over and were trying to rip the front fencing
away.   It was after we started picking up the fans.    We
left them on the terraces and were doing mouth to mouth
resuscitation on them first and as soon as we got them
alive by then somebody had opened the fencing and we were
moving them out that way.

So you were taking them both backwards and forwards
towards the pitch through the hole in the fence? - A.
Yes.

Did you notice any other movement in the people in the
terraces after you had started to... - A. The terraces
seemed empty.   It seemed as though everybody had gone
out of the back because by that time there was that much
space after we had started moving a few people, it seemed
as though nobody was there in the first place.

Did you manage to stay on your feet? - A. Yes, I did.

Did you ever get down close   to the pile of people that
you were helping to move? -   A. Yes, I did.It was while
                         70
                                         I.   J.   CLARK


I was helping pulling people away there was like another
little surge, another push.   From that push as I was
moving one man, I sort of got pushed and took his place
at the bottom of the pile.

Lying down? - A. Lying down.

Were you conscious of what was going on? - A. I was
conscious of what was going on to a certain extent.
There were people under the pile shouting, **I am going to
die.   Help me get out” , but then I just blacked out.

Before you blacked out could you tell if you were on top
of the part of the pile where you were? - A. I seemed to
be braced against the steps.   It was as if I was on the
bottom of the pile and by pushing up I could feel those
on top of me were dead because their faces were cold.

Do you remember where you were when you came round? - A.
I was on the pitch itself.

What was happening to you? - A. The Policeman was with me
who was helping.   He told me he had got me out of the
terrace.

Is this the same Policeman who had been intheterrace
with you helping to recover thebodies from  the pile?      -
A. Yes.                                          F

Had he taken you out? - A. He had taken me out and put me
on the pitch.   He told me afterwards that he had given
me the kiss of life.

Were you then sufficiently recovered to do anything else
yourself? - A. I had no feeling in my back leg at all and
the bottom of my back was still sore.   By looking at the
terraces there were still Policemen and fans in there
taking the last few people out.   All the bodies and that
were still left on the pitch.   The Policeman helped me
to my feet.   I was able to walk but only by dragging my
leg.   It was then we started ripping up the hoardings
and putting the people on.

Did you participate in that? - A. Yes.

Even though your leg was hurting? - A. Yes.

Did you get any medical attention while you were there at
the ground? - A. No.   It was only the mouth to mouth
resuscitation from the Policeman himself.   It was after
we had moved the people over to the gymnasium, and after
a while because I could not find my friend, that I
actually got put into an ambulance.
                                    71
                                                  I.   J.   CLARK


      Q. Did  you go back into the terrace at that stage after you
         had   got out on the pitch? - A. Yes, because there were
         still a few fans in the terrace, just sitting there so
         bewildered over what had gone on.     I went back into the
         terrace looking for my friend.

      Q. Did   you in fact go down to the gymnasium with some of
         these people? - A. Yes, we went down to the gymnasium.

      Q. You saw an ambulance come, did you? - A. They were sort
         of queuing outside and by the side of the gymnasium.
         There were a couple along the side that splits the stand
         with the Spion Kop, so there were ambulances all there.

      Q. Ambulances coming all the time? - A. Yes.

( )   Q» Filling up and then another coming? - A. Yes.        As one
V'       left another one would come in.

      Q.   Did you in fact go off in an ambulance much later        on in
           the afternoon? - A. It was about ten minutes past        five.

      Q.   Were there a lot of other people there in the ambulance
           with you? - A. The ambulance I was in was an all-seater
           and there were about nine other people in that ambulance
           with me.

      Q. Which hospital did you go to? - A. The Royal Hallamshire.

      Q. How long were you in hospital? - A. I came out Tuesday
         the 18th.

      Q. You were injured obviously, you were in until Tuesday,
         and are those crutches still the marks of your injury? -
         A. Since then I have had to go back into hospital.    I
         only came out yesterday because the pain in my back seem
         to get worse so they admitted me back into hospital to
         see if they could find out what was wrong with me.    They
         still think it is the effects from the crush, trapped
         nerves and badly bruised muscles.

      Q. When you were in hospital in Sheffield did you have any
         visitors? - A. Yes.

      Q. Did you have visitors that you knew - your own family,
         did they come and visit you? - A. Yes.   I actually
          phoned them up when I was at the hospital.   After I had
         been admitted that was one of the first things on my
         mind.

      Q. Did others come to visit you that you did not know? - A.
         Yes.
                             72
                                            I.   J.   CLARK


Q. Can you tell the Inquiry about that? - A. On the Sunday
   there were two girls who came down from Nottingham and
   they were so filled with emotion all they could do was
   pass in bunches of red and white carnations to the staff
   to hand in to the injured.

Q. Did you see any other people there? - A. There were other
   people coming in, just normal people off the street.
   Little kids coming in with bunches of daffodils.   Old
   people coming in with baskets of fruit, all so emotional
   because of it.   There were priests coming in, bishops,
   nuns.

Q.   All sorts? - A. All sorts.

Q.    Were there any visitors that you thought were perhaps
     less welcome than that? - A. Well, to me, everybody was
     welcome.   A man from Sheffield Wednesday could come up
     to me and if he said to me, "Would you wear my colours?"
     I would be glad to.    I hold no grudges against anyone.




                             /Q. Did anybody come along
                                                    I.J. CLARK



Did anybody come along to talk to you or to interview you*? -
A. Yes.

Did you know who they were? - A. There was - not really. There
was one time when two from the BBC came in, and told the
sister at the desk they were my auntie and uncle.   There was
another time when one came in and said he was the Hospital
Chaplain, and as he came in the Hospital Chaplain was at
another bed actually talking to one of the patients.

And do   you know who he was? - A. No.

Do you  remember anything about a helicopter? - A.Yes, there
was one day we heard this noise, and as we looked out the
window  there was this helicopter hovering outside the window
with a photographer hanging out of the helicopter.

Thank you very much.

               Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

I want to ask you about the timing, please.  You got through
the turnstiles and to the tunnel into the terrace about what
2.45? - A . Y e s .

When you came through the tunnel you were able to walk along?
- A. We walked straight through the tunnel, yes.

No difficulty about going along there?         - A. No.

And if you had decided to go back would        you have been   able to
do that? - A. Yes.

And walk the other way? - A. Yes.

But you got to the t u n n e l , saw what the situation was in the
pen in front of you, 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

Did you think there was room for you to        go in? -   A. Yes.

At that stage were you alone? - A.       No.

How many were you? - A. I was with       my friend.

So two of you decided to go to one       side rather than the other?
- A. Yes.

Was there anything in particular that caused you to make that
decision? - A. No.

Was there any particular difference in the state of the two
pens, 3 and 4? - A. No, not really.

And you decided to go to the right? - A. Yes.

You decided you wanted to go to the right and down a bit? - A.
                                                 I.J. CLARK


yes.

So you made your way down and wormed your way down, did you? -
A. Yes.

In the normal way? - A. In just the normal way.

It did not strike you at that time, did it, as you came to the
end of the tunnel that the crowd on the terrace was m ore than
could accommodate you? - A. No, because there seemed space at
the back, and with my mate only being small we decided to go
in for a better view.

And the state of the terrace seemed to be able to allow you to
do that? - A. Yes.

You had no worry about doing it? - A. No.

You took up your position about how far from the perimeter
fence? - A. The front one?

Yes? -A. I d o n ’t really know how far it is from the barrier to
the front fence.

Would it be the distance between us now? - A.      I would say from
me to may be the gentleman second along.

At the end? - A . Y e s .

We are talking about 40 feet or so, something like that? - A.
40 feet?

Which gentleman are you talking about? - A. This second one.

About 20 feet or so.  The crowd around you at that position,
was that comfortable? - A. It was just the normal sort of
procedure where you could move, but like it was not pure
freedom.

But it was comfortable and typical? - A. Yes.

No worries at that stage? - A. No.

Do you know what time it was when you were in that position? -
A. It was about quarter-to.

Your watch had broken,      had not it? - A. My watch had broken.

Were any players yet on the field? - A. No.

Had they announced the names or were they announcing the names
of the players? - A. We could not hear them.  We heard people
cheering in the stand above, so we automatically thought they
were calling the players' names.

That is the ritual at that stage when the names are shouted
and you give a cheer.  Did you join in thought you could not
                                            I.J. CLARK


hear? - A. We joined in even thought we could not hear.

So at that stage the noise was such you could not hear the
public address system? - A. Well, the public address system
was not all that....

You could not hear it? - A. We could not hear it, but it was
before hand where they usually say about - I have forgotten.
It is just before they mention the players.  Usually before a
match they usually play songs.

A disc jockey? - A. It is like a disc jockey,    but he is the
one that reads out the teams as well.

Makes announcements? - A. Makes announcements.    We could not
even hear the s o n g s .

You could not even hear the music? - A. No, and before the
game there was not really that much cheering going on.

How long were you in that sort of position before you became
concerned? - A. About 5 minutes.

And was that because of a steady confining pressure upon you?
- A . In a small way, yes, and in another way it was because by
looking down you could see people were in pain.

It did not occur to you to come back? - A. Well, no, because
everybody then was like trying to get back, but people were
still coming in.  By that time you are in a position where you
could not turn.

Is the impression you would give or wish to give is of a
steady build up of pressure around you? - A. A steady build
up.

Not of sudden surges coming upon you at that time? - A. Not at
that time, no.

Had the players yet come on to the field? - A. No.

Did you see the players come on to the field? - A. Yes.

At that time how were you feeling? - A. Tightly squashed.

Was it acceptable to you at that time? - A. It was quite
acceptable because at Anfield when you have a big game it is
that normal situation.

So at the time the players were on the field the pressure was
in the crowd and the situation you were in was typical of a
big game such as you experienced at Anfield? - A. Yes.

And it did not cause you any concern?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was your position? - A. Yes.
                                               I.J. CLARK


Can you make it clear at that stage, looking in front of y o u ,
there were people who were all right or could you see people
under stress at that stage in front of you? - A. People in
distress.

     MR. WOODWARD:   What is the next thing that happens so
far as you are concerned that sticks in your mind? - A. It
seems after that there is a push that comes from the back, and
that seems to be when somebody close to the front sort of
falls down to the floor, and by seeing that I automatically
surmised it was a barrier because of the way the people in
front f e l t .

So the next thing that comes to your mind is something
happening at the front and the release of the weight,
causing others to come forward? - A. Yes.

Had the game started by that time? - A.   It was the toss up,
just before the match.

You did give a statement, and in the statement you said, "I
think the barrier broke just before the game was s t o p ped” . -
A. There was more than one barrier that broke.  There was one
that is close to the side.

Can you describe where that is, please? - A. There is one that
broke just there where he is pointing now,    and there isone
that broke closer to the tunnel.  There was more than one
barrier that broke.

Which is the one that was in front of you? - A. The one that
is by the tunnel.  That is the one I saw go first.

But that was not in front of you, was it? - A. No, it was sort
of to the left of me.

Are you sure about that? - A. Yes.

You did not see a barrier break?  You are describing an
impression of something, are you? - A. Yes.

So when you talk about a barrier breaking and this movement at
the time you described, at the toss up, is that the barrier up
near the tunnel entrance, or something else? - A. It seemed as
though it was the barrier down the side by the tunnel
entrance.  About halfway down.

About halfway down the terrace in line with the tunnel
entrance? - A. Yes.

What you are   describing though is not seeing a piece of steel
fail.  It is   seeing the p e o p l e - A. It seemed as though
you have got   the crowd from the front going straight to the
back, and in   those circumstances you don't expect people
halfway just   to fall down.

But that is what happened, was it? - A. That is what happened.
                                                  I.J. CLARK



Something happened about halfway down the terrace on your
left? - A. Yes.

On a level with you? - A. No,    just in front.

Which you attribute to a crush barrier failing? - A. That is
what I surmised.

And that is the sort of impression you had? - A. Yes.

That was at the toss up time? - A. Yes.

Did you see another barrier go? - A. There was one to my far
right.
          i
Or did you see a similar thing happening to your right? - A. A
similar thing happened to my far right.

What time was that? - A. That was towards the end of the game
getting stopped.  That is when the surge really came forward
and people started to climb over.

Did that which happened to your left at the toss up time have
any effect upon you? - A. Not on my, no.

On your comfort? - A. Not really.      To the people in front,
yes.

But not on you? - A. Not on my, no.

And you were between gate No. 3, were you, and the fence
which runs down from the tunnel entrance?  Was gate No. 3 to
your right or left? - A. To the right.

Thank you very much.

              Cross-Examined by MR. G L A S G O W :

Just one matter.  Would you look at one photograph, photograph
24 in West Midlands bundle 2.  The fat bundle, Mr. Clark.
Page 24.  Is that a picture in the distance there of the
second of the barriers you are talking about?  You see the
bent barrier? - A. No, there seemed to be one further up.

Yes, but is that the second one?  You told us of the
impression you had of the one failing behind you. - A. I mean
the next barrier up.

You see the failed barrier in that photograph.  We can
plainly see the one that actually failed.  We no longer have
to guess about it.  That is the one we certainly know failed.
Did you see that one go or see movement in that area from
where you were standing? - A. No.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Whereabouts was what you took to
be the second surge owing to what you thought was a
                                                       I.J. CLARK


barrier....   - A. There is a barrier here which goes along.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Try the next  photograph, No. 25. I
thought 24 was from your sort of position but 25 is more
general. - A. Yes, that seemed to be....

Does that help you? - A. Yes.

Can you help Lord Justice Taylor with that? - A.   It is the
middle barrier between the three.  It seemed to be from there
that the surge seemed to go where people started to f a l l .

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       That   was the second? - A. That was
the second.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Mr. Clark, I am sure you are trying to
help, but it is very easy to get confused about things after
such a terrifying experience as that, is not it? - A. It is
not easy to get confused considering I have not slept at all
since it happened.

I am sure it was horrifying in every way, but we can actually
see on the photograph the barrier that failed? - A. Yes.

Is that the second barrier you were talking about? - A. No,
that is not the second barrier I am talking about, because
when I say it looked as though it was a ;barrier that failed,
looking by that it could not have been the barrier.  Something
actually happened halfway up them terraces just before the
match got s t o p p e d .

I see.  At any event - this is the last matter - whether or
not that was the barrier failing that you had an impression
about, can you help me as to this.  Before the barrier failed
or what you thought was the barrier failing, the people around
it were already in great distress and changing colour, as deep
as purple, were they? - A. The second barrier, I could not
really see, but from what I could see there were people in
front and towards me, about 10 feet away from me, whose faces
were changing colour.

And that you are quite sure the crush had got that bad to
change p e o p l e ’s colour before you even had the impression of a
barrier failing? - A. Yes.

Thank you very much, Mr. Clark.

                  Re-Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

Just a couple of questions.       Had you been to Hillsborough
before? - A. No.

Were you aware when you first came to the end of the tunnel
there were p e n s , that is to say the two middle o n e s , 3 and 4,
were actually penned in relatively small areas? - A. As I got
to the end of the tunnel I saw the middle one.       I
automatically surmised that it was just split up, and you
                                    79


                                                             I.J. CLARK


     could go straight o u t .

Q. So you were not then aware there was another barrier down on
   the right-hand side   of pen 3. Was your assessment of the
   density of the crowd based on your assumption you would be
   able to spread out if necessary along to the right? - A. Yes.

Q. And when you got into it you began to realise you could not? -
   A. Yes.

Q. And it was much more crushed than you had thought? - A. Yes.

Q. And so far as what you thought to be barriers going are
   concerned, it seems that was your impression, your belief,
   because there was a   surge you thought it must be a barrier
   going.  Is that the   position? - A. That is what it seemed
   like, the way the people were falling.

Q. Exactly, although now you look at the photograph and had drawn
   to your attention where the barrier that in fact broke w a s ,
   you now realise it could not actually have been barriers
   going.  Is that the position? - A. Yes.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Clark, can I express sympathy
     for your ordeal, and hope you make a recovery soon, and thank
     you for all your efforts to help others.  Thank you very much.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I thought it best to complete that
     w i t n e s s ’s evidence. We will rise in a moment until 10-past-2.

          Just before we do, and to clarify matters if we can,            and
     I fully understand the difficult circumstances that that
     witness had to try to recall, but you may be help us,
     Mr. Collins.  So far as your evidence goes only one
     barrier actually collapsed.  Is that right?

           MR. COLLINS:   Yes, we can see that if we look at the
     p hotog raphs. There were other barriers which bent but none
     which actually went down.   The one that went down was the one
     we saw on the photograph Mr. Glasgow put to the witness.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.  I think also just to
     clarify things, unless I have missed it, the witness who has
     just left the witness box in his statement has only really
     referred to one barrier collapsing?

          MR. COLLINS:   Yes, he    did. It is not entirely clear,
     but certainly the   impression when he gave his statement was
     one barrier.

          LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:         Thank you.      10-past-2.

                         (Luncheon A d j o u r n m e n t )
