The Institution of
                                                                                                     T he Institution of
Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royal C harter 1934                                                     S tru c tu ral E ngineers
                                                                                                     11 U pper B elgrave S tre et
                                                                                                     London S W lX BBH

                                                                                                     01-235 4535
From the P resident
P L Campbell |1>D i e C E n n   F l S l r u c t E KICK F I M a r E F I H T F ID E FASCF . M C onsK
                                                                                                     Fax: 01-235 4 2 9 4


      P L C /C C



       18 April 1989



         e Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP
       The House o f Commons
       LONDON SW1A.0AA



       Dear Home Secretary

                                                        THE HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC ENQUIRY

       I wish to convey my deep concern about the tragedy that occurred in Sheffield
       last weekend, and express my support for the Public Enquiry you have initiated.

       There will, I am sure, be a peed for an input by a structural engineer or engineers,
       and I write offering my services either personally, or as the President able to
       nominate distinguished members with the special expertise that will be required.

       Please le t me know if I can be of service to you and Lord Justice Taylor.


       Yours sincerely




       PETER CAMPBELL
THE INSTITUTION OF STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS




Appraisal of
existing structures
THE INSTITUTION OF STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS




Appraisal of

existing structures




JULY 1980


The Institution of Structural Engineers
11 UPPER BELGRAVE STREET, LONDON SW1X 8BH
Constitution of the ad hoc Committee




Professor E. Happold, BSc, CEng, FIStructE, FICE, FIOB, Chairman
Mr. A.P. Backler, BSc(Eng), DLC, CEng, MICE
Mr. J.A. Baird, CEng, MIStructE
Mr. P.R. Bartle, CEng, FIStructE
Mr. P. Beckmann, CEng, FIStructE, MICE
Mr. G.A. Bettany, MSc, CEng, MIStructE, FRICS
Dr. J.L. Clarke, MA, CEng, MICE
Dr. M.S.G. Cullimore, BSc, CEng, FIStructE
Mr. W.G. Curtin, MEng, CEng, FIStructE, FICE
Mr. D.L. Eckett
Mr. K.W. Gibson, BSc, CEng, MIStructE, MICE
Mr. J.H.R. Haswell, BSc, CEng, FIStructE, FICE
Mr. R.A. Heaton, CEng, FIStructE, FICE
Mr. P.K. Jaitly, BSc, MA, LLB, CEng, MIStructE
Dr. J.B. Menzies, BSc(Eng), CEng, FIStructE
Mr. F. Myerscough, CEng, MIStructE
Mr. A.L. Randall, CEng, FIStructE
Mr. W.H. Sharp, CEng, FIStructE
Mr. A. Stevens, CEng, FIStructE, MICE
Mr. R.J.M. Sutherland, BA, CEng, FIStructE, FICE, FIHE
Mr. C.J.K. Williams, MA

Miss Margaret Law, BSc, FIFireE prepared the draft for Appendix 5 (Fire).

Ex officio during Presidential year:
Dr. W. Eastwood, BEng, FEng, FIStructE, FICE                                1976-77
Mr. Peter Dunican, CBE, FEng, FIStructE, FICE                               1977-78
Professor Sir Alan Harris, CBE, BSc(Eng), FEng, FIStructE, FICE             1978-79
Mr. J.A. Derrington, BSc(Eng), DIC, FEng, FIStructE, FICE, FCIArb           1979-80




® 1980: The Institution of Structural Engineers

This publication is copyright under the Berne
Convention and the International Copyright Convention.
All rights reserved. Apart from any copying under
the U K Copyright Act 1956, part 1, section 7, whereby a
single copy of an article may be supplied, under certain
conditions, for the purposes of research or private study,
by a library o f a class prescribed by the U K Board of
Trade Regulations (Statutory Instruments, 1957, no. 868),
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means without prior permission of the copyright
owners. Permission is not, however, required to copy extracts
on conditions that a full reference to the source is shown.
M u ltip le copying o f the contents o f the p u b licatio n without
perm ission contravenes the aforem entioned Act.
                                                  Contents



FOREWORD                                                          5

1 INTRODUCTION                                                    7

2 PROCEDURES                                                      8
 2.1 Terms of reference                                           8
 2 .2   P o in ts to b e e s ta b lis h e d                       8
 2.3    Responsibilities                                          8
 2.4    Reporting                                                 9
        2.4.1. General considerations                             9
        2.4.2 Principal parts o f the report                     10

3 PROCESS OF APPRAISAL                                           11
 3.1 General                                                     H
 3.2 The path of assessment: the flow charts                     13
      3.2.1 Introduction                                         13
      3.2.2 Gathering o f information                            14
      3.2.3 The initial assessment                               14
      3.2.4 Improving the assumptions                            16
      3.2.5 Further stages o f assessm ent                       16
      3.2.6 Load testing                                         21

4 M ETHODS                                                       23
 4.1 Survey                                                      23
      4.1.1 Introduction                                         23
      4.1.2 Documents                                            23
      4.1.3 Dimensions                                           23
      4.1.4 Loadings an d environm ent                           24
      4.1.5 Condition                                            26
  4.2     Testing                                                27
          4.2.1 D eterm ination o f testing requirem ents        27
          4.2.2 Materials testing                                28
          4.2.3 Load testing                                     28

APPEN DIXES
 1   Sources of information on design,construction and history   35
 2   Survey report                                                36
 3   Survey of condition:observations record sheet                37
 4   Types of defect                                              38
 5   Fire                                                         50
 6   Methods of test                                              54
Reprinted D ecem ber 1982
Foreword




In 1742 Pope Benedict XTV, concerned with the state of the dome of St.
Peters, requested three men, Le Seur, Jacquier and Boscowich to carry out a
structural survey to determine the causes of distress and to devise remedial
measures. The report, published the following year, was prefaced by an
apology that said they had assessed it with theoretical mathematical
reflection only because the building was so unique. Then followed a detailed
survey of the dimensions and a discussion on possible explanations for the
damage and named the yielding of the tie rings at the circumference as the
cause. But the interesting part of this report was the second part because an
attempt was made to calculate the horizontal thrust and to prove that the two
tie rings built in at the time of erection were no longer able to carry this thrust.

The report caused a furore. One comment at the time stated: ‘If it were possible
to design and build St. Peter’s dome without mathematics and especially
without the new fangled mathematics of our time, it will also be possible to
restore it without the aid of mathematicians and mathematics... Michelangelo
knew no m a th e m a tic s and yet was able to build the dome... Heaven forbid that
the calculation is correct. For, in that case, not a minute would have passed
before the entire structure would have collapsed.’ Certainly the analysis
contained some errors. But in spite of disagreements as to the causes of the
damage most people were agreed on the measures to be taken, and in 1743 five
additional rings were built in the cupola.

The importance of this event was that, contrary to tradition, the stability of a
structure had not been based on empirical rules and opinion but on a detailed
survey and mathematical analysis.

Today we are even more interested in developing the art of structural
appraisal. We have a large stock of structures and buildings representing
successive deposits of human imagination, which we are reluctant to discard
for emotional or hard economic reasons. Urban renewal is a rapidly expanding
exercise.

 The art of appraisal of structures is different from design. In design the forces
 follow the choice of form and the analysis follows that. In appraisal the
 engineer is left face to face with an existing structure of definable qualities and
 must determine its condition and suitability of use. This is not an easy task. In
 defining the structures qualities the engineer may gain from the experience of
 other engineer’s methods, available testing procedures and current develop­
 ments in analytical techniques, and this report hopes to assist him.

                                                  5
The group who wrote the report are not the fount of all current wisdom. The report
will hopefully be amended and improved, and it is our wish that engineers who
read it will comment, draw the Institution’s attention to omissions and add to the
useful references.

The Chairman thanks the members of the committee and those other engineers
who commented on this report.

The committee enjoyed and learnt from their meeting, and we all are grateful
for the experience. But our respect and thanks go most of all to Mr. R.J.W.
Milne, Assistant Secretary (Technical), whose constant attendance and help
gave much to us all.




                                                                 E. HAPPOLD
                                                                     Chairman




                                           6
1 Introduction




Checking the adequacy of an existing structure sometimes becomes necessary as a result of:
            •    defects in design and construction
            •    deterioration with tim e or in service
            •    accidental damage or collapse
            •    for purchase, insurance, or legal purposes
            •    change of use
            •    future safety or serviceability.
R ecent experience in the appraisal of buildings has led to developments in methods of
assessing the strength and future serviceability of existing construction. T his has
required consideration of the levels o f safety appropriate to the future use o f the
construction; the assessm ent of loading; the evolution of methods for determ ining the
strength of a structure, its com ponents and constituent m aterials; and the derivation of
suitable methods for calculating structural behaviour.
T he aim of this report to consolidate this experience by providing general guidance for
engineers.
T his report is particularly concerned with the structural appraisal o f buildings, bu t it is
also relevant to the appraisal o f other constructions such as bridges, m asts, chimneys,
cooling tow ers, cranes and gantries, docks and harbour works, underground structures,
retaining structures, pipelines and the like. Structures being appraised exist physically
as opposed to being designed, and therefore much o f the uncertainty present at the
design stage is absent. This greater certainty can be taken intoaccountinthe appraisal.
O n the basis o f the Institution report Criteria fo r structural adequacy o f buildings1 1. Criteria for structural adequacy of
                 ,   ,              ,          .     j      « ,                                  buildings, Institution of   structural
S tr u c t u r a l sdC (JU 2C y C3H DC e x a m i n e d u n a e r .                               Engineers, London, 1976

                • overall stability
                • strength
                • geometric perm anence (freedom from creep and other long-term
                                                                  deformations)
                • stiffness
                • dynam ic response
                • fire resistance
                • durability
                • im permeability
                • appearance
 There is no absolute measure o f adequate safety and even less of serviceability. There
 does, however, exist a generally accepted level of safety provided by design and
 construction in accordance with current regulations and codes of practice. This level of
 safety should be used as a datum, but when assessing existing structures, engineering
 judgm ent should take precedence over compliance with the detailed clauses of codes.
 The requirem ents of serviceability should, for existing structures, be stipulated by the
 user in consultation with the engineer.


                                                                     7
2 Procedure




TERMS OF REFERENCE
The first stage is the receipt in writing of a brief from the client in which he states his
requirem ents, dates for reporting and confidentiality. It is essential to find out at the
start exactly what the client needs, how detailed the appraisal is to be and to what use
the results are to be put. A n appraising engineer m ust recognize that he m ay be called in
by someone who does not understand or define his problem. Thus it m ay fall to the
engineer to develop his own brief, together with the client.
T he client will probably be in one of the following categories, each of which m ay require
a different approach to the appraisal and a different type of report:
          •   government departm ent
          •   national corporation
          •   local authority
          •   industrialist
          •   property com pany
          •   private owner
          •   corporate or private tenant
          •   architect, consulting engineer or other designer
          •   contractor or supplier
          •   civic group
          •   insurance com pany

POINTS TO BE ESTABLISHED
The engineer will need:
        • to clarify the brief and its implications with the client and to state these in
           writing with any qualifications. This should be done before accepting the
           commission or as soon after as is practicable. The client m ust know clearly
           w hat is being done and on w hat he will get a report
         • to define the line of responsibility especially when making an appraisal
           jointly or on behalf o f more than one party
         • to isolate and state the factors that are central to the issue as soon as
           possible and to let the client know im mediately when any new problems or
           factors are found in the appraisal, giving, if appropriate, an interim report
            and an updating of the brief.
         • to state in general term s how he will proceed with the appraisal and w hat he
           will aim to establish, and to work within these terms
         • to agree the extent o f the appraisal and to give the client an initial estim ate
            of its cost
         • to advise on w hether other experts or testing houses are to be em ployed
            and, if so, how they are to be paid
         • to establish the time available
         • to keep the client fully informed of all continuing financial implications and
            to get approval of any special expenditure (tests, scaffolding, etc.)
         • to advise the client on the need to seek legal advice
         • to reach definite conclusions and to state these clearly in a written report;
            recommendations should be included in the report only if it has first been
            agreed with the client that these are required.

RESPONSIBILITIES
N o engineer can avoid responsibility for his actions. However, if the appraising
engineer states his opinions and advice clearly, gives the bases for these and can be seen
to have acted wholly objectively and prudently, he should have no need to fear legal
action against him even if his opinions are later proved wrong or his advice unsound.
        T he engineer should:
                  • decide w hether the brief is m orally and professionally acceptable; decide
                    w hether to accept it, reject it or persuade the client to alter it
                  • remain objective at all times
                  • be aware o f his responsibility for public safety and decide w hether to report
                     factors or findings not covered by the original b rief
                  • respect the reputations and feelings of others involved; in particular to
                    avoid defam ation by irrelevant or derogatory statem ents even if this is
                    apparently in the client’s interests
                  • avoid playing too safe in the appraisal or giving undue thought to personal
                    responsibilities rather than the client’s best interest
        A note2 by Lord Justice G raham on duty of care and professional responsibility states:          2. D u ty o f care and professional respon­
                                                                                                         sibility, S tru c tu ra l E ngineer, 57 A , no. 5,
        ‘I t is not possible nor ap p ro p riate. . . to define duty of care and professional            M ay 1979, p.168

        responsibility in any detail. A part from cases where there can be shown to be breach of
        contract, this is a m atter largely based on the Com m on L aw o f negligence, which is
        being developed from day to day by the Courts. T he following are some general
        principles of the law, as it stands at present, which m ay help to clarify the position in
        regard to negligence.
        Duty o f care
        The professional person has a duty, ju st as much as anyone else, in the particular
        circum stances to exercise reasonable care to avoid acts and omissions which can be
        reasonably foreseen to be likely to cause physical or financial injury to persons or
        property. Negligence is failure to exercise that care.
        T he practice of a profession, art or calling which, by its nature, dem ands some special
        skill, ability or experience, carries w ith it a duty to exercise, to a reasonable extent, the
        am ount of skill, ability and experience which that practice dem ands. If a person
        professing to practise such a profession, art or calling fails to possess th at am ount of
        skill, ability and experience which is usual in that profession, art or calling or if he
        neglects to use the skill, ability and experience which he possesses or which is
        dem anded or professed, he will be liable for breach of duty. This duty is owed not only
        to those parties with whom he has a contractual arrangem ent, e.g. by whom he has been
        em ployed or consulted, bu t also to all persons who are so closely or directly affected by
        the negligent act that they ought reasonably to have been foreseen as likely to suffer
        from that act.
         D uty of care thus arises where there is such proxim ity betw een two persons th at the
         negligence of one is likely to affect the other injuriously.
         Liability for damages
         Liability attaches to negligence not only where it is the sole effective cause but where it
         is also a contributory cause of an injury.
         Negligence of a professional person thus gives rise to liability under Common Law in
         tort, apart from the m ore obvious liability for breach o f contract. W here an employee is
         negligent, both he and his em ployer will norm ally be liable. A person who has been sued
         for negligence, although liable himself, m ay in some circum stances, be able to pass on
         his liabilty to someone else (e.g. an independent contractor or a professional m an who is
         actually.responsible for the particular negligent act).
         Jn all cases, it is for the courts to decide who, if anyone, is liable. The position in any
         given case will depend on the particular facts and circum stances of that case, and the
         taking of legal advice should be considered as soon as any serious question of liability
         seems likely to arise . . .
         F u rther information can be found in H alsbury’s Laws o f England: Negligence (Vol.
         28), 3rd Edition, and 1977 Supplem ent.’

 2.4      REPORTING
2.4.1     General considerations
          The writing of the report requires much careful thought, review and redrafting. The
          m eaning of each sentence must be examined critically. T he report will often be used by
          non-technical readers and lawyers, and it must therefore be simple and clear. A t the
          same tim e it must be technically accurate and precise, and proper weight must be given
          to interpretation. Symbols and abbreviations must be generally understod or be given
          precise meaning to avoid confusion.
          The report should be logical, have continuity and be easy to follow. The contents must
          be relevant to the brief, nothing of im portance should be left out or any unnecessary
          materials included. T he report must be based on factual data and should be objective in
          approach. A ny reservations or limitations implicit in the m ethod, technique employed
          or interpretations o f results should be clearly stated.


                                                                9
      Conclusions should be explicit and the use of vague generalities avoided. W here either
      there is insufficient inform ation or the results of the survey an d/or tests are
      inconclusive, this should be clearly stated and the conclusions qualified accordingly.
      A ny recom m endations should include the appropriate engineering solutions clearly
      defining disadvantages and advantages. T he engineer should indicate his preferred
      solution.
      T he client m ust be made aw are of any risk to public safety.

2.4.2 Principal parts of the report
       1.      Title
               This should norm ally read:
               A structural appraisal o f . . . ’
                   •   describe w hether building or structure, type and use
                   •   give location (address)
                   •   say for whom prepared (nam e of the client)
                   •   state by whom (engineer an d /o r the firm).
               It should be dated and m ay also have a serial or other identification num ber. It
               m ay also state the status o f the report, e.g. w hether confidential, interim, etc.
      2.      Synopsis
               This should contain a brief sum m ary of the significant inform ation presented
               in the report (e.g. the reason for the appraisal), stating the problem , and the
               investigations that were carried out, including significant features and
               principal conclusions and recom m endations. T he synopsis should be written
               after the com pletion of the report and m ust not contain anything not included
               in the main body o f the report.
               T he historical background, description of routine procedures and discussion
               of results is not norm ally given in this part.

      3.      List o f contents
               This should be given if required

      4.      Introduction

               This part should introduce the history and subject-m atter of the report, the
               original brief and later am endm ents, and the scope and limits o f the work. The
               limits m ay arise from:
                   • the need for a quick decision
                   • limits on the cost of the appraisal
                   • the client’s restrictions regarding the type and extent of tests that can be
                     m ade, e.g. minimal dam age to finishes etc.
                   • restricted access within the building, especially if it is in use
                   • difficulty in obtaining inform ation regarding the construction
       5.       The body o f the report
               T his should quantify the problem and state w hat was done, how it was done
               and w hat were the results that form the basis for the subsequent conclusions
               and recommendations.
                This part m ay include some of the following:

                5 .1      The background and history of the structure should give information
                          regarding:
                           •      the property, its site and location
                           •      the age of the property
                           •      past and present use
                           •      any previous structural alterations
                           •      the availability of drawings
                           •      the availability o f calculations
                           •       specialist or test reports.

                5.2       D etails o f inspections carried out, including nam es, and dates
                           should be reported. These should include visual inspections,
                           physical surveys and more detailed investigations.
                           W here m aterials and/or load testing had been carried out, the
                           details should be given. A brief description of the methods used
                           should be included, the reason for their choice highlighted, and any
                           limitations clearly stated.
                5.3       the assessm ent of the investigations should now be described. All


                                                        10
              results and their bases should be given in full. I f descriptions or
              calculations are lengthy and laborious they should be given in a
              appendix and a sum m ary only given in this part.

6.   Conclusions These should be firm reasoned judgm ents reached after careful
     consideration of the inform ation assessed. I t is prudent to discuss briefly the
     accuracy of the methods em ployed and the true significance of the findings.
     E very conclusion should be based on the inform ation contained in the body of
     the report.
     Consideration of the available inform ation should lead to one of the following
     conclusions:
     •    the structure is adequate for current use for its norm al life provided that
           it is m aintained properly
     •    the structure, although adequate at present, may not rem ain so in future
     •    the structure is inadequate for the current use but m ay or m ay not be
           adequate for alternative uses
     •    the structure is inadequate and needs rem edial m easures
     •    the structure is unsafe and beyond norm al repair
     •    the inform ation is not sufficient to reach a definite conclusion.
7.   Recommendations These should be in harm ony with the rest o f the report and
     firmly based on the conclusions. T hey m ay include proposals for rem edial
     work, regular m aintenance inspections or inspections to detect further
     deterioration.
        3 Process of appraisal




3.1    GENERAL
       Structural appraisal is a different activity to structural design. It is aim ed at assessing
       the real condition of an existing structure.
       The adequacy o f a structure is assessed by the exercise o f engineering judgm ent on
       inform ation obtained from the study of drawings and calculations, the results of
      surveys, inspections and possibly testing. E ach o f these activities should be taken no
      further than is necessary for a definite for a definite conclusion to be reached.
       T he m ethods used for assessm ent are largely those used for the justification o f a design.
       T he starting points of calculations differ as does the form in which the results are
       presented, but the basic theoiy is the same.
       Codes of practice are intended for use with present-day m aterials and construction
       methods and therefore m ay contain im plicit or explicit assum ptions that are not valid
       for the structure under consideration. It m ay therefore occasionally be necessary to
       take a code formula and work back using first principles to find the assum ptions m ade in
       its derivation. E ven if a structure is constructed using present-day m ethods, certain
       code assumptions m ay not be valid. Codes m ust, for practical reasons, be limited in
       length and com plexity and cannot allow for the infinite num ber of possible variations in
       structural layout.

      It is som etim es relevant to m ake use of out-of-date codes of practice that were current at
      the tim e of construction, but if this is done it should be rem em bered that an old code is
      m ore likely to contain inform ation th at is now considered inappropriate. The com bined
      use of old and new codes should be avoided unless absolutely necessary. I f they are
      com bined special care should be taken with safety factors and the way th at they are
      used in calculations.
      Certain phenom ena require extra care in the formulation of the assumptions for their
      calculation and in the interpretation of the results, for instance if the m ode of failure of a
      structure or m em ber is likely to be sudden (e.g. failure of cast iron beams or over­
      reinforced concrete beam s). Similarly, the collapse of a m em ber that could lead to loss
      of life should be treated with an entirely different level of concern than structural
      distress merely affecting serviceability.
      Serviceability is very m uch ‘in the eye of the user’. Calculating deflections and
      com paring calculated values with code recom m endations is rarely of much value when
      appraising an existing structure, especially as deflection calculations are notoriously
      unreliable.

      F o r an existing structure with unchanged use it is the magnitude of the existing
      deflections that is im portant and w hether they are likely to increase. F o r a change of use
      an estim ate should be m ade o f the deflections to be expected, and the effect on the
      intended use should be assessed. C are should be taken to distinguish between
      deflections caused by perm anent load and those arising from fluctuations in im posed
      load. Similarly, the effects of creep deflections on finishes should be considered.
      The im portance of assessing loads adequately is vital especially if there is risk of
      overloading arising from change in use.
      The total num ber of m anhours available for assessm ent will generally be limited, and it
      is im portant that the time should be spent as effectively as possible. It is easy to get so
      involved with the details of a particular calculation th at other equally im portant
      calculations are given only a small am ount o f tim e or com pletely forgotton F or
      example, a considerable am ount of tim e and effort might be put into a com puter
      analysis o f a steel-fram ed building, and the joints then analysed using a highly
      simplified method. T he time would have been far better spent o b ta in in g references to
      establish how such joints really behave and then checking the joints using forces and


                                                        12
  om ents from a simplified but reasonably accurate analysis of the building as a whole.
Tt m av therefore be useful to set out a list of the calculations as envisaged and check the
refinem ent o f each operation against th a t of the others before carrying out any
num erical work.
W hen failures are investigated they are usually found to be caused by com binations of
several factors. It is rare for failures to be attributable to shortcom ings that would be
c h n w n u d bv a conventional design calculation. This should be borne in mind when
Pa n n in g the calculation checks.



THE PATH OF ASSESSMENT: THE FLOW CHARTS
Introduction
T he process of appraisal is cyclical as shown in the flow charts (see Figs. 1 and 2).
Inform ation is collected and assessed. If the result shows th at the structure is adequate
the process can stop there. If inconclusive m ore inform ation can be collected, assessed
m ore thoroughly and so on. T he action required should be taken in stages, each stage
depending on the findings of the previous one.
T he stages can be as given in clauses 3.2.2 to 3.2.6 below.

                                                                                                                   1. Process of appraisal
            Define the
            structure



               t s it a                                                                 Can
            mechanism                                                        th e s t r u c t u r e be
            a s defined?                                                          r e d e fi n e d

                                                                                                                          Has it
                                                                                                                       c o lla p s e d
      A s s e s s f o rces on
      stru ctu r e a s a whole
      and check stability


                                                   Can forces             \                                              S hore
             I s stability                   or s a f e t y f a c t o r s be
             ad e q u ate ?                    ^reco n sid ered                                                                           In vestigate
                                          [10]                                                                                           oth er possible
                                                                                                                                           c a u s e s of
                                                                                                                                            collapse

                Wtil
           removal* of                                               Can                               Protect or
       single element(s)                                 critic al elem e n t(s)                 No I s t r e n g t h e n
    endanger stability of                                r e s is t a c c id e n ta l                    critical
       whole structure                                             forces ?                             elements
   [3]        parts?




  A s s e s s a c tu a l toa ds on
  ea ch elem e n t a n d in situ
  s tr e n g t h (s) of m a te rials
                                                                                                 R e a s s e s s lo a d s on
                                                                                                 el em ent co nsid ered

                                                 R e a s s e s s s t r e n g t h (s)
  Simple check calculation                       sizes and/or
                                                 assum ptions


                                                                                           Do in Situ
                 Check                                                          c o n d i t i o n s j u st i fy a tt                      Elem ent is
             s a ti s fi e d ?                                                                                                            ad e q u ate
                                                                                       assu m p tio n s




                                                                       Are real                                                Can
               deficiency                                     con d itio n s a s bad a s                                 e lem e n t sh ed
                dras tic?                                              assumed                                                load to
                                                                                                                               others
                                                           [6]
                                                                                                                                                   Element is
                                                                                                                                                   inadequate

                                                                                                                                 Can
                                                                                                                               o th e r      ^      No
                                                                                                                       el e m e n ts ca r ry
                                                                                                                            their s h a r e
                                                                           Will
                                                                     early yield of
    Recheck stability of str ucture                           e lem e n t a f f e c t stobitity
         and/or p arts                                               of o th e r p a r t s
                                                          rgi    'v . of s tr u c t u r e


                                                                                                                              Are p a s t
           Stability still                                                                                             a s s u m p t i o n s too
             adequate?                                                                                                       conservative




    More r e f in e d a n a l y s i s required                                                                    More refined an aly sis
                                                                                                                  may be helpful
      2. R efin em en t o f pro cess


                                                                                                   /             Is       \
                                                                                               '" m ath em atica l model
                                                                                                t o o c r u d e , a s s o far
                                                                                               N .        d ef ine d ?      /
            Refine mathematical model
            reconsider assum pti on s.
            Make a c c u r a te a n a ly s is of
            re de fined str u ctu re




            Make accurate analy sts of
            elem ent (s) and s e c tio n s




                        ca lc ulate d                                                              ater
                       capac
                         a d e q u a te                                                                         checked


                                    No


            Measure d e a d lo a d s a n d
            m a t e r i a l s s tr e n g t h s in situ



                                Are
                         lo ads and/or                                         Reconsider safety facto rs
                  s tre n g t h s accurately                                                                                      d eq u a te
                          known now                                            w h ere a p p r o p r i a te




                                                                                    Final ultimate
                                                                                       an a ly s is



                            Will                                                             Is
                   yield o f e l e m e n t                                            ca lc ulate d
                                                                                    capacity (ies)
           S . a f f e c t sta bility ot o t h e r s x ^                              a d e q u a te
              \               ?             y/
          No    \

      r
                                   Yes                        [s X .
                                                                                                                 a d e q u a te
                                                         \0 .K .?


                                                               ly e s

                                                R e j e c t or t e s t loa d
                                                           elem ent




3.2.2 Gathering of information
          Inform ation should be gathered about the design of the structure, its construction,
          histocy and present appearance. D ocum ents containing this information m ay not still
          be in existence, but an attem pt should be m ade to locate and examine w hat is available.
          Suggestions for this are given in sub-section 4.1 and A ppendix 1.
          T he structure should be visited to make a survey of its condition (see A ppendixes 2 and
          3). Precisely w hat is done will depend on the reason for the appraisal. W here purchase
          or change of use is being considered the dim ensions of individual m em bers, accuracy in
          construction and the type and quality of the m aterials m ay be relevant. It m ay also be
          necessary to determ ine w hat loadings the structure has been subjected to as well as the
          intended or probable future loading. This is partly determ ined visually or by asking
          people, although some people’s statem ents need to be treated with reservation. W ritten
          confirm ation of verbal statem ents should be obtained. In the case o f structural defects,
          dam age or lack of serviceability it will also be necessary to determine the nature of these
          situations and the parts affected. The condition will first be assessed visually. Advice is
          given on this in A ppendix 4.


3.2.3 The initial assessment
          The inform ation to hand should now be studied and analysed. Checks should be made
          of the load-carrying capacity o f the structure and the margins of safety by calculation
          using the available inform ation on actual loads and on the size and strength of the
          materials and com ponents. In particular, the inherent stability and the adequacy of the
          construction should be looked at. In these calculations it will be necessary to make
          assumptions about the distribution of loading and the strength o f m aterials. Such
          assumptions should be conservative.
          The first calculation will practically always be a simple conventional design
          calculation. This m ay lead to one o f three possible conclusions:


                                                                                            14
        [1] The calculations show th at the structure has an adequate m argin o f safety
            according to the relevant code of practice.
            If the engineer is satisfied that the Code recommendations are adequate for
            the likely use of the structure, and if the visual exam ination o f the structure
            has not revealed any signs of distress, it should be necessary only to re­
            check the assum ptions to guard against gross error before pronouncing the
            structure safe. T he possibility o f such m odes o f failure as fatigue or unseen
            corrosion should be considered. If the structure however does show signs
            o f distress a m ore careful recheck of the survey and the calculation m ust be
            undertaken.
       (ii) T he calculations indicate th at the structure is grossly overloaded to the
            extent th at the calculated overall factor of safety is unity or less.
            If the structure nevertheless is earring its load w ithout any signs of
            overstress and generally appears in good order the basis of the calculation
            m ust be exam ined for error.
            If the structure has been seen to be badly cracked, grossly deflected or
            collapsed, the type of failure should be com pared to that predicted by the
            calculations.
       (iii) T he calculations indicate a factor of safety greater than unity but less than
             that recom m ended by the codes and the structure shows little if any
             indication of overload.
             In this case a revised calculation is called for using a refined m athem atical
             model th at takes account o f diverging (alternative) load paths and
             secondary load-carrying m echanism s.
T he flow charts (Figs. 1 and 2) indicate the general sequence th at the process will
follow and show the cyclic paths along which such assessm ents usually proceed. T hey
will not apply in toto to all appraisals and m ay not be com plete for certain situations.
T hey are, however, considered to provide to provide useftil food for thought.
There will obviously be occasions when deviations from the sequence will be
beneficial. F o r exam ple, when a m em ber shows visible distress, a simple check on this
member should be carried out first.
W eak point are as common at connections as in m em bers. W here the flow charts read
‘elem ent’, this should therefore be interpreted as ‘m em ber and/or connections’.


        [ 1] A m echanism is a system that, because of the disposition and num ber of
             members and/or the freedom of the joints to deform w ithout increase in
             mom ent, is inherently unstable.
        [2] A t this stage the check is for overall stability.
        [3] This is equivalent to the check for Building Regulations D 17 and D 18
            (‘the 5th A m endm ent’). T hese are legally applicable only to buildings of
            over four storeys for which building regulation approval was sought after
            the 5 th A m endm ent cam e into force in 1970.
         [4] ‘Simple’ refers to the absence of assum ptions and/or procedures beyond
          & those normally used in initial design. The ‘frame analysis’ m ay at first be
         [5] no more than reasonable estim ates o f support mom ents, but a proper
             analysis m ay be necessary when ‘recycling’. ‘Check satisfied’ means that
             the calculation indicates (possibly by inference) th at the recommend­
             ations of the relevant Code of P ractice could be shown to be observed.
              [2] m ay depend on the outcom e of some of the calculations referred to
              under [4] and [5] and these latter are obviously repeated for each element
              in turn.
         [6] A visit to the site should be made at this stage to confirm that the
             param eters used in the calculations are realistic.
         [7 ] D rastic deficiency m eans th at the calculated overall load factor is less than
              1.1 for dead load only.
         [8] If, for exam ple, the elem ent under consideration provides lateral restraint
             on which a com pression m em ber (or ju st a com pression flange) relies to
             prevent it buckling, then early yielding (say, as prerequisite for load
             sharing) could deprive the possibly more essential com pression member of
             some of its lateral restraint.
          [9] A n optional path for marginal elem ents (see (iii) above), working in
              parallel with others.
        [10] See clause 3.2.5.
        [11] Refinement of the m athem atical model m ay involve the basic arrangement
                            of the structural system and its mode of behaviour as well as its geometric
                            dim ensions. It m ay also include reassessm ent of load paths and loading
                            sharing. T his may lead to several cycles of trial and error which for reasons
                            of space and because they will be different for each structure have not
                            been shown in the flow charts. It may also at this stage be worth checking
                            whether the results of previous calculations are sensitive to changes in the
                            assumptions of strength and stress/strain relations.

  3.2.4 Improving the assumptions
          So far the assessm ent has been based on conventional design assumptions. I f the
          calculations indicate a m oderate shortfall in loadbearing capacity it m ay be worth while
          to improve the accuracy of the assum ptions by m easuring the exact structural
          geometry, by m easuring the actual thickness of and determining from samples the
          densities o f the m aterials that make up the dead loads and by carrying out tests to
          ascertain the strengths o f the structural m aterials on site or in the laboratory.


  3.2.5 Further stages of assessment
3.2.5.1 Introduction
          W ith these more accurate d ata a second series o f calculations can now be carried out.
          T he m ost common design calculations use very simplified (m ostly 2-dimensional)
          models, and the m echanical properties of the m aterials are sim ulated by fairly coarse
          approxim ations. A s a consequence the secondary contributions to the load-carrying
          capacity o f a member and the reductions in the loads acting on a perticular m em ber or
          p art of member, which arise from static indeterm inacies, are ignored.
          O n the other hand, at the time o f design the actual dimensions and m aterial properties of
          the structure to be built are, to some degree, uncertain, and the calculations have to
          include an allowance for this. H owever once a structure has been built much of the
          uncertainty present at the design stage has been removed (e.g. more is known about the
          strength of the m aterials), and when the strength has been assessed itshould be possible
          to adjust the safety factors because more is known about the strength of the m aterials
          used and the condition o f the construction. In relation to loads, for example, appraisal
          allows a more accurate estim ate of dead load to be m ade, and hence the normally
          accepted level of real overall safety will be achieved with a lower nominal value for the
          factor of safety being used in the assessm ent calculation.
          The use o f factors different from those normally used in design should however be
          considered with care and resorted to only when the additional information is adequate
          to dem onstrate that the resulting level o f safety is com parable to that which results from
          sound building practice.
          W hen reconsidering the safety factors ([ 10] on the flow chart) it m ay be useful to adopt
          the now more common approach of partial factors for loads and m aterials. A s an aid to
          relating the further appraisal calculations to the currently accepted safety datum (i.e.
          the Codes of Practice) the following considerations below m ay be used.
          According to the partial safety factor form at used in C P I 103 and in revisions to other         3. C P 110: The structural use o f concrete,
          structural codes the basic design equation is written:                                             British Standards Institution, London, 1972



                                          . j cc .       ^     structural resistance
                                     Yf x load effects   <              — -----------

          7   f and ym between them cover the seven partial safety factors listed in ISO 23944.              4. IS O 2394 : 1973, G eneral principles fo r
                                                                                                             the verification o f the safety o f structures

3.2.5.2   The load factors, yf
          G ENERAL
          The y f -factors in C P 1 1 03 and sim ilar codes are made up of three factors:
                   7   fj   L oad v ariatio n factor. This takes account of the possibility of unfavour­
                            able deviation of the various loads from the values considered in deriving
                            the characteristic loads.
                   7   f2 L oad com b in ation an d sensitivity factor. This takes account of the
                          reduced probability that various loads acting together will all sim ultane­
                          ously be at their characteristic value and also the increased safety margin
                          which is required for load combinations in which the forces act in
                          opposition.

                   7   f3 S tru ctu ral perform ance facto r. This takes account of possible inaccurate
                          assessm ent of the overall effects of loading, unforeseen stress redistribu­
                          tion within the structure, variations in the dimensional accuracy achieved


                                                               16
              in the structure in as far as they affect its response, and the im portance of
              the lim it state being considered.
F o r design o f ordinary structures for strength (‘the ultim ate lim it state’) a value o f yf} =
1.2 is im plied so th at the design loads in C P 1 1 0 clause 2.3.3.1 can be w ritten
approxim ately:
 (i)   Dead and imposed loads
       1.2(1.0 x 1.15G + 1.0 x 1.35Q) or 1.2(1.0 x 0.85G + 1.0 xO x Q)
i.e. for dead loads acting adversely Yf, — 1.15              }      for combination of
     for dead loads acting beneficially Yf, = 0.85           }      two loads Yf2 — 1.0
       for imposed loads acting adversely Yf, = 1.35         )      for combination
       for imposed loads acting beneficially Yfi = 0         }      of two loads Yf2 — 1.0

       Yf, = 1.2
 (ii) Dead loads and wind loads
      1.2(0.9 x 0.85G + 1.0 x 1.15W)

 ie    for dead loads acting beneficially Yf, = 0.85            }   for m o loads combinedyfj =
                                                                     0.9 for dead load
       for wind loads acting adversely yc = 1.15                }   for two loads combined Yf2 =
                                                                     1.0 for wind load
       rf, = 12
 (iii) Dead loads imposed loads and wind loads
       1.2(0.9 x 1.15G + 0.75 x 1.35Q + 0.9 x 1.15W)
 i e for dead loads acting adversely Yf, = 1.15,                    for three loads combined y f2 =
                                                                     0.9 for dead load
       for imposed loads acting adversely Yf, = 1.35,               for three loads combined Yf2 =
                                                                     0.75 for imposed load
       for wind loads Yf, = 1.15.                                   ** t<hree }” * c°rabined       =
                                                                    0.9 for wind load
        Vf,= 12
T H E L O A D V A R IA T IO N F A C T O R Yf,
 D ea d loads
 It m ay sometimes be feasible, particularly in buildings, to m easure stnjctural
 dim ensions and densities accurately so that it is possible to calculate the weight of the
 structure with an accuracy th at would justify the reduction of the load variation factor
 Vfj from 1.15 to 1.05. A possible exception m ay be thin slabs, where 1.10 m ay be
 appropriate for thicknesses of 100mm or less.
 I f thicknesses and densities of screeds and partitions are m easured, Y f,= 1 05 m ay be
 apropriate for these finishes provided that the actual partition loads are used and not a
 ‘blanket allowance’. I f screeds and/or partitions are to be renewed the normal design
 value o f Yf, = 1.15 should be used.
 Im p o sed loads
 If proper ‘characteristic’ values were used for imposed loads there would be little
 justification for reducing y q for separate elem ents. F o r m ulti-storey columns reduction
                                                                                                       5. C P 3. C ode o f basic d ata f o r design o f
 factors such as those in C P3, C hapter V, P art 15 should take adequate care of the lower            buildings: C hap ter V. Loading: P art 1.
 probability of all floors being fully loaded sim ultaneously.                                         1967, D ead a n d im posed toads, British
                                                                                                       Standards Institution, London
  It is the experience of m ost engineers th at floors are very rarely subjected to the
  im posed loads stipulated by C P 3, C hapter V , P art 1. G ross overloading does however
  occur occasionally, particularly on floors originally intended for dwelling use. The
  engineer m ust assess the suitability o f the floors for its intended use.
  Even in situations where the statutory aspects of the C P 3, C hapter V, P art 1, la d in g s
  do not apply, extensive safeguards on the possible future use (as opposed to the
  im m ediately intended use) would be needed, before one contem plated reducing the
  im posed loads from the values in the Code. Sim ilar reservations obviously apply to the
  alternative approach of reducing y fl as the probability of exceedmg the load usually
  rem ains the same. In some circum stances it m ay even be necessary to increase the
  im posed loads and/or Y f,.
   Liquid pressures in storage tanks can be calculated as accurately as the weight of the
   structure; the factor 1.05 as used for dead loads would be appropriate if applied to the
   pressure corresponding to the highest possible head.
   Sim ilar considerations might apply to the weight of existing earth fill but not to earth
   pressures.
   W ind loads
                                                                                                        6. C P 3. Code o f basic d ata fo r design o f
   C P 3 C hapter V P art 26‘wind loads do not conform to the definition of characteristic’. It         buildings: C hapter V. L ooking: Part 2.
   appears, however, that by multiplying the wind load corresponding to S j = 1 b y ™ -                 1972, W ind loads, British Standards
   1 1 5 a wind load corresponding to a return period of 140 years is obtained. This s                  Institution, London

   probably a reasonable ultim ate value for m ost buildings, and only for special elements


                                                           17
          o r structures th a t cannot cause injury and therefore m ay be allowed to fall at less
          exceptional winds should yf, be reduced.
          E xperience suggests th a t the wind loads derived from C P3, C hapter V, P art 2 are
          reasonable for design o f cladding and particularly cladding fixings. F o r brickwork
          parapets and panel infill walls they appear sometim es to be excessive, and for the
          assessm ent of such features it m ay be preferred to refer to the sizes perm itted by the
          London Building By-Laws7rather than using reduced loads and/or y ft — factors in                 7. G re a te r London Council, C onstructional
          calculations according to B S5628, P art l 8. C are m ust be taken, however, in areas            by-laws, London Building A cts 1930-1939,
                                                                                                           L ondon Building (C onstructional) By-laws
          where wind loading is high.                                                                      1972, L ondon, G L C , M arch 1973

          T H E L O A D C O M B IN A T IO N A N D S E N S IT IV IT Y F A C T O R , yfj                     8. B S 5 6 2 8 : T h e stru ctu ra l use o f m asonry.
                                                                                                           P art 1; 1978 U nreinforced m asonry,
                                                                                                           British Standards lnsitution, London
          A s the considerations th at govern this factor are not affected by the difference between
          a design and an existing structure yf2 rem ains unaltered for appraisal calculations.
          T H E S T R U C T U R A L P E R F O R M A N C E F A C T O R , y fj
          The design factor yf3 = 1.2 covers inaccuracies o f construction, inaccuracies of
          analysis and the severity of the consequences of collapse.
          I f m easured dim ensions, including eccentricities caused by building inaccuracy, are
          used in an assessm ent of an existing structure and realistic or conservative assumptions
          are m ade about the m echanics of load transfer the following values o f yf3could be used:
               Yf3 =   1 -05 for secondary elem ents, failures o f which will not lead to progressive
                       collapse.
               Yf3 =   1.15 for prim ary members supporting other parts o f the structure and for
                       secondary m embers failures o f which might cause loss o f life and/or
                       substantial m aterial damage.




3.2.5.3   The material factors, ym
          R E IN F O R C E D C O N C R E T E
          The factor ym = 1.5 in C P I 10 includes the factor y mi in IS O 23944 which                   4. IS O 2 3 9 4 : \§ l% r G eneral principles fo r
          allows for the difference between in situ strength and the strength of the test cubes. T he    the verification o f the sa fe ty o f structures

          value o f 1.5 has been chosen largely because of uncertainties in the quality of materials
          and workmanship, com paction, curing, etc. I f concrete strengths are ascertained by
          tests on cores from the actual structure supplem ented by ultrasonic pulse velocity or
          rebound ham m er m easurem ents to assess the variability, it would be reasonable to
          reduce the overall value o f ym 9.                                                             9. D D 00: A ssessm en t o f concrete strength
                                                                                                         in structures, British S tandards Institution,
          W here the failure m echanism is well understood and'/or ductile (e.g. bending of              London (to be published)
          underreinforced beam s and slabs) consideration could be given to reducing y m to 1.25.
          It should also be rem em bered th at the factor 0.67 which is used in design to translate
          cube strength to beam ‘design strength’, increases with decreasing concrete strength.
          Conversely, there are failure modes that are not clearly understood, (e.g. shear), and
          there are members that m ay fail suddenly w ithout warning (e .f. columns). In both cases
          caution is appropriate, and ym = 1.35 m ay be more appropriate. F o r slender columns
          that cannot be safely cored even higher values of ym m ay be required.
          T he value of y ^ = 1.15 for steel given in C P 110 is based on a single tensile test by the
          manufacturer for every 2 5t (4 0t for large diam eter bars) and has, in addition, to cover
          rolling tolerance.
          A s sampling from a prim ary member will usually lead to substantial loss of structural
          resistance, it is usually im practical to extract bar samples for testing. If samples have
          been obtained from a num ber of representative members and tested and the consistency
          of the m echanical properties of the other bars checked using non-destructive means
          there could be a case for reducing ysteel to 1.05 provided that m easured effective
          depths are used in the calculations and provided th at the full stress/strain curve has
          been obtained from the tests and shows ductility and reserve of strength beyond the
          yield point.

          STRU CTU RA L ST E E L
          The 1977 proposed revision of B S 4 4 9 10 follows the pattern of partial safety factors        10. D raft Sta n d a rd s Specification f o r the
          covering variations in m aterial quality, structural performance and applied loads laid        structural use o f steelw ork in building Part
                                                                                                         I: S im p le construction a n d continuous
          down in C P I 10. A m aterial factor (ym) of 1.07 has been adopted for structural steel        construction,         7 7 / 13908D C ,    British
          covering variation in strength only. This has been incorporated in the draft by                Standards Institution, London, N ovem ber
                                                                                                         1977
          multiplying the yield strength (M in) by a factor of 0.93 (i.e. 1/1.07). The structural
          performance factor, yf3 includes for variations intolerances on rolled steel, fabrication
          and erection, together with allowance for design and detailing inconsistencies. A s far as
          loading is concerned, the principle of C P I 10 has been adopted but with a different
          format.


                                                           18
  W here, in existing structures, steels to BS 1511, BS 5 4 8 12 and BS 9 6 8 13 have been         11. BS 15: 1961. M ild steel f o r g eneral
                                                                                                   structural p urpo ses, British Standards
  used, the strength m ay be assum ed to be com parable to the equivalent grade o f BS             Institution, London
  4 3 6 0 14. In these acircum stances ym m ay be assum ed to have a value o f 1.07. In other
                                                                                                   12. BS 548: 1974. H igh tensile stru ctura l
  cases the strength of the m aterial and value of ym should be determ ined, if possible,          steel f o r bridges etc. a n d gen eral building
  from the relevant specifications and tests. If the m anufacturing specification cannot be        construction. British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                   London
  ascertained and only one or two specim ens can be tested, conservative values should be
  adopted e.g. ym = 1.25.                                                                          13. BS 9 6 8 :1 9 6 2 . H igh yie ld stress ( welding
                                                                                                   q u a lity ) structural steel, British Standards
  W here welding is to be undertaken on existing structures care m ust be taken to ensure          Institution, London
  th at the original m aterial is of a suitable quality, and any necessary adjustments are         14. BS 4 3 6 0 : 1979, S p ecifica tio n f o r
  m ade to the safety factors.                                                                     weldable structural steels, British Standards
                                                                                                   Institution, London
  F o r concrete-encased m em bers some reserve strength may be available, particularly if
  com posite action can be substantiated.
  C are m ust be taken in 19th Century structures since w rought iron m ay have been used
  instead of structural steel, the appearance being similar. The strength of wrought iron is
  directional varying betw een 310 and 36 0N /m m 2 in the line of rolling, while at right-
  angles it is only about % to % of that value. The m aterial can delam inate fairly readily,
  and corrosion is easily recognizable since it occurs in a flaky m anner.
   M A SO N RY
   T he y m -factors in B S5628, P art 18 depend on the brick m anufacturer’s quality control,     8. BS 5628: T he structu ral u s e o f m asonry,
                                                                                                   P a rt 1; 1978 U nreinforced m asonry,
   workm anship and the site control o f the m ortar. W hile these factors are difficult to        British Standards Insitution, London
   quantify after the event it is however usually possible to assess the variability of the
   brick strength and m ortar com position by sampling and testing, and one can assume
   th at the ym values include som e inbuilt allowances for deviations from the design such
   as laying bricks ‘frog’ down, cutting of horizontal chases and raking out of joints prior to
   pointing w ith soft m ortar. D etailed site inform ation on this point m ay make some
   reduction of ym acceptable.
   The very low stresses which codes o f practice allow in brickw ork laid in lime m ortar
   may be motivated by a requirem ent to limit the squeezing-out o f the m ortar and the
   resulting settlem ent o f the brickwork in the period following the construction. This
   consideration is not relevant when assessing an existing building. The increase in stress
   th at m ig h t be allowed is however difficult to assess in the absence of further
   inform ation, such as m ay sometimes be obtained by sawing out large prisms of
   brickw ork and testing them intact.
   T IM B E R
   I f the markings from m achine grading can be found, the m echanical properties and
                                                                                                    1 5 .BS 5268: T he structural u s e o f lim ber,
   appropriate safety factors can be deduced from BS 5268, P art 2 .                                P a rt 2; British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                    London
    In the majority of existing buildings the best that can be done is to identify the species
    from samples and to stress grade a representative num ber o f mem bers according to             16. B S 4978: 1973, T im ber g rades fo r
    visible defects as laid down in BS 4 9 7 8 16 for softwood and BS 5 7 5 6 17 for tropical       structu ral use, British Standards Insitution,
                                                                                                    London
    hardwoods. Once species and grade has been assessed, m echanical properties can be
    found in BS 5268, P art 2 15.                                                                    17. BS 5756: Specification f o r g ra d in g o f
                                                                                                     tropical hardw oods f o r structural purposes,
    Certain members such as floor joists in old houses are sometim es undersized by today’s          British Standards Institution. London (to b e
                                                                                                     published)
    standards and frequently notched for service pipes. Some 18th Century jo in t details in
    roof trusses are not sound engineering. In both cases calculations are likely to prove
    unhelpful, and subject to careful inspection o f bearings, and joints, the engineer has
    either to accept ‘structural adequacy by force of habit’, provided that the load is not
    increased, or to recommend rem edial works.




.4 Calculations requiring special consideration
    GENERAL
    W hile m ost engineering calculations do not in any way represent the real structural
    behaviour they do however in m ost cases, when used w ith the custom ary safety factors,
    result in structures that are safe and serviceable. C ertain types o f structural behaviour
    are however not am enable to accurate prediction by calculation so that safety factors
    used in calculations will not necessarily ensure safety. U nfortunately the types of
    failure that are m ost difficult to predict accurately also tend to be the most sudden and
    therefore present the m ost danger to life.
     Perhaps the greatest danger is the use of a formula in a situation where it is not directly
     applicable. If the formula is obtained from a recognized code or standard there should
     be no danger provided that the formula is used exactly as intended in the document.
     Form ulas from textbooks have usually been derived for idealized, simplified conditions
     and will give values applicable for those conditions only. T he E uler formula, for
     example will give the exact elastic critical load for a straight pin-ended bar, but does
     not include param eters such as yield strength and initial bow which are necessary to
calculate the buckling load of a real strut. A textbook formula will not, generally,
contain safety factors. These m ust be chosen to take account o f the applicability of the
formula.

B R IT T L E -F R A C T U R E F A IL U R E I N S T R U C T U R A L S T E E L W O R K
Brittle-fracture failures in structural steelwork occur only under a com bination of
factors. This com bination includes:
           • tensile stresses
           • crack-like defects or severe stress concentrations
           • m aterial of poor notch ductility or fracture toughness at service
              tem peratures.
In carrying out appraisals o f risks of brittle-fracture failure it is im portant to know the
notch ductility or fracture toughness o f the steel, the stress levels present, the presence
of any general stress concentrations or risks of crack-like defects, and the previous
loading history. F o r structures subject to loading in one direction only, successful
carrying o f high loads previously indicates that the structure will not suffer brittle
fracture failure before this stress level is reached, provided that there has been no
deterioration of the structure by fatigue crack growth or m aterial changes.
It should be noted that no indication o f the notch ductility is obtained from the ordinary
tension test.
It m ay be that the structure being appraised is found to have cracks. F racture
mechanics techniques are now available to predict the residual strength of such
structures. In these circum stances specialist advice should be sought. Brittle fracture
                                                                                                    18. Suh, N .P ., and Turner, A .P .L .'.Elem ents
and fracture m echanics are discussed in references 18, 19 and 20.                                  o fih e m echanical behaviour o f lids, Scripta
                                                                                                    Book C o . and M cG raw -H ill, 1975

 B R IT T L E M A T E R IA L S                                                                      19. Boyd, G .M .: B rittle fra c tu re in steel
                                                                                                    structures, B utterw orths, London, 1970
 Some m aterials, e.g. concrete, are inherently brittle and fail with little or no plastic
 deformation. T he energy-absorbing capacity of a brittle com ponent is much lower than             20. K no tt, J .F .: F un d a m en ta ls o f fra c tu re
                                                                                                    m echnaics, B utterw orths, London, 1973
 that of a sim ilar com ponent m ade from a ductile m aterial, and care should be taken in
 the consideration o f dynam ic and accidental loads. Im posed displacements such as
 tem perature movement and foundation settlem ents are unlikely to cause collapse of a
 ductile structure, whereas the reverse is true o f a brittle structure or component.
 In some cases it m ay be impossible to carry out calculations that have any confidence of
 prediction, e.g. the strength of fixings cast into or drilled into concrete can be
 ascertained only from test data.

 C O M B IN E D S T R E S S E S
 The basic states o f stress are uniaxial tension, uniaxial com pression and shear. T he
 strengths o f a m aterial in these modes m ay be found by careful tests. Loading in practice
 may not be unidirectional, direct and shear stress com ponents being present two or
 three planes. In such cases the principal stresses m ust be calculated, and the failure
 criterion appropriate to the m aterial, often expressed in term s of an ‘equivalent stress’,
 applied to determine the limiting load.
  It follows, therefore, that in quoting the results o f tests m ade to determine the ‘strength’
  of a m aterial the stress conditions in w hich the data were obtained m ust be stated
  precisely.

  F A T IG U E
  F atigue calculations will be necessary when it is required to calculate the remaining life
  of a structure that is and has been subjected to repeated fluctuating loads. These
  calculations will entail an analysis o f the loading to which the structure has already
  been subjected and that anticipated in the future, together with an analysis to obtain the
  stress spectrum for the areas of stress concentration. Existing fatigue test data may then
  be used for the damage calculation. M ethods of carrying out these calculations are set
                                                                                                      21. D ra ft BS 5400. Steel, concrete a n d
  out in references 18, 21, 22, 23 and 24.                                                            com posite bridges. P a rt 3: C ode o f practice
                                                                                                     f o r design o f steel bridges, 7 9 /1 3 1 4 D C ,
                                                                                                      British Standards Institution, London
   B U C K L IN G
                                                                                                      22. B S 3518: Parts 1 to 5: 1962-1966,
   F o r m ost practical structures, buckling will involve m aterial yield or fracture. M aterial     M eth o d s o f fa tig u e testing, British
   strength m ust therefore be taken into account, together with imperfections such as bow            Standards Institution London

   in a column or tw ist in a beam.                                                                   23. G u m e y , T.R .: F atigue o f welded
                                                                                                      structures, U niversity Press, Cam bridge,
   Questions th at need to be asked before starting a buckling calculation include:                   1968
            • W ill the strength o f the structure drop suddenly after buckling? If so, initial
                                                                                                      24. F ro s t, N .E ., M arsh, E .L ., and Pook,
               imperfections will have a greater effect on the collapse load.                         L.P.: M eta l fa tig u e, University O xford,
            • Is the m aterial subject to creep? If so this is equivalent to a reduction in           Press, 1974

               stiffness and should be taken into account.
            • If the com ponent is assum ed to be restrained by adjacent elements are
               these elements stiff and strong enough?


                                                       20
               • If a C ode of Practice or B ritish S tandard formula is used to check buckling
                 does the accuracy of construction of the structure corresponded to that
                 assumed in the Code or Standard?

     C O N N E C T IO N S
     The rigorous analysis of connections is extremely difficult, and it is often only the
     ductility o f m ost engineering m aterials that enable calculations to give results that
     predict actual failure loads.
     C ertain connections have to be checked for im posed displacem ents caused by
     tem perature movements, foundation settlem ent, etc. This applies particularly w hen the
     connection is the ‘w eakest link in the chain’ so that movement is concentrated at the
     connection.
     If, as is often the case connections are hidden, so that their condition cannot be fully
     ascertained by inspection, no reduction o f safety factors should be com tem plated.

     B O L T E D C O N N E C T IO N S
     Bolted and riveted connections should be checked to ensure th at the fasteners are in
     good condition (e.g. not loose) and of a type and number adequate to transm it the
     service loading.
     H igh-strength friction-group bolted joints should also be inspected for satisfactory
     contact o f the faying surfaces and absence o f corrosion between them. A check should
     also be made with a torque w rench for the existence o f adequate shank tension.

      W E L D E D JO IN T S
      These should be checked to ensure th at the welds are of a size and type adequate to
      transm it the required loads and inspected for cracking or other signs o f deterioration.



3.2.6 Load testing
      The real behaviour of certain structural arrangem ents is sometimes not am enable to
      calculation. If a structure appears to be adequate but the calculations at this stage fail to
      dem onstrate an acceptable margin of safety, it may be worth while to:
                • load test the structure within the elastic range to examine the m anner in
                    which it actually distributes loading
                • remove components from the structure to test to failure in the laboratory
                • isolate part of the structure and test it to failure
                • test the complete structure under an overload.
      A dvice on the decision as to testing requirem ents is given in sub-section 4.2.
      C alculations should be carried out to predict as far as possible the results before the
      tests are carried out. T his is to establish approxim ately the am ount of loading required
      and the magnitude o f deflections to be m easured. A calculation that predicts the result
      before the test is carried out wil also carry more weight than a sim ilar calculation
      perform ed after the load test.
       The procedure to interpret the test results should be decided before the tests are
       commenced so that the instrum entation can be arranged to providethe relevant data
       necessary for the calculations.
       If calculations to predict test results are based on Codes o f Practice, partial factors of
       safety should be assum ed equal to 1.0 and m aterial strengths and stiffness adjusted to
       expected rather than minimum values.
       L oad tests have the effect of reducing uncertainty. Safety factors in calculations
       subsequent to load tests can be adjusted accordingly. C are m ust be taken to ensure that
       only the correct part o f the safety factor is reduced, e.g. if a water-retaining structure is
       filled with w ater and the induced stresses are m easured accurately in various
       components then if there is no possibility o f a denser liquid ever being stored it could be
       argued that the factor y f could be reduced to 1.0 for the assessm ent o f those
       components. This is incorrect since y f also has to account for the importance o f the limit
       being considered, and this portion of y f m ust remain.
       There will be occasions when it is impossible to carry out reliable calculations or
       im practical to perform load tests to assess directly the level of safety of a structure. In
       such situations any other information that can lead to a conclusion regarding adequacy
       is of great use. O ther data that could be used include:
                 • an estimate o f the ratio between the maximum load taken by the structure
                     in the past and that likely in the future ( =
                  • an estimate of the ratio between the load at which signs o f distress would
                     become apparent and the load to cause collapse (=-Rs); if brittle failure is
                     possible then R s m ust be taken as 1.0.


                                                             21
If the structure is practically in ‘as good as new ’ condition, if further deterioration is
unlikely, and if

                 past maximum load               x               collapse load
Rs              future maximum load                       load fo r apparent distress
is considered sufficiently greater than 1.0 then the structure can be deem ed adequate. If
such procedure is adopted, then the structure should be monitored over a period of time.
 4 Methods




 4.1    SURVEY
4.1.1   Introduction
        T he inform ation required for the first stage o f a structural appraisal includes a
        com prehensive knowledge of both the construction and the conditions of service to
        which it is now or is likely to be subjected.
        T he character and scope o f the survey will be limited by the dictates of time and m oney,
        bu t it m ust include as far as possible all relevant information about geometry and
        condition. T he survey m ay range from a brief visit to examine one building com ponent
        to a com plete survey o f condition and dimensions, including a programme of materials
        testing.
        Before a major survey is put in hand, the engineer should make a reconnaisance to
        establish conditions generally and to decide w hich finishes have to be removed to
        expose the structure. I t may be necessary to arrange the attendance of a contractor who
        can provide the means of access, carry out the necessary work and make good after the
        survey.
        T he information required is in three parts:
                  • The dimensions of the structure are required. T hey may be found on
                    existing drawings and m ust then be checked on site for accuracy.
                  • The loadings and other conditions of service at present and in the future
                    must be established.
                   • The m aterials o f construction, the physical condition and the visual defects
                     m ust be ascertained.

         Before visiting the site the engineer should study any evidence initially available to
         determine which information has to be obtained.

4.1.2 Documents
         Valuable information on the design, construction and history of the structure can often
         be obtained from docum ents prepared for the original design and construction and for
         subsequent modifications. The engineer should be aware that drawings and calculations
         m ay not be the latest revision nor be exactly as the structure w as built. Information on
         other construction in the locality may also be useful. Possible sources of such
         inform ation are listed in A ppendix 1.

 4.1.3 Dimensions
         T he reconnaissance and available docum ents provide the basis for a dimensional
         survey which should m easure the site, building, level, room and structural elements as
         necessary. The standard grid and level datum , national or local, to which the survey is
         to be referred may need to be specified.
         T he form and content of the final record should be agreed in advance. This agreement
         should include the size and scale of the survey drawings, the features to be measured
         and the accuracy required.
          A diary should be kept during the survey.
          It may be necessary to establish and protect survey stations and level points for later re­
          use.
          F o r surveys aimed at monitoring structural m ovement,the frequency, accuracy and
          form of readings should be agreed w ith the survey team in advance of work starting on
          site A ttention should be drawn to items of special interest in the survey and to specific
          points and surfaces on w hich readings are to be taken. The engineer should indicate


                                                               23
      where the timing of the readings is im portant and where m ore than one observation will
      be needed. Requirem ents for specialized inform ation (e.g. changes in slope on a
      surface) should be noted.



4.1.4 Loadings and environment
      Introduction
      The existing loadings and environment m ay be different from those foreseen at the time
      of design or envisaged in Standards and Codes of Practice.

      Dead loads
      D ead loads will initially be estim ated in accordance with statutory requirem ents7-25-26-27   7. G re a te r London Council, C onstructional
                                                                                                      by-laws, London Building A cts 1930-1939,
      and Codes of Practice5. Differences between design and actual loads m ay arise from             London Building (Constructional) By-laws
      variations in the dim ensions, the density and m oisture content of building m aterials28.      1972, L ondon, G L C , M arch 1973
                                                                                                      25. T h e B u ild in g R egulations, 1976, no.
      Imposed loads                                                                                   1676, L ondon, H M S O , 1976

                                                                                                      26. B u ild in g S ta n d a rd s (S co tla n d ) (C o n ­
      Since the imposed loads depend on the use of the building a full specification of current       solidation) R egulations, 1971, SI 1971,
      and proposed usage should be obtained from the building user. This should be                    no. 2 0 5 2 , London, H M S O , 1971

      confirmed by the survey. The appropriate loads can then be derived from statutory               21. B uilding Regulations (Northern Ireland),
                                                                                                      1977, Stat. R ules o f N I, 1977, no. 149,
      requirem ents,7l25,26’27 C odes o f Practice5 or results of loading surveys.29"31               Belfast, H M S O , 1977

      Warehouse loading and storage                                                                   28. BS 648: 1 964, S c h e d u le o f weights o f
                                                                                                      building m aterials. British Standards
                                                                                                      Institution London
      A ttention should be paid to the current and proposed methods and patterns of storage.
                                                                                                      29. M itchell, G .R ., and W podgate, R.W .:
      M echanical stacking may induce dynam ic effects and increase loading.                          F loor loadings in office buildings the results
                                                                                                      o f a survey, BR S C urrent paper C P 3 /7 I ,
                                                                                                      BR S, G arsto n e, 1930.
      It is necessary to confirm that m aterials   stored in structural containers are of sim ilar
      characteristics to those assumed in the       original design. Overloading is common in         30. F lo o r loadings in retail prem ises, BRS
                                                                                                      C urrent P a p e r C P 2 5 /7 1 , BRS, G arston,
      stockpiling periods. A bibliography on       the design of hoppers and silos is given in        1971
      reference32, while references33' 37 should   prove useful.                                       31    Floor loadings in domestic premises,
                                                                                                      BRS Current Paper C P33/76, BRS, Garston,
      Loads arising from machinery                                                                    1976
                                                                                                      32. A selective bibliography on hoppers and
      Static and dynamic loadings applied by plant and equipment to the structure m ay be             silos. C IR IA Bibliography 1/1970
      obtained by reference to the user or the manufacturer. A ttention should paid to the            33. C o des o f Practice — G erm an D IN
      loads applied during the installation, relocation or replacem ent of plant and equipment.       1055 P a rt 6 , D esign loads f o r buildings,
                                                                                                      loads in silo bins
      The size, location and direction o f application of point loads from lifting equipment may
                                                                                                      34. C odes o f Practice — R u s s ia n C H 302-
      be of significance.                                                                             65, Instru ctio n s fo r design o f silos f o r
                                                                                                      g ra n u la r m aterials
      D ynam ic effects of mobile equipment, e.g. forklift trucks, should be investigated.
      A ccount should be taken o f im pact from presses, ham mers, compressors and similar            35. P aterson, W .J.: ‘Pressures in silos — a
      equipment producing cyclic loads that m ay induce a dynam ic response of the structure.         review o f some structural aspects’, C ivil
                                                                                                      Engineering, 6 5 , no. 7 66, M ay 1970, p,
      It m ay prove necessary to m easure dynam ic effects and to assess the fatigue properties       497
      of the materials.
                                                                                                      36. Particulate Review, Jan . 1972, B u lk
       Service loading from pipework, valves and ductwork, should be examined in order to             storage o f g ra n u la r m aterials. A review o f
                                                                                                      so m e structural aspects
       confirm that the allowances used in the appraisal are adequate.
                                                                                                      37. B in s a n d bunkers f o r hand ling bulk
                                                                                                      m aterials — Practical design a n d techni­
       Explosion and impact                                                                           ques, b y W . Reisner and M .V. Eisenhart
                                                                                                      Rothe. T ran s T echn Publications, 1973

       G eneral provisions for accidental damage are covered by statutory requirements and
       Codes of Practice. T he resistance required for specific explosions or im pact loads must
       be determined from first principles.

       Highway and railway loads
       The frequency, weight and distribution of actual road and rail traffic, particularly on
       private roads and sidings may have to be determ ined.38 The dynamic effects of road and         38. BS 5400, Steel, concrete a n d com posite
                                                                                                       bridges,: P a rt 2. 1978, Specification fo r
       rail traffic m ay be significant.                                                               loads, British Standards Insitution, London


       Snow and ice loadings
       Consideration should be given to the build-up o f snow and ice particularly in roof
       valleys and on cables. It may be desirable to take account of variation in snow loading         39. M itchell, G .R .: S now loads on roofs.
                                                                                                       BRS C urrent P ap er C P 3 3 /7 6
       with geographical locations (see A ppendix F , Iceformation on structures, of reference
       6 and reference 39).                                                                            40. N ew bury, C. W ., and Eaton, K .J.: W ind
                                                                                                       loading handbook, BRS Report, London,
                                                                                                       H M S O . 1974
        Wind loads                                                                                     41. Penwarden, A .D ., and W ise, A .F .E .:
                                                                                                       W ind environm ent a ro und buildings. BRS
       T here have been changes in design wind loadings6 on structures in recent years.                Report. London, H M S O , 1975
       Structures designed before 1972 may be found to have different factors of safety than
       are currently required. Additional information on loading is available in the literature        42. The m odern design o f wind sensitive
                                                                                                       structures, proceedings o f the seminar held
       from the Building Research Establishm ent and the Meteorological Office, where                  on 18 June 1970 at the Institution o f Civi!
       information exists on the variation of wind speed with direction.39-40-41-42                    Engineers, London, C IR IA , 1971




                                                          24
T he dynam ic effects of wind on structures such as m asts, towers43 and buildings of           43. D ra ft Code o f P ractice — L a ttic e
                                                                                                towers a n d m asts — loading, 7 8 /1 3 0 8 5 ,
flexible construction will require special consideration.                                       British Standards Institution, London,
                                                                                                Septem ber 1978


Earthquake loads
T he zones in w hich earthquakes are likely to occur and the design criteria are usually
given by local building regulations. A refinem ent of the dynam ic loading m ay be
achieved by the application of m ethods of analysis that combine a characteristic ground        44. R ecom m ended lateral force require­
disturbance w ith the dynam ic response of the structure.44 45                                  m ents, and co m m en tary Seism ology
                                                                                                C om m ittee, Structural E ngineers, A ssocia­
                                                                                                tion o f C alifornia, San F ran cisco , 1975

Soil pressures and ground movement                                                              45. D ow rick, D .J .: E a rth q u a k e resistant
                                                                                                design. London, W iley , 1977
Loadings from soils depend on the nature o f the m aterial, its condition and ground
movements.46-52 T he engineer should look for movements in the ground that m ay be              46. BS C P 2 0 0 4 :1 9 7 2 , Foundations, British
                                                                                                Standards Institution, London
caused by:
                                                                                                47. S o ils a n d fo u n d a tio n s : /, B R E D igest
          failure in loadbearing soil strata                                                    63, H M S O , O ctober 1965
          soil consolidation
                                                                                                48. S o ils a n d fo u n d a tio n s : 2, B R E D igest
          variation in moisture content o f soil                                                64, H M S O , N ovem ber 1965
          soil com paction
                                                                                                49. S o ils a n d fo u n d a tio n s: 3, B R E D igest
          slope instability                                                                     67, H M S O , F e b ru ary 1966
          heave due to frost
                                                                                                50. Subsidence engineers’ handbook.
          soil shrinkage and swelling                                                           N ational C oal B oard, M ining D epartm ent,
          earth trem ors, earthquakes                                                           2nd ed ., 1975

          soil shrinkage due to heating                                                         51. D esign a n d construction o f deep base­
          soil swelling due to freezing                                                         m ents, Institution o f Structural E ngineers,
                                                                                                London, 1975
          m ineral extraction, tunnelling
           soil com paction due to vibration                                                    52. Stru c tu re-so il interaction, Institution
           settlem ent due to the collapse o f cavities                                         o f Structural E ngineers, London, 1978

           m ovement due to construction on the site or in the locality
           settlem ent due to com bustion in coal seams
           sub-surface erosion
           soil swelling in clays caused by moisture
           soil erosion from faulty drains or w ater supply
           swelling o f unsuitable hardcore

 Fire
 Consideration should be given to surveying the com partm entation, means of escape,
 fire load and the provisions for fire detection and fire-fighting in order to determine the
 requirem ents for protection of the structure against fire. It should be noted that
 structural modifications that may have a negligible effect on strength m ay considerably
 reduce resistance to fire.
  A dvice on inspecting fire dam aged structures53 is given in A ppendix 5.                      53. A sh ton , L.A .: Fire a n d protection o f
                                                                                                 structure, S tructural Engineer, 4 6 , no. 1,
                                                                                                 Jan u ary 1968, p. 5

 Atmospheric conditions
                                                                                                 54. W ilson, J.G .: Concrete in the weathering
  N orm al atmospheric conditions give rise to corrosion at an acceptable rate for               a n d perform a nce o f building materials,
                                                                                                 (Ed. b y Simpson, J.W ., and H orrobin,
  structures designed, constructed and m aintained in accordance with the relevant Codes         P.J.), M edical and Technical Publishing
  of Practice. A ccount should be taken o f the proximity of m oisture, corrosive m aterials,    C o., 1970 p. 41
  gases, discharges, etc. The rate or incidence of corrosion may be affected in some
                                                                                                  55. T he Institution o f Heating a n d Ventila­
  m aterials by the level of stress.                                                              ting E ngineers, G u id e A 6: S o la r data,
                                                                                                  IH V E , 1975
  A dverse conditions54 may be indicated by the deterioration of m aterials in the locality
  if not on the building itself. Investigation o f possible local sources of pollution may        56. Tem perature a n d concrete, Com m ittee
                                                                                                  on the Effect o f Tem peratuire on C oncrete,
  indicate the corrosive agent. F urther inform ation may be available in the U K from            A C I SP25, 1971, p. 1
  offices of the H ealth and Safety Executive or the Alkali Inspectorate.
                                                                                                  57. W ells, A.A .: N otched bar tests,fracture
                                                                                                  m echanics a n d th e brittle strengths o f
                                                                                                  w eldedstructures, British W eldingJoum al,
  Thermal effects                                                                                 Ja n u ary 1965

  The effects o f diurnal and seasonal variations in ambient tem perature on the structure        58. Building Research Establishment Current
  cause expansion and contraction. T he tem perature range to which the structure is              P aper l/1 0 ,E v ir o n m e n t changes tem pera­
                                                                                                  ture, creep a n d shrinkage in conrete
  subject may be determined by reference to the records o f the M eteorological Office.           structures, H M S O , 1970
  The therm al effects of heat gain and loss caused by radiation may be established by
                                                                                                   59. Building R esearch Establishm ent Digest
  transient heat flow analysis and by reference to published solar radiation data.                 no. 75 (2nd series), C racking in buildings,
                                                                                                   H M S O , O ctober 1966
   Significant temperature variations56 in the structure arising from building use,
   inadequately insulated furnaces and cold rooms and stores, kitchens in large hotels, etc.       60. B uildingR esearchEstablishm entD igest
                                                                                                   no. 164, C lay brick work: /, H M S O , April
   may need to be m easured on site. Extrem es of tem perature may affect the performance          1974
   of m aterials, e.g. brittle fracture of steels,57 strength of concrete58 and steel, etc.
                                                                                                   61. Building R esearch Establishm ent Digest
   V ariations in moisture content in some building m aterials give rise to dimensional            no. 165, C la v brick w o rk :, H M S O , M ay
                                                                                                   1974
   changes that can affect structural conditions.
                                                                                                   62. The m ovem ent o f tim bers, Technical
   A change in tem perature, moisture content or humidity may increase the rate of                 N ote no. 38, B R E , Princes Risborough
   corrosion or the deterioration in building m aterials59-62.                                     L aboratory, A ugust 1975
        Abrasion, erosion and deterioration
        In time a structure may be eroded and a significant reduction in strength and
        serviceability m ay result. A brasion from vehicles o r equipment and erosion by wind
        and w ater are examples. V andalism is a further example.
        The structural properties o f some building m aterials deteriorate with tim e, e.g. high
        alum ina cement. The engineer should look for signs o f such deterioration.

        Fungal and insect infestation
        O rganic m aterials are susceptible to fungal and insect infestation. Possible forms of
                                                                                                        63. D eca y in buildings: recognition, pre­
        attack which the engineer should look for are described in the literature                       vention a n d cure, T echn ical note no. 44,
                                                                                                        B R E , Princes Risborough Laboratory,

        Creep                                                                                           Septem ber 1977

                                                                                                        64. Tim ber decay a n d its control, T echnical
        C reep _ the increase in strain with tim e under constant load — can occur with certain         note no. 53, B R E, Princes R isborough
        m aterials. T he level of stress and the period of its application are im portant factors. >    Laboratory, N o vem ber 1977

                                                                                                        65. Ills ton, J.A ., and England, L.: Creep
        Aggressive constituents                                                                         a n d shrinkage o f concrete a n d their infl uence
                                                                                                        on structural behaviour, S tru c tu ra l
        Substances included in certain structural m aterials can cause deterioration, such as           E ngineer, 4 8 , no. 7 , Ju ly 1970, p. 283
        undispersed calcium chloride in concrete etc. D ifferent m etals separated on the
                                                                                                        66. T he creep o f stru ctu ra l concrete, R eport
        galvanic scale bu t in close contact in the works will corrode in the presence of a suitable    o f a C oncrete Society working party,
        electrolyte, e.g. w ater.67’68                                                                  T echn ical pap er no. 101, C oncrete Society,
                                                                                                        1974

        Aggressive ground conditions                                                                    67. C oncrete in th e M id d le E ast, R eprint o f
                                                                                                        five articles from Concrete, orginally pub­
        C ertain constituents in the ground m ay degrade foundations, e.g. sulphate attack on           lished 1 9 7 5 -7 6 , C & C A , 1977
        concrete in footings and piles, the effects of buried industrial w aste, etc.oy                 68.    Building Regulations        A dvisory
                                                                                                        C om m ittee, R epo rt b y Sub-C om m ittee P,
        Aggressive conditions caused by the use o f a building                                          H igh a lu m in a cem ent concrete, D e p a rt­
                                                                                                        m ent o f the E nvironm ent and W elsh Office,
                                                                                                        London, A ugust 1975
         It m ay be necessary to look for aggressive conditions o f service deriving from the use of
         the building. Reference should be m ade to the m anufacturer, to process m anagem ent or       69. Building R esearch Establishm entD igest
                                                                                                        no. 174, C oncrete in su lp h a te bearing soils
         to independent expert advice.                                                                  a n d ground water, H M S O , F ebruary 1975

         The effects o f vibration                                                                      70. Steffens, R .J.: S tru c tu ra l vibration a n d
                                                                                                        dam age, Building R esearch Establishm ent
         V ibrations70 m ay affect the use or performance of a structure. T he effects may be           R eport, H M S O , 1974


         show     y^          caused by resonance in com ponents with insufficient damping
                   • fatigue failure, usually in m etals, where the num ber and amplitude of
                     vibration cycles are excessive
                   • effect of frequency and am plitude of vibration on people.

         Strains induced in a structure by manufacture and assembly
         Badly fitting components forcibly assembled or local deformation induced in
         m anufacture and assembly (e.g. caused by welding o r by excessive local deflection of
         tem porary w orks) m ay cause strains and forces within the structure th at can affect its
                                                                                                         71. Proceedings o f conference on fatigue o f
         strength and serviceability.71                                                                  welded structures, July 1970. W elding
                                                                                                         Institute, Cam bridge. 1970
          Flooding                                                                                       72. R epair a n d renovation o f flo o d -
                                                                                                         dam aged buildings, BR E Digest 152,
          Dam age m ay be caused by flooding. G uidance on repair of flood dam aged buildings is         H M S O , April 1972
          given in reference 72.




4.1.5     Condition
          A n im portant part of the survey is to determine the physical condition of the
          construction T he task o f determining the condition of a structure should be approached
          with an open mind without prejudging the cause of any a p p a r e n t defects since the
          complexity of each structure’s history prevents all possible combinations o f defects and
          their causes being defined. T here is always a danger that new defects th at are outside of
          previous experience will be missed, and much effort m ay go into trying to find a well
          known type o f defect that is not present. It is then necessary to describe the conditions
          adequately so th at the situation can be reviewed objectively back in the office . However
          previous experience o f defects, such as those described in A ppendix 4, should be borne
          inmind and checks made for them.
                                                                                                           73. W all cladding defects a n d their
          Lack of integrity and stability of wall cladding73 is a common form of defect often              diagnosis. BR E Digest 217, Septem ber
          traceable to faults that have been present since construction. W hile fixings tie back*          1978
          and supports are of prime interest, inspection should consider that the life of most
          sealants is less than that of the cladding. It is im portant to see w hether any defect
          repeats in a pattern. Differential movement, particularly that caused by creep in in situ
          concrete construction, is potentially damaging.


                                                             26
        T he engineer should tru st only the evidence of his own eyes. H e m ust therefore be
        dressed so as to be able to inspect all spaces and equipped with a torch, tape, ham m er,
        ladder, notebook, etc. T he engineer m ust have the courage to expose m em bers or
        connections where he judges th at defects m ay occur, e.g. fixings of precast cladding
        panels, connections in prefabricated structures, etc.
        C lear notes together with sketches and photographs should be kept; a possible form is
        given in A ppendix 3.
        A list of com mon defects, together with possible causes and suggested further
        investigation, is given in A ppendix 4.


 4.2. TESTING
4.2.1   Determination of testing requirements
        T he requirem ents for testing will depend on the outcom e of the survey.
        T here is no need for testing where the survey provides sufficient inform ation to enable
        the engineer to com plete the appraisal and reach conclusions and recom m endations
        with confidence. This situation will occur where:
                   • the structure is clearly in a sound condition w ithout defects and the physical
                     dim ensions found in the survey allow calculations to confirm the suitability
                     o f the structure for its intended future use
                   • visual defects or the poor condition of the structure point to obvious
                     conclusions that m eet the requirem ents of the brief.
         Requirem ents for testing will arise in other situations w here, for example:
                   • there is a lack of inform ation on w hat m aterials are present in the structure
                   • the presence o f deteriorated or deleterious m aterials is suspected.
         W here testing is needed it is necessary for the engineer to make an assessm ent o f what
         further inform ation is needed. T he purpose o f particular tests and the inform ation that
         they can provide m ust be understood so that the right tests are carried out.
         A vailable test techniques cover a wide range of cost and complexity, the engineer
         should proceed in a logical way. Some tests lead to little disturbance. A t the other extreme
         it m ay be necessary to remove the structure from service while tests are undertaken. In
         some circum stances the cost o f testing m ay be such that im mediate rem edial action will
         provide the m ost economic solution. A ppropriate experience m ay be necessary to see
         that some types of test are carried out successfully, and specialist advice m ay be needed
         to interpret the results.
         Types of test can be divided into those th at give a local m easurem ent of a dimension,
         m aterial integrity or m aterial condition, com position or property and those th at give a
         direct indication o f the perform ance of a structure or structural element. It is often
         necessary to use a com bination of testing techniques.
         T ests providing local m easurem ent are described in clause 4.2.2 and A ppendix 6.
         Since these tests are local it is necessary for the engineer to decide on the num ber of
         tests and their locations so that representative samples are obtained. U sually there are
         typical dimensions or m aterial characteristics in structural elem ents. I f not the
         dimensions of the complete structure m ust be established, which can be used later in the
         appraisal. M inimum values or average values m ay be required. In either case, several
         tests will be needed.
          The numbers of tests and location will depend on the particular circum stances and
          should be decided by the engineer remembering that:
                  (i)    the likely variation in m aterial properties within and between parts o f the
                         structure
                 (ii)    the probable critical locations
                 (iii)   the possible errors in the test procedure
                 (iv)    different techniques m ay m easure properties o f different volumes, e.g. in
                         concrete ultrasonic-pulse-velocity m easurem ents indicate the average
                         quality through the depth whereas core tests measure to only 100-300 mm
                         depth.
          T hese factors will affect the consistency (scatter) of the results and hence the strength
          obtained by standard statistical procedures, the confidence level appropriate to which
          will increase with the number o f results. G uidance on interpretation of the results of
          tests which give an indication o f strength is available in some cases (e.g. for concrete
                                                                                                         9. D D 00: A ssessm ent o f concrete strength
          structures see reference 9).                                                                   in structures, British Standards Institution,
           T ests that give a direct indication o f structural perform ance are discussed in clause      L ondon (to b e published)

           4.2.3.


                                                                27
 4.2.2 Materials testing
        T he engineer carrying out an appraisal will rarely carry out the tests him self, b u t he
        should be present to observe and supervise the work. T hus this clause does not give
        detailed inform ation on test techniques bu t identifies the types of test th at are available,
        w hat inform ation they give, and their advantages and limitations.
        If a sample of concrete is being obtained it m ay be possible to carry ou t a com plete
        chemical analysis of the constituents. However, this analysis can be broken down in separate
        parts depending on w hat inform ation is required. F o r example the main interest would
        n o r m a l l y be the cem ent content of the concrete, the w ater/cem ent ratio and the
        presence o f deleterious m aterials such as chlorides, reactive aggregates, etc. In some
        cases there are tests that can be perform ed in the field, but these will be indicative tests.
        F o r accurate quantitative results the use of proper laboratory facilities is needed.
        W here steel samples are required and can be rem oved from a structure, all the tests
        described (including non-destructive tests on m aterial not rem oved from structure) can
        be carried out on a com paratively small sample o f m aterial. T he largest piece required
        is likely to be for a standard tensile test specim en. W hen it is possible to obtain only
        non-standard size test specimens (i.e. m iniature pieces o f different shape) the results
        m ust be carefully considered since they m ay not be representative nor give a true
        indication of actual properties.
        A vailable test techniques are sum m arized in Tables 1—5, with further details of the
        techniques in A ppendix 6.

 4.2.3 Load testing
4.2.3.1 Introduction
        A fter the survey and local tests on the m aterials the engineer m ay still have doubts
        whether the structure can perform satisfactorily under the loads likely to be im posed in



         TABLE 1 — STE E L A N D O T H E R M ETA LS

         Information               Techniques                Remarks              Reference
         sought                   available                                       (see A ppendix 6)

         D im ensional            Tapes, callipers,                               clauses 4.1.2
                                   m icrometers
                                   O ptical (eg lasers)                           T 17
                                   Radiographic               Specialist          T2
                                                              essential

         Integrity (eg presence U ltrasonic                                       T 5b
         and degree of cracking Radiographic                  Specialist          T2
         —surface and internal                                essential
         — lam ination, porosity
         inclusions

         Presence o f cracks       U ltrasonics                                   T5
                                   Radiographic               Specialist          T2
                                   D ye penetrants             essential          T18
                                   M agnetic particle                             T19

             M echanical           Tensile                                        T 20
              Properties           Im pact                                        T21
                                    Bend                                          T 22
                                    H ardness                                     T23

             Com position          M etallography                                 T 24
                                   Spectrography              Specialist          T25
                                   Chem ical analysis         essential

             W rought iron and      Visual                                        T 27
             cast iron             D rilling for small
                                    samples

             Aluminium and          Chem ical analysis
              aluminium alloys

             Corrosion

             Fatigue


                                                             28
T A B L E 2 C O N C R E T E — P L A IN , R E IN F O R C E D A N D P R E S T R E S S E D
Information              Techniques              Remarks           Reference
sought                   available                                 (see A ppendix 6)

D im ensional             T apes, callipers,                        clause 4.1.2
                           m icrometers
                          O ptical (eg lasers)                      T17
                          Radiographic           Specialist         T2
                                                  essential

C over and position       Coverm eter                                T1
of steel                  Radiographic           Specialist          T2
reinforcem ent                                    essential
                          Physical
                           exposure of
                           reinforcem ent

D egree of corrosion      E lectrical                                T3
of steel                  Physical
reinforcem ent             exposure of
                           reinforcem ent
                          Endoprobe                                  T4
 C om paction and         Radiographic           Specialist          T2
 quality of concrete                              essential
                          U ltrasonic            M ay give some
                          pulse velocity         indication of       T5
                                                 strength
                          Rebound ham m er                           T6
                          Coring                                     T7

 Strength of              Internal fracture                          T8
 concrete                 Crushing o f cores                         T7

 E x ten t o f cracking    D ye and
                           ultraviolet light                         T9

 Perm eability             A bsorption test on
                            cores                                    T lO a
                           Surface absorption                        T lO b

 Cem ent content           Chem ical A nalysis   Specialist          T il
                                                  essential
 Cem ent/aggregate         Petrographic analysis Specialist           T il
  ratio                                           essential
 W ater/cem ent ratio      Absorption            Specialist           T12
                           techniques             essential

  Presence and type        Chem ical analysis      Specialist         T13
  of adm ixtures                                    essential

  Free-lim e content       Chem ical analysis Specialist              T14
                                               essential
  D epth of carbonation Petrographic analysis Specialist              T14
                                               essential
                        Phenolphthalein test Specialist               T 14
                                               essential

  Type of cement            Chem ical analysis    Specialist          T15
                            Petrographic analysis Specialist
                                                   essential
                            Radioisotope          Specialist
                                                   essential


   T ype of aggregate       Chem ical analysis    Specialist          T16
                                                   essential
                            Petrographic analysis Specialist
                                                   essential
          T A B L E 3 — T IM B E R

          Information              Techniques                Remarks              Reference
          sought                   available                                      (see A ppendix 6)

          D im ensional            T apes, callipers,                             clause 4.1.2
           micrometers
          O ptical (eg lasers)                                                    T17
                                   Radiographic              Specialist           T2
                                                              essential

          Type of tim ber or        Laboratory               Specialist
           plywood                   exam ination             essential

          M ethod of assem bly      A nalysis of
           for built-up units        sample (to                                   T 34
          (eg glued, nailed,         determ ine glue)
          nailed and glued,
          etc.)

          Checking and/or           Physical means
           delam ination of          such as a knife
           plywood.                 blade or similar
                                     small tool

          Integrity and             Physical tests           F o r plywood
          properties                                          the type
                                                              should be
                                                              established

                                                              Refer to C P I 12
                                                               for permissible
                                                               stresses

           M oisture content        M oisture meter                               T 30
                                    D rying or sample

           Type of preservative      V isual with sample testSpecialist           T31
                                                              essential

           Insect attack             Visual                   Specialist           T32
                                                               essential

           D ry rot/w et rot         L aboratory
                                      examination             Specialist           T33
                                      for early signs          essential




            the future. C alculations based on the inform ation to hand may suggest that the structure
            may have become unserviceable or that there may be an inadequate margin of safety. In
            these circumstances consideration should be given to carrying out load tests on
            structural elements or on the complete structure.
            Clause 3.2.6 outlines the circum stances in which load testing is considered as a step in
            the process of assessing the safety of a structure. L oad testing may also be indicated
            when, because of past deterioration of materials and/or change of use, there are doubts
            about the ability of the structure to perform satisfactorily under the loads that are likely
            to be imposed in the future.
            A load test o f a full-scale structural element or o f a complete structure is a costly and
            time-consuming operation that generally cannot be repeated. I t should be used only as a
            last resort, and then it requires careful planning and design to ensure that all the desired
            information is obtained.


4.2.3.2      Types o f load test
            The appropriate type o f test should be chosen. There are four m ain types, three o f which
            may be performed with the same testing arrangement. T he four types are:
                     (i)   S tatic service load test
                           The purpose of this type o f test is to check for serviceability (e.g.
                           deflections, crack widths, etc.) and/or to investigate the behaviour o f the


                                                               30
T A B L E 4 — M A S O N R Y (IN C L U D IN G B R IC K W O R K , B L O C K W O R K
A N D P R E C A S T C O N C R E T E C L A D D IN G )

Information                Techniques                Remarks             Reference
sought                     available                                     (see A ppendix 6)

D im ensional              T apes, callipers,                            clause 4.1.2
                            m icrom eters
                           O ptical (eg lasers)                          T17
                           Radiographic              Specialist          T2
                                                      essential

Q uality                   U ltrasonic pulse                             T5
                           velocity
                           Rebound ham m er                              T6
                           Coring                                        T7

 Strength                  Internal F ractu re                           T8
                           Crushing o f cores        The com pressive T7
                           Crushing o f blocks       strength o f bricks
                                                     o r blocks in
                                                     m asonry may be
                                                     assessed by
                                                     removal o f
                                                     individual units
                                                     and carrying out
                                                     standard crushing
                                                     tests
                            M arker tests for w /c
                            ratio                                         T il

 Perm eability              Surface absorption                            T 10

  Chem ical attack          Chem ical analysis

  M ortar check             Chem ical analysis

  Integrity of wall ties    Inspection o f cavity by                      T4
                            endoprobe
                            (or sim ilar device)




  T A B L E 5 — P L A S T IC S

   Information               Techniques                Remarks             Reference
   sought                    available                                     (see Appendix 6)

   D imensional              T apes, callipers,                            clause 4.1.2
                             m icrometers
                             O ptical (eg lasers)                          T17
                             Radiographic              Specialist          T2
                                                        essential

   Identification of          Visual inspection        T rade marks oftenT35
   type of plastics           Simple hardening         give a good guide
                              Effect of flame          to chemical
                              Chem ical analysis       composition and
                                                       spread-of-flame
                                                       characteristics




                   structure or p art of the structure (e.g. load distribution between beams in a
                   floor) under a load equal to the known design service load.
            (ii)   O verload test to assess safety
                   This is a test in which the structure or part of the structure is tested under
                   an overload to confirm that an adequate margin of safety exists under
                   service loads. W here there has been no deterioration of the structural
                   materials this test will not normally lead to collapse.


                                                          31
                     W here deterioration is apparent, the test may be used to assess the
                     working load corresponding to a required margin of safety. W hen incipient
                     failure can be recognized, i.e. if the m ode of failure is sufficiently ductile, it
                     will not normally be necessary to continue the test so as to produce actual
                     collapse.
             (iii)   S tatic lo ad te st co n tin u ed to co llap se
                     This test would be earn ed out on a m ass-produced structure o r structural
                     element, or on a p art o f a com plete single structure, in order to investigate
                     the m ode of failure or to obtain an estim ate o f the failure load of the
                     remaining sim ilar structures or s ■ ctural elem ents. A ny such estim ate
                     m ust take account o f the inherent variation between structures and the
                     variability of the strength o f m aterials, arising from the processes of
                     m anufacture and construction. N on-destructive m easurem ents, as des­
                     cribed in clause 4.2.2 and A ppendix 6, can assist in this.
                     Such a test may be carried out by isolating the structure or elem ent and
                     testing it to failure in situ or by removing it to the laboratory. T he choice
                     will be governed by relative costs and consideration o f the practical
                     difficulties.
              (iv)   D y n am ic testing
                     It is sometimes necessary to ascertain the dynam ic behaviour of a
                     structure or to assess its remaining fatigue life. The dynam ic behaviour can
                     be assessed on the basis of m easurem ents of vibration amplitudes at
                     different frequencies in service conditions or under imposed dynam ic test
                     loads. Fatigue life may be assessed, when many identical components
                     have been subjected to sim ilar fatigue loading, by removing a num ber of
                     components for fatigue testing to failure in a laboratory.
                     A lternatively, the stresses at the stress raiser in the com ponent may be
                     calculated and the fatigue life estim ated from d ata on specimens with the
                                                                                                           74. E S D U data item 7 4016, Fatigue and
                     same stress concentration factor.74                                                   sub-series
                      Specialist advice should generally be sought about the likely usefulness of
                      the results.
                (v) Soil testing
                    The identification and classification o f the subsoil and the determ ination
                    of its strength and deform ation properties aimed at assessing possible
                    causes of foundation failure is a specialist subject. D escriptions of
                    methods of investigation of subsoil conditions including in situ m easure­
                    ments of soil properties are given in references 52, 75, 76 and 77.                    52 Structure— so il interaction. Institution
                                                                                                           o f Structural Engineers, L ondon, 1978

                                                                                                           75. C P 2001: 1957, S ite investigations,

4.2.3.3 Planning, preparation and precautions                                                              British Standards Insitution, London

                                                                                                           76. Scott, C.R.: A n introduction to so il
        The planning should consider every step in the test and should allow for a course of               m echanics a n d fo u n d a tio n s, 3rd edit..
        action to follow situations that may arise. If the planning reveals that the proposed test         A pplied Science Publishers, 1980

        may not be interpreted so as to yield the essential information required for the appraisal,        77. L am be, T .W ., and W hitm an, R.V.: S o il
        the decision to test should be reconsidered.                                                       m echanics, John W iley & Sons, 1979

        The testing and acceptance clauses included in several Codes o f Practice, e.g. BS 449,
        are intended primarily as guidance forjudging prototypes. They do not apply directly to
        appraisal of existing structures. The engineer may refer to the testing clauses in the
        relevant Code but m ust interpret them with care taking into account their relevance to
                                                                                                           78. M enzies, J.B.: L o a d testing o f concrete
        the structure being appraised. 78 79                                                               building structures, Structural Engineer.
                                                                                                           56 A . no. 12, D ecem ber 1978. p. 347
        A n elem ent o f danger is inherent in all load testing and particularly so for existing
        structures whose behaviour and load paths are not clearly discernible beforehand. An               79. Jones, D .S ., and Oliver, C .W .: The
        experienced engineer should be appointed to be in charge o f the entire preparation and            practical aspects o f load testing, Structural
                                                                                                           Engineer, 5 6 A , no. 12, D ecem ber 1978. p.
        execution of the test and particularly to be responsible for all aspects o f safety. H e must      353
        acquaint himself with, and look out for, signs of impending collapse. The contractor’s
        representative responsible for the personnel engaged in the testing m ust be under the
        direction of this engineer. T he engineer should fully inform the contractor o f the nature
        o f the work and of the quality of the personnel required for it. C asual labourers will not
        normally be suitable.
        Free-standing structures, e.g. unclad fram es,m ust be stayed against lateral collapse.
        Provision m ust be made to restrict movement at failure. This may be done with chocks
        or layers of timber, which can be removed progressively as the test proceeds.
         F or load tests on beam o r slab structures, scaffolding or loose props that do not interfere
         with the observed deflections but which are strong enough to withstand the im pact o f the
         structure in the event o f collapse should be provided.
         A s the collapse load will usually exceed the safe capacity o f the floor below this will
         have to be ‘propped through’ to the next and perhaps the third floor b e l o w (If the test
         load is applied by dead weight the im pact load of the collapsing floor could be about
         twice its total static load.)


                                                              32
        The possibility o f dam age to adj acent parts o f the structure o r to adj acent property m ust
        be considered, and bracing m ay have to be provided to ensure stability o f the p art of the
        structure remaining after a collapse o f the tested part.
        P reparatory work will norm ally include exposing and cleaning areas where gauges are
        to be fixed and m easurem ents made. It m ay be possible in some cases to isolate parts o f
        existing structures, e.g. floor beam s th at have to be tested. T his should be done by non-
        percussive m eans, e.g. sawing or core drilling.
        W hen a load test on a structure o f unknown capacity is in progress o r when the test load
        exceeds the service load no one m ust be allowed under the area o f possible collapse.
        M easurem ents m ust be m ade with instrum ents th a t can be read from a safe position.
        A ppropriate protective clothing m ust be worn: ‘hard hats’ are ‘de rigueur’ anywhere
        near the te st area, hard-toed boots should be available at least for personnel carrying
        kentledge, and safety goggles are desirable in case concrete or m asonry fragments start
        flying im m ediately prior to collapse.


4.2.3.4 Instrumentation
        Instrum entation should be limited to the minimum that will provide adequate
        inform ation for the proper interpretation of the test in the context of the overall
        appraisal o f the structure. Instrum ents that give interesting but inessential inform ation
        can d istract attention from the observations th at are crucial to the purpose of the test.
        The m easurem ents generally required are those o f displacem ent (including rotation)
        and cracking. Electronic devices (e.g. resistance strain gauges, displacem ent trans­
        ducers) m ay enable large numbers of observations to be m ade and recorded rapidly
        rem ote from the im mediate test area, but expensive installation costs are involved
        especially on sites exposed to the w eather where elaborate precautions will be
        necessary.
        O n site, m echanical devices although slower in use will generally be more reliable.
        D eflections up to 50mm m ay be m easured with dial gauges to an accuracy within
        0.1mm. L arger deflections m ay be m easured with scales, or observed rem otely with
        telescope if necessary. It is im portant to provide measuring devices at the supports as
        well as at m idspan o f flexural members in order to eliminate errors from column
        shortening and bearing bedding-in.
        W hen necessary rotations can be m easured by clinom eters or, in the case of large
        expected movements, by pointers attached to the structure and moving over
        independently supported scales.
        W hitew ash applied after the initial survey may facilitate the observation of fresh
        cracking o f concrete. G raduated magnifying glasses are available for m easurem ent of
        crack widths, but for safety reason their use is restricted. W hen attempting measurement
        of crack movement, great care m ust be taken to ensure th at the crack width is measured
        at exactly the same position every time.
        M echanical strain gauges such as the D em ec can be used for measuring both strains
        and crack opening. Their gauge lengths are generally not small enough, however, to
        obtain adequate resolution in areas o f rapid change of strain. If this is necessary
        electrical-resistance strain gauges will be required. In biaxial stress fields where the
        directions of the principal stresses are unknown strain gauge rosettes will be required to
        obtain the stresses.
         Local yielding of m etal structures may be detected by coating the surface with a brittle
         lacquer (of which there are several proprietary brands).
         Therm om eters should be provided to read the am bient tem perature. F o r slabs it should
         be read above as well as below the test area, and for roof slabs subject to interm ittent
         sunshine, the presence or absence o f sunshine m ust be recorded for each deflection
         observation. Alternatively, therm ocouples may be used to measure tem perature
         differences between members.


4.2.3.5 Loading
         The test load may be in the form of dead weight or may be applied mechanically.
         D ead weight requires labour for handling and is consequently usually slow and
         expensive to use. T he m eans, however, are fairly readily available (e.g. sand, bricks,
         precast concrete blocks), and a uniformly distributed load can be obtained.Bricks or
         blocks should be stacked in separate piles to avoid arching effects. A means of weighing
         samples of these materials should be provided on site. Precise measurem ent of load
         may be obtained by using cast-iron weights, but costs of hiring these may be substantial.
         Because dead load persists when failure is reached the precautions to restrict movement
         referred to above are even more essential as accelerating motion may occur aggravating
         the effect of the collapse. E ven small amounts of tilting may result in piles of blocks
         being upset.


                                                               33
        W ater contained in dustbins, proprietary or purpose-m ade plastic tanks forms a
        convenient dead load. I f loads are to be m aintained for any appreciable period it should
        be noted that only rubber provides a wholly impervious lining. W ater is fairly easily
        handled by pumping. In the event o f sudden failure w ater may be harmlessly dispersed,
        although care has to be taken to avoid damage to finishes.79                                       79. Jo n es, D .S ., and Oliv
                                                                                                           p ra c tic a l aspects o f load tes
        H ydraulic o r screw jacks or cables tensioned by jacks, winches or ‘pull-lifts’ are rapid         Engineer, 5 6 A , no. 12, Dec
                                                                                                            353
        and convenient m echanical m eans of loading. T he load m ay be m easured with pressure
        gauges in the case o f hydraulic jacks, although a load cell or proving-ring at the point of
        application o f the load to the structure is preferable. L oads should always be applied
        axially to load cells and to jacks to ensure accuracy and prevent dam age to the
        equipment.
         These m echanical m eans o f loading will generally provide some restraint to movem ent
         o f the point o f the structure at w hich it is applied. T o ensure th at the desired loading
         conditions are obtained this restraint should be minimized, e.g. by using ball seatings or
         rollers. D istributed loading m ay be sim ulated by using a num ber of jacks or by single
         jacks with load-spreading beam s. A dequate means for the applied load to react against
         adjacent parts o f the structure or a suitable anchorage m ust be provided.


4.2.3.6 Procedure and recording
        Before any load is applied a carefully annotated sketch and photograph of the testing
        arrangem ents should be m ade, and record sheets should be drawn up on which all the
        observations can be noted, including the tem perature, w eather and all other relevant
        data.
         The load should be applied increm entally at a controlled.rate without impact. A full set
         of observations should be recorded at each increment, and graphs should be plotted of
         observations at critical points on the structure as the test proceeds, to obtain an
         assessm ent o f the response and the possible onset of failure. O nce any non-linearity is
         observed the structure should be unloaded and the recovery recorded. A t this stage it
         may be desirable although expensive to unload and reload after every few increments.
         In any case a careful inspection of the structure should be m ade at each increm ent of
         load and the progress of any local damage noted.
         W here tests are continued to collapse carefully dim ensioned sketches should be m ade
         after failure o f the configuration of the collapsed structure, supplemented by
         photographs.
         The report m ust state explicitly all the conditions o f the test. I t m ay not be necessary to
         present all the data obtained, but the full record should be retained. It is essential to
         distinguish in the report between observed and deduced values.


4.2.3.7 Criteria fo r acceptance
         T here will usually be several criteria for accepting th at the structure has performed
         satisfactorily. Codes of Practice and, for concrete structures, reference 79 give some
         guidance.




                                                              34
                                                                       APPENDIX 1

Sources of information on
design, construction and history
Building owner — current/previous
  as-built drawings
  legal representatives

Original structural designers
  consulting engineers, contractors

Original design team
  architects, services engineers, quantity surveyors

Soils Investigation
   contractor records, reports

Building surveyors
   change of ownership

Adjoining owners
   party-w all agreem ents

Constructors
   contractors, specialist sub-contractors

Routine maintenance information
   building ow ner’s staff, contractors

Design team
   alterations, refurbishm ent architects, consulting engineers, quantity surveyors

Insurers
Ordnance survey
Geological survey
Mineral valuer/National Coal Board
Statutory undertakers
   railw ays, Post Office tunnels, underground services

Local authorities
   building control, planning, district surveyors (in. Inner London)

Central and local Government departments, agencies
Technical institutions, societies, journals, proceedings
   records, libraries

Local musems,
    public libraries, local societies
            /




                                                          35
                                                           APPENDIX 2

Survey report
Standard Record Sheet: General Information
Survey to be carried out by: (firm, names)

Premises to be surveyed: (title)
Address:
OS map reference:

Authority, client for survey:
Address of client:
Name, telephone number of client contact:

Name, occupier:
Nature of business
Name, telephone number of occupier contact:

Name, address of building owner:
Name, telephone number of owner contact:

Current use of building(s)
Proposed future use:
Brief statement of reason for survey:
Reference to client’s brief:

Scope of survey:

Brief description of buildings(s):
Approximate age, history of buildings:

Name, address of original designer, constructors (if known):

Titles, addresses of planning, building control authorities:

Dates of survey: by areas/buildings:




                                            36
                                                             APPENDIX 3

     Survey of condition:
-•
     observations record sheet
     subject of survey: building, level component
                                                    checklists


     observations:                                  considerations
                                                    checklist
                                                       loading
                                                       current use
                                                       adequacy for use etc.




                                                    observations
                                                    checklist




       observations by:                              date:
Types of defect                                                                                                                                                        APPENDIX 4




BUILDING COMPONENT: Loadbearing brick walls (solid) /Brick or block boundary walls
                                                 POSSIBLE C A U S E                                                     IN V E S T IG A T IO I sTS S U G G E S T E D

 V ISIB LE D E F E C T   L O A D B E A R IN G B R IC K O R   B R IC K /B L O C K B O U N D A R Y   L O A D B E A R IN G BR IC K O R             B R IC K O R B L O C K B O U N D A R Y
                         B LO C K W A L L                    W ALL                                 BLO C K W A L L (SO L ID )                   W ALL

 wall out o f plumb      rotation o f foundation             therm al/m oisture movement           examination of                                ascertain presence or otherwise
                         lack of lateral                     presence o f lateral                    foundation and subsoil                        o f expansion joints
                            restraint                          forces                                — presence o f trees —                        (particularly necessary
                         exertion of                                                                 lack of depth below                           where walls are curved on
                            horizontal forces                                                        ground o f foundation                         plan)
                         weathering effects                                                        adequacy o f wall — floor                     ascertain whether wall is
                            (see parapets)                                                           connections and roof                          ‘surcharged’ by soil or
                         sulphate attack on one side                                                 ties (in case of                              other materials
                         overloading                                                                 pitched roofs)
                         cutting o f chases

 wall fractured          differential foundation             differential foundation               as for loadbearing                            effects o f adjacent tree
 vertically —               or support settlement               settlem ent                          cavity walls                                   roots in clay soils
 cracks tapering or      heave in clay soils                 heave in clay soils                                                                 presence o f water
 diagonal following      roof movement                                                             test m ortar                                  adequacy o f foundation
 vertical and            too strong m ortar                                                                                                        and subsoil
 horizontal brick        overloading
 joints                  cutting of chases

 wall bulged             inadequate lateral                  physical growth of tree               adequacy of wall —                            presence of trees
                           restraint                           trunk                                 floor connection                              immediately adjacent to
                         inadequate ‘bond’                   pressure of local                     use of ‘snapped                                 wall
                         overloading                           lateral forces                        headers’ especially
                         horizontal chases                                                           in Flem ish bonded
                         sulphate attack on m ortar                                                  walls
                                                                                                   loading and design
                                                                                                     appraisal

  walls fractured        m ovem ent/corrosion of                                                   ascertain presence or
   vertically and/         em bedded structural steelwork                                            otherwise of
    or horixontally —    overloading                                                                 structural steelwork in
    cracks not           therm al movement                                                           wall and adequacy or
   tapering                                                                                          omission o f concrete
                                                                                                     casing

                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                       I




                                                                                                                                                           ' ■ - r - •■


                                                                                                                                                                            -V -n U
                                                                                                       loading and design check              1
     splitting and/or              overloading
       bulging o f brick           fault in bond
                                                                                                       further examination
       piers — fractures
       tapering off to
       zero at top and
       bottom o f pier
                                                                           inadequate thickness or                                               design check using
     wall oscillates                                                                                                                               lateral wind loading
                                                                             stiffening
       under application                                                                                                                         presence o f a dpc
                                                                           plane o f weakness in the
       o f intermittent                                                                                                                            incapable of
                                                                             bed joints above
       load                                                                                                                                        transm itting tensile
                                                                             foundation
                                                                                                                                                   stresses




OJ



     BUILDING COMPONENT: Brick parapet walls
                                                                  PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                         IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D
           V ISIB LE D E F E C T
                                                                                                        evidence of similar defects in adjacent buildings
     parapet ‘bow ed’ on           climatic effects
                                   rot in timber bonding wall plates below parapet                        in same situation
       plan or leaning                                                                                  examination of condition of timber plates built into walls
       inwards or outwards         torsional uplift at com ers of rectangular concrete roof slabs
                                                                                                        look for horizontal cracks at perim eter of building
                                   sulphate attack

                                    faulty construction                                                 evidence of dpc under coping stone (if any) and
     parapet brickwork
                                    porous brickwork                                                      its condition
       saturated
                                    no dpc under coping                                                 suitability of bricks used for purpose

                                    m oisture/therm al movement                                         porosity of brickwork used and likelihood of
     diagonal cracks
                                                                                                          expansion because of absorption of moisture.
        along brick
                                                                                                        effects of tem perature — location (i.e. south facing)
       courses and down
                                       \
       vertical joints
        at each end of
       parapet
BUILDING COMPONENT: Loadbearing brick or block external cavity walls/Brick or block external cavity panel walls
 V ISIB LE D E F E C T                                           PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                              IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D

                                 L O A D B E A R IN G CA V ITY             CA V ITY P A N E L W A L L      L O A D B E A R IN G CA V ITY              CA V ITY P A N E L W A L L
                                 W ALL                                                                     W ALL


 bowing of inner or outer leaf   inadequate lateral restraint              creep, shrinkage and elastic    compliance (or otherwise)                  provision (or otherwise)
                                  from floors                               shortening of building frame    with BS 5628                               of ‘com pression’ joints at
                                 inadequate tying of leaves                moisture                        omission or inadequate number of            the top of panel walls and
                                 unsuitability of m aterials used          movement (expansion of           em bedment ties, corrosion of ties -       their effectiveness
                                 overloading                               brickwork)                       strength of brickwork and                 adequacy and condition of
                                 inadequate design                         inadequate tying of leaves       m ortar used for purpose                   ties between leaves the
                                                                                                           loading and design appraisal                spacing and em bedment into
                                                                                                                                                      each leafsuitability of m aterials used
                                                                                                                                                      conditions of supporting nibs

 vertical tapering               differential foundation                                                   adequacy o f foundation provided           test
  cracks and/or                   movement and/or                                                          depth of foundation below
  diagonal cracks                 heave in clay soils                                                       surface of ground
  following horizontal           too strong m ortar                                                        presence of w ater (cracked drains)
  and vertical brick                                                                                       ground-water movement following
  joints in zig-zag                                                                                         adjacent earthworks
  pattern                                                                                                  proximity of trees in clay soils
                                                                                                           mining subsidence
                                                                                                           removal of trees prior to
                                                                                                            construction of foundations
                                                                                                            (clay soils)

 vertical hairline               shrinkage of bricks                                                       evidence of no vertical differential
  fractures at vertical           used                                                                     movement symptomatic of foundation
  joints with some evidence      omission of                                                                failure
  of hairline crack               movement joints
  along bed joints (not
  zig zag)

 horizontal fractures in                                                   therm al                        presence of underfloor heating
  flank walls at concrete
  floor levels                                                                                             adequacy or omission of joint between slabs at expansion joints

 dam pness on inside                                                       w ater bridging of cavity       existence and size of cavity (50m m minimum recommended)
  face of inner leaf                                                       condensation                    m ortar droppings on ties
                                                                                                           other bridging of cavity — wood, bricks, etc.
                                                                                                           omission of dpc trays or drainage joints in bottoms of outer leaf
                                                                                                           bridging of cavity by faulty filling of cavity with therm al insulation m aterial

 cracking (random pattern)                                                 thermal                         shrinkage of blocks — central heating
  of internal leaf and                                                                                     inadequate mechanical tying o f inner leaf to column
  plaster finish                                                                                            at edges of panel
BUIJLDIMG C O M P O N E N T : R C general, RC columns and w alls, nibs and corbels




 V ISIBLE D E F E C T                     PO SSIB LE C A U SE                           IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D

 cracking o f concrete cover/             corrosion of reinforcement (e.g.by C aC l2)   adequacy o f concrete cover to reinforcement
  exposure o f reinforcment               nails and wire ties left in formwork           having regard to quality o f concrete and severity of exposure
 very fine cracks are inherent            fire                                          visual examination — concrete usually white,
  in reinforced concrete                  corrosion of tying wires or chairs etc.        straw or pink
 rust staining on concrete                presence of iron containing compounds         strength tests
                                            in the aggregate at surfaces                test for carbonisation (phenolphthalein)
  surface
                                                                                        analysis o f concrete samples



 fine hair crazing o f surface            construction fault

                                          shrinkage                                     provision or omission of movement joints
 vertical fractures at
                                          moisture movement                             amount and spacing o f distribution reinforcement
  intervals along rc walls

                                          differential foundation or support            adequacy of foundation on stiffness of support
 diagonal fractures in
                                           settlement                                   presence o f w ater — ground movement
  rc walls

                                          corrosion of reinforcement                    adequacy o f concrete cover in relation to
 spalling of concrete from face
                                          inaccurate positioning of top                  severity o f exposure
  or top o f nibs or corbels
                                           reinforcement                                cover m eter checks
                                          inadequacy o f top reinforcement              design check
  cracking o f ribs vertically
                                          lack o f anchorage of top reinforcement       examination o f detail drawings (where possible)
                                          overloading                                   loading assessm ent and comparison with loading capacity
                                          expansion o f infilling brick panels          provisions (or otherwise) o f com pression joints in panel walls
                                          elastic shortening and shrinkage of
                                           building frame
                                          frost attack
                                          shrinkage

                            \                                                           therm al effects
  diagnonal spalling o f front edge        presence o f horizontal and vertical
                                            forces on nib                               other horizontal effects
   o f nib
BUILDING COMPONENT: RC beams and slabs


 V ISIBLE D E F E C T                    PO SSIB LE C A U SE                        IN V E ST IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D

 vertical or slightly inclined cracks   overloading                                 ascertain actual load being carried
                                        under-reinforcement, inadequate depth        compared with design load
                                        fault in design                             compare span/depth ratio with Code
                                        therm al movement                            requirements
                                        shrinkage around stirrups                   ascertain existence or otherwise of
                                                                                     uneven temperature gradient
 diagonally inclined hair cracks        overloading in shear                       ascertain shear capacity and compare
  generally at or near supports         thermal effects                             with shear forces
 o f beams
                                                                                   compare span/depth ratio with Code
                                                                                    requirments
                                                                                   ascertain existence or otherwise of
                                                                                    uneven temperature gradient




presence o f diagonal cracks in         torsional shear stresses                   adequacy o f design
  beams on the faces o f and                                                       cause and magnitude o f torsional moment
 extending around the perim eter
o f section


excessive deflection (damage to         inadequate depth                           compare span/depth ratio with Code
 partitions/glazing below) in           overloading (long-term)                     recommendations
 slabs and beams                        fault in construction: tensile             ascertain calculated theoretical
                                         reinforcement out o f position             deflections
                                        fault in design                            check loading history
                                        deterioration o f materials                test concrete
                                                                                   cover metre checks



cracking of slab and/or                 slabs designed simply supported although   cover m eter checks for presence of ‘top’ steel
 finishes over supports of               continuous                                examination of design
 slabs                                  anti-crack steel at supports inadequate
                                         o r incorrectly positioned
                                        excessive relaxation of support
                                         moments in original design
                                                                                                                                     ,


                                                                                                                                     /
                                                  'M j£   ~ — - .    » . . v       .;             s.   . -   . t -. -/ ■   *   *.   <■ y     'r}1?"   '*   ~i               ' i*>~!




                                                          PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                                             IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D
V ISIBLE D E F E C T


                                                          inadequate provision for contraction/shrinkage                                   check am ount of reinforcement and spacing of joints
random diagonal cracking
                                                          over-rich concrete mix                                                           analysis of concrete samples
 or lateral cracking across
 bays at near-even spacing


                                                          excessive wear due to traffic (forklift trucks,                                  ascertain plant manufactures loadings
breaking up or spalling of
                                                           steel-tyred vehicles, impact from mechanized plant)                             test and analyse concrete
 surfaces
                                                          poor quality concrete                                                            check use — history
                                                          chemical attack due to spillage
                                                          frost attack


                                                          random cracking due to shrinkage of concrete                                     examine spacing and detailing of joints
wet and damp areas and deterioration
                                                          inadequate daywork/expansion joints                                              cover meter
 of applied finishes
                                                          honeycombed or badly com pacted concrete                                         test and analyse concrete
                                                          faulty filling o f movement joints
                                                          bad mix design
                                                          inadequate reinforcement


                                                          excessive spacing of movement joints                                             examine details
repetitive vertical fractures
                                                          shrinkage


                                                          poor com paction of sub-grade/inadequate reinforcement                           removal of small areas to investigate conditions below slab
local settlements combined with diagonal cracks
                                                          ground movement (due to w ater movement, erosion,
                                                            mining or other outside causes)
BUILDING COMPONENT: Post-tensioned externally or internally stressed concrete beams


 V ISIBLE D E F E C T                                             PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D


 cracking (1) or spalling o f precast concrete                    corrosion of secondary reinforcement                 check condition of secondary steel at cracked locations
   with or without rust staining (2)                                                                                   check cover, carbonation and chloride content of concrete if
                                                                                                                        corrosion is confirmed
                                                                                                                       where chloride contents are high consider checking
                                                                                                                        tendon condition (especially if environment is wet) and
                                                                                                                        seeking specialist advice

 rust staining (2) below mortar covering                          corrosion of tendons                                 ascertain location of corrosion and dampness
   of externally-stressed beams


 excessive deflections                                            fracture of tendons                                 structure may be unsafe; assess and consider
 anchorage loose or fractured                                     overloading                                          closure and propping
 separation at joints in beams of segmental construction          inadequate prestress                                investigate condition of other tendons if tendon fracture obvious
 tendons visible                                                                                                      check design against existing loading conditions
 disturbance of m ortar covering tendons of
  externally-stressed beams
 shear cracking of diagonals of beam segments




BUILDING COMPONENT: pretensioned concrete beams or columns

  V ISIB LE D E F E C T                                            PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D


  transverse cracking of concrete (1) or excessive deflection      overloading                                         check design against existing loading conditions
                                                                   inadequate pretension

  cracking (1) or spalling of concrete with or without             corrosion of tendons or secondary                   check condition o f embedded steel
    rust staining (2) (cracking generally parallel to               steel reinforcement                                check cover, carbonation and chloride content of
    to the direction of the steel)                                                                                      concrete if corrosion is confirmed

  bowing of columns                                                distortion during erection                          check conditions of loading
                                                                   creep and shrinkage of concrete                     check adequacy, of design
                                                                   fracture of tendon if concrete                      check tendon condition at cracked locations
                                                                     cracked longitudinally
Note (1)           Very fine cracks may be of no significance in reinforced concrete structure but in prestressed concrete they indicate that conditions in the structure are substantially different from
                   those assumed in design.

                   Brown rust staining on the concrete surface may be indicative of corrosion of embedded steel, but it may also arise from other causes such as iron-containing aggregate or
                   reinforcement tying wire.
                          _____             —              — ..

      BUILDING COMPONENT: Stone or precast concrete cladding



                                                                  PO SSIB L E C A U SE                                         IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D
       V ISIB LE D E F E C T


                                                                  thermal movement                                             provision (or otherwise) of expansion joints and their adequacy
       spalling of vertical joints between stones and/or
                                                                                                                               adequacy of restraint fixing
       outward ‘bowing’ of stonework in the
                                                                                                                               adequacy of stonework behind fixing
        horizontal direction
                                                                                                                               adequacy of support for stonework
                                                                                                                               thickness, strength and durability of stonework used
                                                                                                                               conditions of fixing cramps used and suitability of material
                                                                                                                                for purpose (i.e. ferrous, non-ferrous)
                                                                                                                               evidence of stress corrosion (high tensile brass)

                                                                  creep, shrinkage and eleastic shortening of building frame   as above
        spalling of horizontal joints between stones                                                                           provision (or otherwise) o f soft ‘com pression’ joints
         and/or outward ‘bowing’ of stonework in the              thermal movement
                                                                                                                                 between stones at storey-height intervals and their adequacy
         vertical direction


                                                                  fixing fault                                                 failure or omission of fixings
        differential ‘face’ movement of one stone with                                                                         condition of joints — likelihood of water penetration,
          another                                                 frost movement
                                                                                                                                lack of drainage in ‘cavity’ behind stone

■t*
                                                                  corroded structural steelwork or reinforcement in wall       removal o f one or more stones to ascertain cause
        vertical fractures in stonework
                                                                   behind cladding
                                                                  shrinkage
                                                                  thermal movement

                                                                  units unreinforced likely to be iron                          if a problem analyse concrete
        rust stains on surface,
         random occurence                                          bearing aggregate

                                                                                                                                check cover, carbonisation and analyse
        rust stains on surface of precast                          corrosion of reinforcement
         concrete units suggest a pattern                          possible use of calcium chloride in manufacture




                                            \
BUILDING COMPONENT: Structural steelwork
                                                PO SSIB L E C A U S E                      IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D
       V ISIB LE D E F E C T

                                                poor fabrication or erection                structure may be unsafe, therefore
       excessive deformations resulting from:                                                  assess conditions and give
         out-of-plumb columns                   overloading                                    consideration to closure and
         floors or supporting beam s or         wrong grade of steel, or size or               temporary support
            column joints not at correct          stiffness of members
            levels                              inadequate bracing or lateral               check:    original member design
         distorted or buckled members             support                                             for under-size and/or lack
         bowing o f beams, ties and             poor fit, slip or failure of                          of stiffness;
           bracings                               supports or connections
                                                                                                      existing load conditions
                                                torsional effects not accounted for
         lack of fit at connections                                                                   against design and verify
                                                   in design
                                                                                                      adequacy for load trans­
                                                unsatisfactory base or holding-
       damage to windows or cladding                                                                  ference;
                                                   down material or grouting
                                                impact; due to vehicles, forklift                     effectiveness of connec­
                                                   trucks, etc.                                       tions, i.e. bolts, rivets or
                                                elevated temperature effects not                      welds;
                                                   allowed for in design
                                                                                                      line and level of beams
                                                                                                      and columns with original
                                                                                                      general arrangement;
                                                                                                      foundations for
                                                                                                      inadequacy or movement
                                                                                            check whether structural arrange­
                                                                                              ment is able to accommodate
                                                                                              forces imposed by thermal
                                                                                              movements

                                                effects from wind or rotating               check when wind is not blowing or
       unacceptable flexibility of a                                                          machines are not working
         complete structure or of indivi­          machinery not adequately
                                                   allowed for in design                    check if machinery is unbalanced
         dual members                                                                         or if anti-vibration mountings are
                                                vortex shedding on circular structures
                                                  such as chimneys (see also item above)      deficient

                                                 members removed by owner,                  check effects of changed structural
       member or members removed
                                                   maintenance engineers, local               arrangement and assess if rein­
       from a framework causing:
                                                   build, etc. to provide opening or          statement of removed member is
                partial failure of               access                                       sufficient remedy
                remaining structure;
                instability or overstress­
                ing of individual
                members;
                collapse


       slight waviness or localised              local yielding due to overload             check actual load, shear and
          buckling or bulging generally at         caused, e.g. by high shear or              bearing capacities against
          or near points of support or             buckling through an inadequate             applied loads
          concentrated loads                       bearing length
          absence of welds                         oversight                                     test for adequacy
          poor appearance of welds                 unsatisfactory welding

          hairlines or slight gaps on edges of     laminations                                  non-destructive testing
            material often revealed by flame       lamellar tearing
            cutting (generally only critical in
            members or parts of members in
            compression), or near weldments


          surface appearance of fractured          poor welding                                 cause of metallurgical failure,
            m aterial which may vary from          fatigue caused by repetition of                indicated by the appearance of
            smooth to crystalline                     cyclic loading having reached               the fractured surface, is best
          cracks on surface of                        the fatigue life of the structure or        determined by a expert.
            welds or heat-affected                    structural element,
            zones                                  brittle fracture, caused by low
          cracks initiated at stress raisers          temperature combined with a
            such as punched holes or sheared          tensile stress and notch effect,
            or flame-cut edges not subse­             not allowed for in the design and
            quently machined or ground                selection of the steel


          slipping of joints and connections      overloading                                   check loading, size and effective­
          tearing or distortion of metal          incorrect type of fastener, e.g.                ness of fasteners
             adjacent to holes                       undersize, wrong grade, etc.
                                                  inadequately or over tightened bolts
                                                  flame cut or poor punched holes
                                                  hole drifting during erection


          open holes indicating missing           fasteners badly fitted or never             check load adequacy and need to
             fasteners                               installed at time of original erec­        replace defective items
          rivets with loose or missing heads         tion, through inadequate super­
          loose bolts, loose nuts (wrong size        vision or poor workmanship
             nuts)                                misaligned or misplaced holes
          bent or distorted fasteners             failed fasteners because o f over­
          uneven seating of head or nut              load or defective fastener material


          corrosion-                              environmental attack                       ascertain cause
                   varying between light          presence o f moisture                      if moisutre is present — where is it
                   rusting on previously          failure of protective system               coming from — can it be prevented?
                   protected surfaces to                                                     is structural performance likely to
                   pronounced rusting                                                        be afFected i.e. is sufficient sound
                   on unprotected surfaces.                                                  material remaining to support the
                                                                                             applied leading?
                                                                                             Note:    corrosion may be detri­
                                                                                                      mental if present between
                                                                                                      surfaces o f joints, due to
                                                                                                      the products of corrosion
                                                                                                      causing expansion.
_   ...
BUILDING COMPONENT: Timber pitched and flat roofs

 VISIBLE D E F E C T                                              PO SSIB LE C A U SE                                                        IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D

                                          P IT C H E D R O O FS                         F L A T R O O FS                     P IT C H E D R O O FS                                    F L A T R O O FS


 sagging o f roof                                                       excessive span/depth ratio                                                                 determine size and spacing o f roof
                                                                         o f roof joists                                                                            joists and compare with span and
                                                                        inadequacy of any main supporting                                                          check adequacy and condition of any
                                                                         beam or joist                                                                              supporting beam(s) and that additional
                                                                        change or roof covering                                                                     layer(s) of asphalt have not been
                                                                         or addition to existing covering                                                           provided since completion of
                                                                        inadequate or lack of bracing                                                               construction
                                                                        heavy items on roof                                                                        check for any ‘plant’ placed
                                                                         such as water storage tanks,                                                               on the roof and the fall of roof and
                                                                         ventilating plant etc.                                                                     and any evidence of ‘ponding’
                                                                        ‘ponding’ (i.e. water lying)                                                               visual examination for rot or infestation
                                                                        inherent defects in the actual
                                                                         structural timber such as w et/dry rot.
                                                                         splits shakes and insect infestation


 ridge sagging                    horizontal movement of feet                                                      examine verticality o f external walls
                                   of rafters                                                                       in the topmost storey; extent and
                                  removal of purlins and/or struts,                                                 efficiency of ties provided between
                                   of wall in topm ost storey                                                       the feet o f rafters (i.e. ceiling joists);
                                   supporting the feet of the struts,                                               condition and spacing of purlins and
                                   earring the purlins                                                              struts; support for struts in topmost
                                  recent change in the roof                                                         storey; roof for any recent changes
                                   covering causing an increase                                                     in coverings
                                    in loading


  valley beam sagging             removal or settlement o f central                                                visual examination of support
                                   support (usually timber stud                                                     provided and its effectiveness
                                   partition)                                                                      remove part of ceiling for visual
                                  valley beam split or rotten where                                                 examination
                                   built into external walls or                                                     ditto - particularly at ends where
                                   because of leaking gutter                                                        beam is built into walls
                                                                                                                   visual examination for beetles or
                                  insect infestation
                                                                                                                    wood boring insects, their holes
                                                                                                                    and wood particles resulting
                                                                                                                    therefrom
                                                                                                                   examine gutter


                                                                                                                                                                    examine construction
  disturbance o f tile coursing   roof inadequately braced
                                                                                                                                                                  ---------------------- -- -------------------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1       i
                                               PO SSIBLE C A U SE                                                    IN V E S T IG A T IO N S S U G G E S T E D
VISIBLE D E F E C T


                                               if associated with cracks in parent structure see cracks              remove local areas of finishes to inspect the structure:
cracks in rendering, tiling or floor screeds                                                                          then process as for cracks in brickwork or concrete walls
                                                 brickwork in earlier table
                                               if not associated with parent structure — differential                 or concrete floors
                                                 shrinkage between finish nd structure                               check whether finishes properly bonded to structure:
                                               incompatible materials with ineffective bonding agent                  tapping will generally reveal ‘hollow’ areas)



wall cracks, horizontal, up to about lm        deflection of floor supporting bottom courses of
 above floor level                              brickwork/blockwork


                                                                                                                     ascertain expansion of roof under known environmental
cracks in asphalt roof finishes                thermal movement (plus shrinkage) of roof structure
                                                (some lightweight decks very susceptible)                              conditions examine
                                               torsional movement of areas of rectangular simply supported slabs     external walls for horizontal cracks
                                                                                                                     inspect joints from below and check deflection of units
                                               relative vertical movement of adjacent precast units
                                                                                                                     inspect total construction
                                                (NB prestressed units may be more susceptible)
                                               crushing of insulation

                                                                                                                     partial removal of brickwork to inspect dpc
damp areas of plaster on inner leaf of         blocked or partly filled cavity
                                                                                                                     investigate detail
brick/block wall:                              faulty dpc                                            , . ■ ,
near ground level;                             structural cracking due to one of the causes listed under brickwork
adjacent to gills, lintels;                    faulty detailing of dpc
behind precast concrete beams or lintels       shrinkage causing opening of joints
                                               condensation
                                               burst pipes
                                                                             APPENDIX 5



         Fire




 A5.1    INTRODUCTION
         Building fires, which normally reach temperatures of the order of 1000°C, can affect
         the loadbearing capacity of structural elements in a number of ways. Apart from such
         obvious effects as charring and spalling there can be a permanent loss of strength of the
         remaining material and expansion may cause damage in parts of the building not
         directly affected by the fire.
         Criteria for the behaviour of structural elements exposed to fire are derived from the
         standard fire resistance test of BS 476: Part 880. This has been criticised in (at least)      86. BS 476: Fire tests on building materials
                                                                                                        and structures. P a rt 18. 1972 Test methods
         three ways: first, that in practice the variation of fire temperature with time may be         and criteria fo r the fir e resistance o f elem ents
         different; secondly, that the effects of rapid cooling by fire hoses are not reproduced;       o f building construction, British S tan dard s
                                                                                                        Institution, London
         and thirdly, that the test does not show the effects of structural restraint or composite
         action. These criticisms are, of course, of some importance when the structure is
         being designed. However, in this Appendix, the main emphasis is on estimating the
         residual load carrying capacity and hence assessing the remedial measures, if any, that
         are needed to restore the building to its original design for fire resistance and other
         requirements. Obviously, if some weaknesses in the original design have been
         exposed by a fire these should be put right.


 A5.2    EFFECTS OF HIGH TEMPERATURE
         ON MATERIAL PROPERTIES
A5.2.1   General
         The effects of temperature on thermal, strength and deformation properties are
         published in a range of papers and an excellent summary is given by Lie81. It should be        81. Li e. T . T . : F ire a n d b u ild in g s . A p p l i e d
                                                                                                        S ci en c e P u b li s h e r s Lt d. . L o n d o n , 19 72
         noted that building materials, except timber, heated above 250°C are likely to show
         significant loss of strength which may or may not be recovered after cooling.


A5.2.2    Concrete
          For concrete, the compressive strength varies not only with temperature but also with a
          number of other factors including the rate of heating, the duration of heating, whether
          the specimen was loaded or not, the type and size of aggregate, percentage of cement
          paste and the water/cement ratio. In general it may be said that concrete heated by a
          building fire always loses some compressive strength and continues to lose it on
          cooling. However, where the temperature has not exceeded 300°C most of the strength           82. G r e e n . J .K .: 'R e i n s t a t e m e n t of co nc re te
          will eventually be recovered.8182                                                             st ru ct u r es a f t e r f ; r e \ A r c h i t e c t s Jo u r n a l,
                                                                                                        14 a n d 21 J u l y 1971
          Because of the comparatively low thermal diffusivity of concrete (of order 1mm2/s) the
          300°C contour may be at only a small depth below the heated face. The elastic modulus
          also decreases with temperature, although it is believed that it will recover substantially


                                                            50
         with time provided that the concrete has not been heated above 500°C. The
         coefficient of thermal expansion of the concrete is of the order of 1(T5 per °C but
         varies with aggregate. Creep becomes significant at quite low tem peratures, being of
         orders 10-4 to 10~3 per hour over the tem perature range 250°C to 700°C, and can have
         a beneficial effect in relaxing stresses. More details of the properties of concrete                        83. F ire resistance o f concrete structures.
         exposed to fire are given in the R ep o rt83 of a Joint Com mittee of the Institution of                    R eport o f a jo in t C om m ittee o f the Institu­
                                                                                                                     tion o f Structural Engineers a n d the
         Structural Engineers and the Concrete Society.                                                              C oncrete Society, Institution o f Structural
                                                                                                                     Engineers, London 1975



A5.2.3   Steel
         F o r steel, the yield strength is reduced to about half at 5 5 0 °C ,an d a t 1000°C it is 10%
         or less. Because of its high therm al conductivity the tem perature of unprotected internal
         steelwork will normally be little different from the fire tem perature so th at structural
         steelwork is usually insulated. A part from losing practically all its loadbearing capacity
         unprotected steelwork can give considerable expansion, the coefficient being of order
         10~5 per °C. Young’s modulus does not decrease with tem perature so rapidly as yield
         strength.
         Cold-worked bars, when heated, lose their strength more rapidly than hot-rolled high-
         yield bars and mild-steel bars. The properties after heating are of interest from the point
         of view of reinstatement. The original yield stress is alm ost completely recovered on
         cooling from tem peratures of500°-600°C for all bars, b u t on cooling from 800°C it is
         reduced by 30% for cold-worked bars and 5% for hot-rolled b a r s .'
         F o r prestressing steels, the loss of strength occurs at lower tem peratures than for
         reinforcing bars. Cold-drawn and heat-treated steels lose a p art of their strength
         perm anently when heated to tem peratures in excess o f about 300°C and 400°C,
         respectively.
         The creep rate* of steel is very sensitive to higher temperatures; it becomes significant
         for mild steel above 450°C and for prestressing steel above 300°C. In fire resistance
         tests, the rate of tem perature rise when the steel is reaching its critical tem perature is
         fast enough to m ask any effects of creep, but where there m ay be a long cooling-down
         period, as in prestressed concrete, subsequent creep m ay have some effect in an
         elem ent .hat has not reached the critical condition.
         F urther information on the properties of steel exposed to high tem perature is available
         from the British Steel Corporation Teesside Laboratories.




A5.2.4 Timber
         Tim ber ‘browns’ at about 120°-150°C , ‘blackens’ around 200°-250°C and evolves
         combustible vapours at about 300°C. A bove a certain tem perature 400°—450°C, or
         300°C if a flame is present) the surface o f the tim ber will ignite and char at a steady rate.
         A ny charred part o f a section m ust be assumed to have lost all strength, but any timber
         beneath the charred layer may be assumed to have no significant loss of strength
         because the therm al conductivity of tim ber is low. T he T able below gives notional rates
         of charring.84                                                                                             84. BS 5268: Code o f practice fo r the
                                                                                                                    structural u se o ftim b e r, Part 4: 1978, Fire
                                                                                                                    resistance o f tim ber structures, British
                                                                                                                    Standards Institution, London
         Table: N otional rate o f charring for th e calculation of residual section

                                                                                                Chat Ting in
                                               Species                                                     60 min
                                                                                       30 min

                                                                                       mm                   mm
            (a )     all structural species listed in Table 1 o f C P 112: P a rt 2:   20                   40
                     1971,85 except those noted in items (b ) and (c)                                               85. C P 112: T he stm c tu ra l use o f timber,
                                                                                                                    P art 2 :1 9 7 1 , M etric units, British Standards
                                                                                       25                   50      Institution, London
            (b )     western red cedar

            (c)       Oak, utile, keruing (gurjun), teak, greenheart. jarrah            15                  30




           A column that is exposed to the fire on all faces should be assumed to char equally on all
           faces 1.25 times faster than the rates given in the Table. Reference should be m ade to
           BS 5268: P art 4 for further details84.




          •T h e creep rate referred to is secondary period creep.




                                                                               51
A5.2.5 Brickwork
          The physical properties and mechanisms of failure of brickwalls exposed to fire have
          not been analysed in detail. As with concrete there is a loss of compressive strength,
          unequal thermal expansion of the two faces, and behaviour is influenced by edge
          conditions86'87. For solid bricks, fire resistance is directly proportional to thickness.        86. M alhotra, H.L.: Fire resistance of brick
                                                                                                           and block walls, Fire note no. 6 , H M SO ,
          Perforated bricks and hollow clay units are more sensitive to thermal shock; there can           London 1966
          be cracking of the connecting webs and tendancy for the ‘leaves’ to separate. With
                                                                                                           87, F isher, K.: ‘T he perform ance o f brick­
          cavity walls the inner leaf carries the m ajor part of the load. They can be subjected to        work in fire resistance tests, Jubilee con­
          more severe forces by heated and expanding floor slabs than an internal wall                     ference — Structural design for fire re­
          surrounded by stru cture. All types of bricks give much better performance if plaster is         sistance, 9 - 1 1 Septem ber 1 9 7 5 ,M idlands
                                                                                                           Branch, Institution of Structural Engineers
          applied, thus giving im proved insulation and reduction of thermal shock.



 A5.3 ESTIMATION OF FIRE BEHAVIOUR
          It is useful to estimate the maximum tem perature attained in building fires. Parker
          and N urse88 give the following guidance: moulded glass objects soften or flow at 700°           88. Parker, T .W ., and N urse, R.W .: The
                                                                                                           estim ation o f the m a x im u m tem perature
          or 800°C. Metals form drops or have sharp edges rounded as follows: 300°— 350°C for              attained in b uildingfires fro m exam ination
          lead, 400°C for zinc, 650°C for aluminium and alloys, 950°C for silver, 900° to 1000°C           o f the debris, Investigations on building
          for brass, 1000°C for bronze, 1100°C for copper and 1100° to 1200°C for cast iron.               fires Part 1, N ational Building Studies
                                                                                                           technical paper no, 4 , H M S O , London,
          There are also the well known colour changes in concrete or mortar investigated by                1950
          Bessey89. The development of the red or pink colouration in concrete or m ortar
                                                                                                           89. Bessey. G .E : T h e v isib le changes in
          containing natural sands or aggregates of appreciable iron oxide content occurs at               concrete or m orta r exposed to high tem per­
          250°— 300°C, and normally 300°C may be taken as the transition temperature. For the              atures, ibid. P a rt 2
          standard fire and various periods of heating Bessey gives the following results for
          slabs:


              H eating      Maximu-ri      M axim um depth of concrete showing characteristic change, mm
               period        surface
                           temperature'
                                            Pink or       fading of red,        buff           sintering
                 h             °C             red            friability

                                             300°C            600°C            950°C           1200°C


                 1             950             56               19                0               0
                 2            1050            100               38                6               0
                 4            1230            140               63               25               3
                 6            1250            170               90               38               6



           T he temperature within a slab may continue to rise after the fire is ended, and some
           of the above m axima were attained after the end of the heating period.




  A5.4 ANALYSIS AND REPAIR OF
       CONCRETE STRUCTURES

A5.4.1     Effective cross-section
           Removal of the surface material down to the red boundary will reveal the remaining
           cross-section that can be deemed effective. Compression tests of cores can indicate the
           strength of this concrete, giving a value to be adopted in calculations.


A5.4.2 Cracks
           M ost fine cracks are confined to the surface. M ajor cracks that could influence
           structural behaviour are generally obvious. A wide crack or cracks near supports may
           m ean there has been a loss of anchorage of the reinforcement.


 A5.4.3     Reinforcement
           Provided that mild steel or hot-rolled high-yield steel is undistorted and has not reached
           a tem perature above about 800°C, it may be assumed to have resumed its original
           properties, but cold-worked bars will have suffered some perm anent loss.


 A5.4.4 Prestressing steel
            It is likely that prestressing steel will have lost some strength, particularly if it has
            reached temperatures over 400°C. T here will also be a loss of tensile stress. These
            effects can be assessed for the estimated maximum temperature attained.


                                                                52
?*T“




       A5.4.5   Remedial measures
                In some situations, replacem ent of a dam aged m em ber m ay be the m ost practical and
                economic solution. E lsew here, reinstatem ent will be justified in order to avoid
                inconvenience and loss or dam age to other structural members.
                W here new members are connected to existing ones, monolithic action m ust be
                ensured; this calls for careful preparation o f the concrete surfaces and continuity of
                steel. F o r reinstatem ent, the removal o f all loose friable concrete is essential, to ensure
                adequate bonding. E x tra reinforcem ent should be fixed by experienced welders.
                N ew concrete may be placed either by casting with formwork or by the gunite m ethod;90           90. G re e n . J .K ., and Long, W .B .: ‘G u n ite
                                                                                                                  repairs to fire dam aged concrete structures’.
                with the latter it m ay be possible to avoid increasing the original dimensions of the            Concrete. 1971
                member. T he choice of method will depend on the thickness o f the new concrete, the
                                                                                                                  91. A sse ssm en t o ffir e -d a m a g e d concrete
                surface finish required, the possibility of placing and com pacting concrete in the               structures a n d repair by g u n ite , Concrete
                formwork and the degree o f im portance attached to an increase in size of section.               Society T echnical report no. 15, London,
                                                                                                                  1978
                Large cracks can be sealed by injection o f a latex solution or resin. Various w ashes or
                                                                                                                   92. K ordina, K., K ram pf, L , and Seiler,
                paints are available to restore the appearance of finely cracked or crazed surfaces.              H .F .: 'An exa m in a tio n o fth e effects o f a big
                                                                                                                  fir e in som e concrete buildings', F ire P re­
                F urth er guidance is given in reference 91. A n interesting analysis o f fire effects and         vention Science a n d Technology no. 14.,
                design guidance is given by K ordina et a f 1.                                                     (reprinted from Beton and Stahibetonbau,
                                                                                                                   67, nos. 5 and 6, p. 108 and p. 129


         A5.5 ANALYSIS AND REPAIR OF STEEL STRUCTURES
                In general, a structural steel member remaining in place, with negligible or minor
                distortions to the web, flanges or end connections should be considered satisfactory for
                further service. T he exception will be for the relatively small number of structures in
                cold-worked or tempered steel where there m ay be perm anent loss of strength. The
                change in strength may be assessed using estimates o f the maximum tem peratures
                attained or on-site tests; if necessary, the steel should be replaced. M icroscopy can be
                used to determine changes in microstructure. Since this is a specialized field, the
                services of a metallurgist are essential.


         A5.6 ANALYSIS AND REPAIR OF BRICK STRUCTURES
                 It will be possible to determine from the colour change of the m ortar or of the bricks
                 themselves the degree of heating of the wall. F o r solid brickwalls without undue
                 distortion the portion beyond the pink or red boundary m ay be considered as
                 serviceable and calculations made accordingly. Perforated and hollow brick walls
                 should be inspected carefully for the effects of therm al shock and may need
                 replacement. Plastered bricks sometimes suffer little damage and may need replace­
                 m ent of the surface treatm ent only.


         A5.7    ANALYSIS AND REPAIR OF TIMBER STRUCTURES
                 BS 5268: P art 4: Section 4.1 can be used to analyse the residual strength of members
                 that have been subjected to a fire. G enerally, any wood that has not charred could be
                 considered to have full strength. It may be possible to show by calculation that a timber
                 section or structure which has been subjected to fire still has adequate strength once the
                 affected surfaces are cleaned off (by planing, sanding etc.). W here additional strength is
                 required it may be possible to provide this by gluing on strengthening pieces or
                 otherwise replacing lost strength. Joints that may have opened and metal fixings that
                 may have conducted heat to the interior are points of weakness that should be carefully
                  examined.


          A5.8 TEST LOADING
                  A nalysis of the damage and assessm ent ofthe necessary repairs may be possible within
                  a reasonable degree of accuracy, but final acceptance may depend on proof by load test.
                  Performance is generally judged in term s of recovery of deflection after removal of the
                  load.




                                                                        53
Methods of test                                                      APPENDIX 6




T1 Cover meter
This is a simple electromagnetic technique for measuring the depth to the steel and to          BS 4408: R e com m endations fo r non­
                                                                                                destructive m ethods o f te x t fo r concrete.
determine its orientation and distribution. Response differs for different diam eter bars       P art 1: 1969, E lectro m agn etic cover
and will be influenced by multiple layers and or close pitch. M odem equipment is               m easuring devices, British Standards
claim ed to identify the diam eter of bar. Particular care is needed where the m eter is used   Institution, London

on lightweight concrete or concrete containing crushed rock aggregate.


T2 Radiographic techniques
y - and X -ray s may be used to examine the interior of relatively thick concrete               BS4408: R e c om m endations fo r non-des­
                                                                                                tructive m ethods o f test fo r concrete, Part 3:
members to check for the presence o f voids, poor compaction, continuity of grouting in         1970, G am m a radiography o f concrete,
prestressing ducts, layout of reinforcement, etc. It is an expensive specialist technique       British Standards Institution, London
suitable for the survey of relatively small areas of concrete. Special care has to be taken
                                                                                                BS 3683: Glossary o f term s used in non­
to ensure personnel are not exposed to harmful radiation. The test is probably best used        destructive testing. Part 3: 1964 R a d io ­
in conjunction with other non-destructive tests.                                                logical fla w detection, British Standards
                                                                                                Institution, London

Radiographic techniques may also be used to determine the quality and integrity of              B S 2 6 0 0 : 1973: M ethods f o r radiographic
                                                                                                exam ination o f fu sio n w elded butt jo in ts in
steel, i.e. to ascertain the presence and degree of cracks, laminations, porosity and           steel, British Standards institution, London
inclusions, both in parent materials and welds, y - and X -ray s will highlight defects and
lack of continuity (see also T l) .


T3 Electrical techniques
M easurem ent of the electric potential between parts of a concrete member can be used          G e rw e ty ,M .W .,ei al: C auses a n d repair o f
                                                                                                deterioration to a C alifornia bridge due to
to give an indication of corrosion of the reinforcement. Similarly, the resistivity of the      corrosion o f reinforcing steel in a m arine
concrete is lowered by the presence of corroding steel. N either technique will give an         environm ent. Highway Research Board
accurate measure of the degree of corrosion.                                                    Bulletin no 182, California. 1957




T4 Endoprobe
Prestressing tendons in ungrouted or poorly grouted ducts can be inspected using this
device. A small diam eter hole (say 10 mm) m ust be drilled through the concrete and
into the duct: extreme care will be necessary to avoid damaging the prestressing steei.
A n endoprobe (or similar device) may also be used to inspect the integrity of wall ties.
                                                                                                BS 4408: R ecom m endations fo r non­
                                                                                                destructive m ethods o f test fo r concrete.
T5 Ultrasonics                                                                                  Part 5: 1974, M easurem ent o f the velocity
                                                                                                o f ultrasonic p u ise velocities in concrete,
                                                                                                British Standards Institution. London
(a) Concrete
The quality of concrete can be assessed by measuring the velo c ity of ultrasonic pulses         BS 3683: Glossary o f term s used in non ­
                                                                                                destructive testing. Part 4 :1 9 7 6 Ultrasonic
through it. The m ethod may be used to determine the presence o f voids, cracks or other        fla w detection, British Standards Institu­
imperfections in a member, and to compare the strength of the concrete in different              tion, London




                                                   54
members or along a given member. U nless the instrum ent can be calibrated against                D D 2 1 :1 9 7 2 Q u a lity g ra d in g o f steel p la te
                                                                                                 fr o m 12 m m to 150 m m th ic k by m ea n s o f
concrete of known strength, it cannot be used to give an accurate m easure of the                 ultrason ic testing, British Standards Instit­
strength of the concrete in the member. The technique requires precise m easurem ent of           ution, London
the distance between the two ultrasonic heads. It is suitable for use only by experienced        BS 2704: 1978: Specifica tio n f o r calibra­
persons.                                                                                         tion b lo c k s fo ru s e in u ltrason ic f la w detec­
                                                                                                 tion, British S tandards Institution, London

(b) Steel and other metals                                                                       BS 3923: M e th o d sfo ru ltra so n ic exam ina-
F o r steel and other m etals, ultrasonics, while providing similar information to               tin o f welds, P art 1: 1978 M a n u a l e x a m ­
                                                                                                 ination o f w elds in ferritic steels, P art 2;
radiographic techniques, will, in addition, indicate the presence o f laminations in              1972 A u to m a tic exa m in a tio n o f fu sio n
parent materials. Lam ellar tearing will also be revealed.                                       welded bu tt jo in ts in ferritic steels, and Part
                                                                                                 3: 1972 M a n u a l exa m in a tio n o f nozzle
                                                                                                 welds, British Standards Institution, London

T6 Rebound hammer                                                                                BS 3889: M eth o d s f o r non-destructive
                                                                                                  testing o f pipes a n d tubes, P a rt I A: 1965
                                                                                                 U ltrasonic testing o f fe r r o u s p ip e s (e x ­
This is a simple technique for assessing the quality o f concrete by testing its surface         cluding cast), British Standards Insitution.
hardness. Strength can be determ ined by calibrating against test cubes. A s the impact          London
on the surface of the concrete is over a small area the readings are susceptible to local         BS 4124: N on-destructive testin g o f steel
variations. A t least nine readings should be taken over a given area to obtain a                forgings, P art 1: 1967 U ltrasonic fla w
                                                                                                  detection, British Standards Institution,
representative mean.                                                                              London


T7 Coring                                                                                        BS 4408: R e c o m m e n d a tio n s f o r non-
                                                                                                 destrutive m ethods o fte stfo rc o n cre te, Part
                                                                                                 4: 1971 Surface h ardn ess m easurem ents.
Standard cores of 100 or 150 mm diam eter m ay be cut from suspect concrete for                  British Standards Institution, London

m easurem ent o f the actual strength and density. T hey may also be used to indicate the
distribution o f materials in the concrete, the concrete quality (voids, honeycombing,            BS 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete, Part
                                                                                                  4: 1970 M eth o d s o f testing concrete fo r
etc.) and may be used to obtain a m easure o f the shrinkage and absorption properties of         strength, British Standards Institution,
the concrete. A s they m ust be drilled to a depth o f at least 150 mm they are likely to pass    London
through the reinforcement: the cores can thus be used to give an accurate measure o f the         Concrete core testin gforstrength, Concrete
cover to the reinforcement and to determine the type and size of steel used. The                  Society T echnical Report no . 11, London,
consequence of cutting the reinforcement should be considered.                                    M ay 1976


F o r situations where standard cores cannot be obtained, for example in small beams,
smaller cores can be taken. The results obtained should be subjected to specialist
interpretation since the relationships to cube strength will not be the same as for
standard cores.

 T8 Internal fracture test for concrete
 This test (sometimes called ‘pull-out test’) m easures the strength o f concrete by pulling      Chabowski, A .J., and Bryden-Smith, D ..A
                                                                                                  sim ple p u ll-o u t test to assess the in-situ
 on an anchor in the concrete until internal fracture occurs. It is a simple technique            strength o f concrete, P recast Concrete,
 requiring only light equipment. Unlike the two proceeding tests it results in some slight        M ay 1971, p. 2 43 (reprinted as BR E
                                                                                                  Curren Paper C P 25 /7 7 )
 damage to the concrete, but this will require only minor cosmetic repair work. I t is
 unlike core cutting (see T 7).

 T9 Detection of cracks using ultraviolet light
 Very fine cracks in concrete may be detected using ultraviolet light if the surface is
 specially treated with a fluorescent flow detector. Extrem e care m ust be taken in
 interpreting the observed pattern to differentiate between shrinkage cracks and those
 caused by applied loads.

 T10 Absorption
 (a) Absorption test
 Tests are made on small cores, 75 mm in diam eter, cut from the concrete. Considerable           BS 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete. P art
                                                                                                  5: 1970 M eth o d s o f testing hardened
 care needs to be taken in making these tests. A bsorption limits for concrete at different       concrete fo r other than strength, British
 ages are specified in some British Standards for precast concrete products.                      Standards Institution, London


  (b) Initial surface absorption test (ISA T )
  This test measures the surface absorption o f the concrete. Again considerable care
  needs to be taken. It does not damage the structure but is most suitable for comparative
  purposes. The results are affected by the nature o f the surface, and there are little data
  on tests on in situ concrete.

  T il Cement content and cement/aggregate ratio
  The determination o f the cement content o f a hardened concrete requires the facilities        Figgs, J.W ., and Bowden, S.R.: The
                                                                                                  analysisofconcrete, H M SO ,L ondon, 1971
  of an analytical laboratory. T he techniques used depend on whether or not the
  aggregate grading and content is to be established as well as the cem ent content, and the       D eterm ination o f chloride a n d cem ent
                                                                                                   co ntent in hardened P ortland cem ent
  type o f cement aggregate used. If, by chance, samples o f the materials used in the             concrete, B R E leaflet IS 13/77
  concrete are still available the inherent errors in concrete analysis are considerably
  reduced compared with those in the results when assumptions about the materials have


                                                       55
to be made.                                                                                       Figgs, J .W ., and Bowden, S.R.; The
                                                                                                  a n a lysis o f concrete. H M S O , L ondon
                                                                                                  1977
Requirements for tests are indicated by suspected low strength, poor durability,
permeability and concrete failure.                                                                BS 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete. Part
                                                                                                  5: 1970 M e th o d s o f testing hardened
                                                                                                  concrete f o r o th er than strength, British
                                                                                                  Standards            Insitution,       London
T12 Water/cement ratio
W hen the cement content has been determ ined, a knowledge o f the original w ater                BS 1881: M e th o d s o f testing concrete, Part
                                                                                                  6: 1971 A n a ly sis o f hardened concrete,
content enables the w ater/cem ent ratio to be calculated and an estim ate of the concrete        British Standards Institution, London
strength obtained. A com parison can also be made with the original mix design if
                                                                                                  Figgs, J .W ., a n d B ow den. S .R .: The
known. T he methods o f determining the original w ater content are usually based on              a n a lysis o f concrete, H M S O , L ondon
saturation techniques and will give only approxim ate answers. T he methods cannot be             1977

used with damaged, poorly com pacted or aerated concretes.

R equirem ent for tests are indicated by suspected low strength, poor durability,
perm eability, concrete failure.

T13 Admixtures and contaminants
T here are many varieties of admixtures that could have been used in a concrete, but the          S im p lifie d m eth o d f o r the detection and
                                                                                                  determ ination o f chloride in hardened
m ost likely one to be considered in a structural appraisal would be the presence of              concrete, B R E leaflet IS 12/77
chloride. T he amount in a sample can be easily determined in the laboratory or a close
estim ate can be obtained by a field test with strip indicators. T he presence o f sulphate is    BS 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete. Part
                                                                                                  6: 1971 A n a ly sis o f hardened concrete,
another factor that could be considered in an appraisal. A gain this can be determined            British Standards Institution, London
quite readily in the laboratory.                                                                  Figgs. J .W ., a n d Bow den, S .R .: The
                                                                                                  a n a lysis o f concrete, H M S O , London,
O ther admixtures and contam inants, e.g. organic adm ixtures, sugars, metals, etc., can          1977
be determined by laboratory techniques such as X -ra y fluorescent spectroscopy, infra­
red absorption, etc.

R equirem ent for tests are indicated by concrete failure, e.g. cracking and spalling,
corrosion of steel, etc.

T14 Free lime content — depth of carbonation
The alkaline environm ent in concrete acts as an inhibitor to the rusting of embedded            C arbonation o f concrete, BR E leaflet (to be
                                                                                                 published)
steel, and if corrosion has taken place or is suspected, it m ay be necessary to find out
whether or not free lime is present and also the depth to which the concrete has been            Figgs. J .W .. a n d Bow den. S .R .: The
affected by carbonation from the exposed surfaces. D eterm ination of free lime in               an a lysis o f concrete, H M S O . L ondon.
                                                                                                 1 977
concrete requires a laboratory technique if quantative results are needed, but for an
indication of the depth of carbonation and lack o f an alkaline environment, a newly
broken surface can be treated with a phenolphthalein solution when a purple red
colouration will appears where the concrete is still alkaline.
Requirem ent for tests is indicated by concrete failure, e.g. cracking and spalling by
corrosion of steel etc.


T15 Type of cement
M ost concretes use the Portland type of cement — ordinary, rapid-hardening, sulphate-           B S 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete, Part
                                                                                                 6: 1971 A n a ly sis o f hardened concrete,
resisting or low-heat — and these are not normally distinguishable by the analysis of            British Standards Institution. London
concrete. A compelte chemical analysis of the fine material from a sample of concrete
                                                                                                 R a p id chem ical test fo r the detection o f
can be compared with typical analyses of various types of cement, and also a                     h igh-alum ina cem ent concrete. B R E leaflet
petrological exam ination can be helpful. Portland blastfurnace cement and high-                 IS 15/74
alumina cement may be distinguishable visually by the colour o f the matrix, but this            Figgs. J.W ., a n d Bow den, S .R .: The
may also be affected by the aggregate used, and extreme care is necessary.                       an a lysis o f concrete. H M S O . London.
                                                                                                 1977

Requirements for tests are indicated by suspected high-alumina cement, sulphate-
resisting cement specified and concrete failure.


T16 Type of aggregate
The types o f aggregates used in concrete under exam ination may be immediately                   A n n u a l book o f A S T M sta n d a rd s Part 14:
                                                                                                  P otential reactivity o f aggregates (chem ical
apparent, but if not then a petrological exam ination of a cut slice will identify them. It       m ethod). C 2 8 9 -7 1 , 1976
may also be necessary to examine the aggregate for alkali reactivity.
                                                                                                  BS 1881: M eth o d s o f testing concrete. Part
                                                                                                  6: 1971 A n a ly sis o f hardened concrete,
Requirements for tests axe indicated by concrete failure, cracking and spalling, staining         British Standards Institution, London
o f surface, etc.
                                                                                                  Figgs. J .W ., a n d Bowden, S .R .: The
                                                                                                  analysis o f concrete, H M SO . L ondon
                                                                                                  1977
 T17 Optical methods
 T o verify dimensions o f members visual measurements obtainable with rules, tapes,


                                                    56
callipers and even m icrom eters will usually suffice. Sophisticated optical methods are
available however, such as lasers, X - and y -ra y s, which m ay be used to check on
dimensions (but see T 2).

T18 Dye penetrants
These methods will provide information on surface condition of steel in regard to                BS 3683: G lossary o f term s used in n o n ­
                                                                                                destructive testing, P a rt 1; 1963 P enetrant
presence of cracks and surfaces imperfections, particularly when associated with                fla w detection, British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                 London
welding.
                                                                                                BS 3889: M ethods o f non-destructive testing
                                                                                                o f p ip es a n d tubes, P a rt 3A: P enetrant
T19 Magnetic-particle crack detection                                                           testing o f fe rro u s p ip e s a n d tubes, British
                                                                                                Standards Institution, London

This is an im portant inspection tool used during fabrication and erection of steelwork.         BS 4124: N on-destructive testing o f steel
Although it is considered to be a simple technique for smooth flat-plate surfaces with          fo rgings. P art 3: P enetrant fla w detection,
                                                                                                 British Standards Institution, London
flush welds it is less simple with more complex structural arrangements, and is
sometimes not applied effectively.                                                              BS 4416: 1969 M eth o d s f o r penetrant
                                                                                                testing o fw e ld e d o r b ra c ed jo in ts in m etals,
                                                                                                British Standards Institution, L ondon

T20 Tensile tests                                                                               BS 3683; G lossary o f term s u sed in n o n ­
                                                                                                destructive testing, P a rt 2: 1963 M agnetic
T he testing of steel by m easurem ent o f the tensile load required to rupture standard size   particle fla w detection. British Standards
specimens is m ost probably the oldest form of test used for the selection o f materials.       Institution, London

This type o f test is more widely employed than any other single test and is frequently         BS 3889: M ethods ofnon-destructive testing
used to obtain measurem ents o f the ductility of the m aterial in addition to the tensile      o f p ip es a n d tubes, P a rt4 A ; 1965 M agnetic
                                                                                                p a rticle fla w detection: ferro u s pipes and
strength. O ther properties obtained include elastic limit, yield point, proof stress and       tubes, British Standards Institution, London
modulus o f elasticity. Standard size test pieces are usually required whose cross-
                                                                                                 BS 4124: N on-destructive testing o f steel
section may be circular, square, rectangular or in special cases of some other form. The        forgings, P a rt 2: 1968 M a g n etic particle
test pieces should generally be machined to the dimensions given in the various                 fla w detection, British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                 L ondon
Standards, but some sections, bars, tubes, etc. may in certain circumstances be tested
w ithout being machined.                                                                         BS 4397: 1969 M eth o d s fo r m agnetic
                                                                                                 p article testing o f welds, British Standards
                                                                                                 Institution, London

 T21 Impact tests                                                                                BS 18: M ethods,for tensile testing ofm etals,
                                                                                                 P art 2; 1972 S tee l (general), P a rt 3: 1971
 Both standard tests — the Izod (cantilever) and Charpy (beam ) — m easure the energy            S tee l sheet a n d strip (less than 3 m m a n d
                                                                                                 not less than 0 .5 m m thick), and P a rt 4:
 required to fracture a standard notched specim en with a blow from a pendulum. The              1971 S teel tubes, British Standards Institu­
 Charpy test is the more versatile as it enables results to be obtained over a range of          tion, London
 temperatures. The results enable com parisons of the notch ductilities o f different
 materials to be m ade and to ensure compliance with standard requirements for
 adequate resistance to brittle failure obtained from service experience on actual steel
 structures,


 T22 Bend tests
 This is used to determine the ductility of steel. Steel that has been shaped into its final      BS 1 6 3 9 :1 9 6 4 M eth o d s fo r bend te s tin g o f
                                                                                                  m etals, British Standards Institution,
 form by bending m ust have ductility, and therefore bend tests are useful for any                London
 subsequent investigation. Typical examples are reinforcement bars for concrete and
 sheet and strip formed into profile shapes. T he test piece m ust withstand, without
 fracture, being bent round set formers through a given angle (generally 90° or 180°).
 Some standards call for reverse bend tests, and in these cases the test specimen is bent
 through a given angle and then back to the original position, which constitutes one bend
 test.

  T23 Hardness tests                                                                              BS 240: M eth o d f o r B rinell hardness test,
                                                                                                  P a rt 1: 1962 Testing o f m etals, British
  T he hardness number of a m aterial is determined from the size o f an indentation made         Standards Institution, London
  on its surface, whose properties may differ from those within the body of the material.
                                                                                                  BS 4 2 7 -.M ethods fo r Vickers hardness test,
  A n empirical relation exists for steels between the hardness num ber and ultimate (not         P art 1: 1961 Testing o f m etals, British
  yield) strength which should be regarded as a guide only. If a strength is required for         Standards Institution, London

  calculations a tensile test (T20) should be m ade wherever possible. T he standard              BS 709: 1971 M eth o d s fo r testing fu sio n
  laboratory hardness tests are the Brinell (ball), Vickers (pyram id diamond) and                w elded jo in ts a n d weld m etal in steel,
                                                                                                  British Standards Institution, London
  Rockwell (ball or diamond cone); these give much more reliable results than on-site
  tests using portable testing apparatus. T he ranges of tensile strengths of the various         BS 860: 1967 Tables fo r com parison o f
  grades of structural steel specified in BS 4360 overlap, so that it may not be possible to      hardness scales, British Standards Institu­
                                                                                                  tion, London
  identify positively the grade of the steel from its hardness number. Because o f these
  limitations, the cost of exposing a sample in a structure (e.g. steel reinforcing bars in        BS 891: M eth o d fo r R o ckw ell hardness
                                                                                                   test. P a rt 1; 1962 Testing o f m etals, and
  concrete) and the subsequent reinstatem ent should be carefully considered against the           Part 2: 1964 Verification o f the testing
   value o f the results to be obtained.                                                           m achine, British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                   London

                                                                                                   BS 417 5 M eth o d fo r R ockw ell superficial
   T24 Metallography                                                                               harness test ( N a n d T S c a les). P a rt 1:1967
                                                                                                   Testing o f m etals, British Standards
                                                                                                   Institution, London
   Metallographic examination can give fuller information on the internal structure of the


                                                        57
material; for instance it might indicate some chemical segregation that would explain
anomalous response to welding.


T25 Drillings and spectrographic analysis — ‘spot’ tests
These tests will enable m aterial composition to be ascertained. A small am ount of
drillings can usually be taken from non-critical areas in m ost steel plates, sections and,
with care, even reinforcement. These can be submitted for full chemical analysis by wet
methods, or for selective analysis by spectrography.

In situ ‘spot’ tests o f an elem entary nature can sometimes identify some elements, but
this is a crude method and not recommended.


T26 The crack opening displacement test
The objective o f this test is to determine the value of the critical crack opening              BS 5762: 1977 M eth o d s fo r crack opening
displacem ent at the tip o f the defect at the onset of stable and or unstable crck extension,   displacem en t (C O D ) testing, British
                                                                                                 Standards Institution, London
displacem ent at the tip o f the defect at the onset o f stable and/or unstable crack
extension. This test is not suitable for general application in structural appraisal, but in     BS 5447: 1977 M eth o d s o f test f o r plane
                                                                                                 strain fracture toughness ( K    o f metallic
exceptional circumstances, the engineer may wish to seek specialist advice on its use.           m aterials. British Standards Institution,
                                                                                                 London


T27 Wrought iron and cast iron
The presence of wrought iron and cast iron should be expected in all 19th Century
structures. The structural use of these m aterials diminished with the introduction of
steel in the 1880s and effectively ceased by the 1930s.

(a) W rought iron
Although not easily distinguishable chemically from a low-carbon steel, wrought iron
may readily be identified by its characteristic laminated structure. I f a small patch is
ground on the surface to remove scale and expose the clean metal, which is then
polished with fine abrasive paper, the filaments of slag, which are visible through a hand
magnifying glass, will identify the material as wrought iron. In fonged elements — such
as clevises, brackets, eye-bars — the direction of the lamination should be checked to
identify areas in which tension stress occurs normal to the plane o f lamination.

Forge welding was a common practice in fabricating structural elements. The presence
of welds in, for example, eye-bar ends, large bars with threaded ends, or where there is a
marked change in section, should be suspected and non-destructive tests made to verify
the soundness of the weld. A s the laminations o f wrought iron constitute internal flaws,
crack detection techniques are of little use in determining its integrity. Visual
examination, if possible supplemented by tension test samples, m ust be used. The
surface o f the sample should also be examined for stamp marks that identify its quality.

(b) C ast iron
C ast iron may sometimes be identified by the apearance on its surface o f evidence of the
casting process — sand m arks, mould joints. The reaction of the m etal to cutting with a
sharp file will normally distinguish it from steel. I t may also be identified by drilling,
which will result in fragmented swarf. Beams with unequal flanges, or of unusually thick
section, should be suspected as being made o f cast iron.

Cast-iron members m ust be examined for cracks and for soundness (i.e. casting defects)
by any of the N D T methods previously described. Additionally, dimensional accuracy
(e.g. constancy of wall thickness) should be checked.


T28 Cables
The comments below refer to structural cables and not to those used in lifting gear or
other mechanical equipment.
If the original specification is available a check should be made to see if the cable was
prestretched (normally by the manufacturer). Subsequent stretching in service, which
may be checked by measuring the sag or alignment o f adjacent structural elements and
comparison with the original design, will normally indicate significant damage.

 Appraisal is generally by visual examination, bearing in mind that:

           •           damage is m ost likely to occur at the ends (terminations), the
                        outer wires generally failing before the inner ones

           •           examination o f the ends for signs of relative movement between
                        the cable and socket or end connection, which indicates pulling
                        out, is necessary


                                                    58
                                corrosion is more likely to occur at the lower end of a cable caused
                                by rainw ater running down it; particular attention should be paid
                                to the cable/socket junction where there is frequently a groove in
                                which w ater can collect

                                if the outside o f a cable is painted the rpesence of a broken wire in
                                the outer lay will be indicated by a spiral crack in the paint caused
                                by the relative movement betw een adjacent wires when the
                                tension in the broken wire is released

                                areas where the lay of the cable or individual strands are
                                disturbed are potential failure sites


         T29 Mechanical properties of timber
         T o determine the mechanical properties of tim ber the engineer should first try to
         establish the stress grade of the timber. W ith machine stress graded tim ber or timber
         v i s u a l l y stre ss graded to BS 4978, BS 5756 or the C anadian N L G A rules the tim beror
         com ponent should have been marked. If no marking is visible the engineer should
         measure defects and relate this to BS 4978 to establish the stress grade. Reference
         should then bd made to CP 112 for permissible stresses.

         T o arrive at the permissible stress of plywood the type of plywood should be established
         (either by reference to makers or to specialist organisations) and reference made to CP
         112 .


    ;)
         T 30 Moisture content of timber
■

         The moisture content of solid untreated tim ber can be determ ined usually with                   standard grading rulesfo r Canadian
         sufficient acuracy by a portable battery-operated moisture meter. D eep probes should             lum ber■Natl0nal
                                                                                                            A uthority,        Lumber
                                                                                                                        V ancouver, 1 July   1978Grades
         preferably be used, and the moisture should be checked at several points including, in
         particular, those where ventilation is poor. W hen using a moisture m eter to take
         moisture readings o f plywood or preserved timber, reference should be made to a
         correction factor for the particular m eter being used. In extreme cases it may be
         necessary to remove part of the tim ber for a more accurate test, drying the tim ber in an
         oven.

         If the moisture content is about 15-16% it may prove valuable to check the temperature
         and humidity of the air (with a dry bulb/w et bulb hygrometer) to relate (by available
         tables) to the moisture content.

          T31 Identification of chemical preservatives
          A green tinge to the timber would suggest copper/chrom e/arsenate salts had been used.
          M ost reputable manufacturers of preservatives have a small kit th at can be used to
          check if their preservative has been applied. H owever if the engineer is not aware which
          preservative may have been used it m ay be necessary to send a small sample to a
          laboratory or to call in an expert.

          T32 Identification of insect attack
          There are two main pests that infect constructional timber — the common furniture
          beetle and the house longhorn beetle. The latter is prevalent only in a small area of
          south-east England.

          It is necessary to distinguish between live attack, attack th at has died out and
          emergency holes associated with attack on the timber in the forest, e.g. pinhole borer
          (Am brosia beetle) which dies out on conversion.

           It is recommended that identification is carried out by a specialist, but the engineer
           should be able to distinguish live attack by evidence of bore dust around the exit holes.


           T33 Identification of dry rot/wet rot
           The early signs of fungal attack are not easy to spot without specialist laboratory
           equipment. However, one can forecast with some degree of certainty that given a
           sufficiently long exposure to dam p conditions any unpreserved perishable wood will
           decay. Therefore, the conditions are easier to identify than the fungus in the early
           stages, i.e. prolonged moisture content in excess of 20% .

           The two main types of fungii — dry rot and wet rot — are easier to diagnose in the later


                                                                 59
stages o f development when the fruiting body appears on the surface of the timber.

E arlv signs o f dry rot are cracks along the grain, and a sharp pointed knife can easily be
pushed into the tim ber. D ry rot usually gives off a smell of mouldy cheese.

W et rot will continue to develop only on tim ber that is wet, whereas dry rot having
established itself on w et tim ber will spread to otherwise sound dry timber.

The treatm ent of the two types of decay are different, and therefore, accurate
identification is important.


T34 Identification of glues
Although a chemical analysis would be necessary to establish exactly the glue th at had
been used there are guides th at the engineer can u se. I f the glue is dark brown it is likely
that the glue used is w eather and boil proof glue such as resorcinol. If it is white then it
could be either moisture resistant, such as a urea glue, or an ‘interior glue such as
 casein.

 T35 Identification of type of plastics
                                                                                                  Saunders, K.J.: The identification o f
 A variety of rigid plastics materials are used in construction including poly-                   plastics a n d rubber, C h ap m an & H all,
 vinylchloride, acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, acrylics, polystyrene, polypropylene,            London, 1966
 polyesters and epoxides. Tests to identify whether the plastics is a rubber, a flexible          Kluckow, P.: R u b b er a n d p la stics testing,
 therm oplastic, a rigid thermoplastic or a therm osetting plastic are by appearance,             C h apm an & Hall, London. 1963
 bounce, odour, feel, colour, specific gravrty and the Beilstein test which detects
                                                                                                  A id s to the id en tific a tio n o f p la stics —
 halogens Simple heating tests can often determine the class of plastics and are usually          ex pla natory notes with p la stic sam ples,
 carried out before an elemental test for nitrogen, sulphur, chlorine, bromine and                Building Research Establishm ent, January
                                                                                                  1977
 fluorine. Infrared spectrographic analysis can also be of use in identifying plastics and
 their degradation products.

 Requirem ent for test indicated by deterioration of the plastics caused by degradation by
 ultraviolet and infrared radiation, moisture, etc., and giving nse to crazing, resin -g la ss
 interface failure, colour fading and a subsequent deterioration of structural properties.




                                                       60
                                                                                                                                \jr f   >1313        1» r o ’ i i



                                                                                            2




                             stress
            EQUIVALENT
                                               e                              >             O
                                               e                              t—                                                    I                     >
                                                                                                                                                          ►-
                                              I           c                                                                        I
                                                          ~ %A                              y   g   !                              H       S   \T\
                                              >—                                                                                                          u     X
                                                                              2    *        a   2   i      a O                            UJ uJ
                                                                                                                                               u          Q     «/i
                                          1   o                                                            a -J              I     S




                             cube
                                                          5*       a^                       O   ^          O u                            2    1/1
                                                                              >*   ^*       o   ^          u        ^
                                          2   5                                                                                           H    ^          £    I


        m                o            /                                     A - 10      I                                   /7<3         4 7 /

                                                                                                                            178         14 2 :d \ 4 - ? A
                                                      i                                                                     n      s    :; * A 7 P ' * 7

        2743                          /                                     •4 5 2      I                                                399>
                                                                                                                            7 7 7 1
        14-57                         I                                     4 3 7                                           177         '3 3 T , 4 - 5 l
                                                                                        *
                                                                                                                            l7 7 ~ 3 9 -2 \ 4 -5 1

                                                                                                                            / 7 7 ' 3 3 - V ~ 4-53

        1750                          I               \                 a   3-79\ i                                     I / Z 9         ' ^    7     L3        68
    ■
    « ... _                                                                                                                 / 7 7       ! ^ 5 - 5     3 -8 9

    1 3 -6 4                          r                                     3 S 6       l                                   1 7 7       \ 4 6 3       3-82
    I
                                      -------------            _            -------------
                                                                                          ____1-------------                17 7         4 0 9        4 3 3
    1
                                                                                                                            17 8         4 l- 7       4 2 7
    i       —
    \l3 -6 2
    I
                                      /                                     4-32        I                                   17 9         4 2 - 7 14 7 9
    m                                                                                               j
                                                                                                                            1 7 7                     ~ 4 3 9
                                                                                                    i                       178          4 0 -1
        -------------                                                                                                                                 4 4 4

                                                                                                                            1 7 7       3 9 -8        4-45-
        16-62 i                                _                            4 -3 3                                          '1 7 8 1 4 0 -T 4 4 4
                                                          —                                             ---------

                                                                                                                            ~17&         3 9 -3       4 -5 3
                                                      i                     i r ^ i                 i                   1




9
