The stewards booklets and specific duties cards were

issued to all clubs in March, 1987.   The crowd control,

safety and security recommendations booklets were

similarly issued a year later.
THE SCOTTISH FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




  CROWD CONTROL,
      SAFETY
       AND
     SECURITY
 RECOMMENDATIONS
                                  INTRODUCTION


1.   The safety of the public inside grounds is the responsibility of those who stage the
     matches and the management of the home dubs.

2.   The Scottish Football Association, in an endeavour to assist in these
     responsibilities, has produced this booklet of recommendations for crowd
     control, safety and security in the immediate vicinity of and inside grounds.
MEASURES AT THE GROUND

1.   Adequate policing, as agreed with and in certain instances determined by the
     Chief Constable, in the immediate vicinity of the stadium for a reasonable period
     before and after the match.
2.   A search for and removal of dangerous objects, e.g. building materials and
     rubble, inside and in the immediate vicinity of the stadium in good time before the
     opening of the stadium.
3.   The police must be consulted and special arrangements made if tickets are on sale
     on the day of the match or if it is cash at the turnstiles, to preserve the segregation
     of supporters in the stadium.
4.   Turnstiles should be opened timeously giving spectators ample opportunity to
     enter before the start of the match. Police must be in attendance when the
     turnstiles are opened. The public address announcer and all stewards, including
     fire stewards, must be at their places of duty when the turnstiles are opened.
5.   In the event that forged tickets are found in circulation, the police should be
      informed without delay. Immediate action should then be taken to prevent
      fraudlent entry and ensure overcrowding does no occur in any section.
6.   Efficient entry controls with the co-operation of the police to ensure that:
      (a) spectators do not enter the wrong sector of the stadium,
      (b) spectators do not bring in object that could be used in acts of violence,
      (c) unauthorised persons do not gain entry,
      (d) persons do not attemp to enter while -
            (1) in possession of controlled containers, e.g. beer or soft drinks cans,
           (2) in possession of alcohol,
           (3) drunk,
           in contravention of Sections 72, 73 and 74, respectively, of the Criminal
           Justice (Scotland) Act, 1980,
      (e) persons do not attempt to enter while in possession of controlled articles or
            substances, e.g. distress flares and fireworks, in contravention of Section
            72A of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act, 1980, as amended by the Public
            Order Act, 1986, Section 14,
      (f) known or potential troublemakers are excluded,
      (g) persons under the influence of drugs are excluded.
7.   Adequate numbers of police, as agreed with and in certain instances determined
     by the Chief Constable, inside the stadium during the whole time spectators are
     present to ensure order and assist in evacuation in the event of emergency.
8.   A sufficient number of properly trained stewards (see S.F.A. booklet “Safety of
     Sports Grounds — Stewards”) .
 9.   Adequate policing and/or stewarding inside the stadium to ensure spectators are:
      (a) directed to the correct area of the stadium,
      (b) not in possession of objects that could be used in acts of violence,
      (c) (1) not in possession of controlled containers, e.g. beer or soft drinks cans,
           (2) not in possession of alcohol, or
           (3) not drunk,
      in contravention of Sections 72, 73 and 74, respectively, of the C riminal Justice
      (Scotland) Act, 1980, and
      (d) not in possession of controlled articles or substances, e.g. flares and
           fireworks, in contravention of Section 72A of the Criminal Justice
           (Scotland) Act, 1980, as amended by the Public Order Act, 1986, Section 14.

10.   Segregation of the fans in the stadium by means of solid constructions plus the
      presence of police/stewards.
      Police cordons only should not be used for planned segregation unless in special
      circumstances.
      Sterile (no-go) areas between opposing fans may also be considered necessary.

11.   Spectators should not be able to circulate freely between sectors in the stadium.

12.   Supporters found in the wrong area amid opposing fans should be moved to the
      correct area, specially supervised or, if particular circumstances so dictate,
      expelled from the stadium. These measures and any others considered necessary
      would be at the discretion of the police.

13.   Protection of the playing field by means of:
      (a) adequate policing/stewarding to prevent spectator intrusion onto the field of
           play, or
      (b) a permanent fence plus the presence of police/stewards to prevent spectator
           intrusion onto the field of play.
      Fences must have sufficient gates opening towards the field of play to allow
      spectators to escape in an emergency and to allow police/stewards/medical staff
      quick access to the terraces. These gates must be supervised by police or stewards
      during the whole time spectators are in the stadium.

14.   Corridors and gangways for the public have to be kept free in order to allow quick
      access to the police, stewards, medical staff and/or fire service.

15.   During the entire time spectators are present in the stadium all exit doors and
      gates should be adequately staffed. All such doors and gates should be capable of
      being opened immediately from inside by anyone in an emergency, as
      recommended in the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds, Section 66. It is not
      acceptable to lock these doors and gates, even with a steward in attendance with a
      key.
16.   A n effective public address system capable of being heard in all areas of the
      stadium to be in function during the whole period spectators are in the stadium.
      The police must have ready access to broadcast over the system and an over-ride
      facility.

17.   Every endeavour must be made to comply with all terms and condidtions of the
      safety certificate, as required by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, and the
      Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act, 1987.

18.   Entertainment before matches and at intervals should be considered for all
      matches likely to attract large crowds. In certain instances and in co-operation
      with the police, consideration should be given to methods of retaining either the
      away or winning team’s fans in the stadium until the opposing team’s fans have
      cleared the immediate vicinity.




OTHER MEASURES

 1.   Appointment of a senior club official to liaise with the police and local authority
      departments and to co-ordinate order, security and safety measures.

 2.   Active participation with supporters’ clubs in order to obtain their support in
      avoiding incidents.

 3.   Well publicised meetings of club managements showing their endeavours to
      prevent crowd trouble.

 4.   Appeals to supporters via the media, club magazines, programmes, wall posters
      and possibly on the back of entry tickets:
      (a) to refrain from bringing alcohol, bottles, cans, fireworks, flares or any object
           that could be used in acts of violence to the stadium,
      (b) not to throw objects,
      (c) not to intrude onto the track or pitch before, during or after the match,
      (d) to keep the expressions of joy or of disapproval within the limits set for good
           behaviour,
      (e) not to allow that the misbehaviour of a minority deprives the majority of the
           pleasure of watching good football,
      (f) to preserve the good reputation of their own team by displaying impeccable
           conduct.
 5.   Close co-operation and exchange of relevant information between the home and
      visiting clubs. All such information to be passed to the police responsible for
      policing the stadium.
 6.   Tickets should have a plan of the stadium showing the various sections and points
      of entry.

 7.   Every possible measure should be taken to prevent the counterfeiting of tickets.
 8.   Every reasonable measure should be taken to ensure proper segregation of rival
      fans including an effective ticket allocation policy.

 9.   During the period the police are on duty inside and outside the stadium the
      organisers should co-operate closely with them, possibly direct by radio.

10.   The police should be notified immediately of any late abandoned games, re­
      arranged fixtures, cup replays, changes to venues, times or any other arrangements
      affecting matches.



MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED FOR TRAVELLING SUPPORTERS

 1.   All efforts should be applied, in co-operation with the police, supporters’ clubs
      and coach operators, to prevent potential troublemakers from travelling.
 2.   Supporters’ clubs and coach operators should be advised not to arrive too early, to
      depart immediately after the match and to heed any advice given regarding
      routes, drop off/pick up points and parking areas.

 3.   Supporters’ clubs should be asked to appoint responsible persons from within
      their membership to act as stewards while travelling to and from matches and
      within the stadia. The stewards should be easily identifiable by means of arm
      bands or conspicuous badges.

 4.   Supporters should be provided with all useful information and necessary details
      particularly as to their placing in the stadium. The areas set aside for the visiting
      support should be well publicised and tickets for visiting supporters should only be
      available for such areas.
NOTES
THE SCOTTISH FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




      S afety of
        Sports
      Grounds


      Stew ards
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS — STEWARDS

1.   The prime responsibility for the arrangement of affairs at sports grounds lies with
     the club. To that end they should ensure that stewards are suitably qualified.
     Qualifications:
     Stewards should:—
     (a) Be trained and instructed to deal with any emergencies relating to fire or
          evacuation.
     (b) Be given written instruction about the action to be taken in cases of emergency,
          including arrangements for calling the emergency services.
     (c) Receive practical instruction and training appropriate to their responsibility.
     (d) Should not be employed as a steward unless so instructed and trained, and
     (e) Be adequate in number, physically and mentally capable of performing their
          duties, effectively deployed, efficiently supervised and readily identifiable.
          NB. Stewards should not be less than 18 years or more than 60 years of age
          and should wear distinctive dress such as fluorescent jackets suitably
          inscribed front and back.

2.   On the occasion of each match, stewards should attend a pre-match briefing and
     be made fully aware of their responsibilities and the location of members of the
     Emergency Services appropriate in the area for which they are responsible.

3.   Stewards should be distributed throughout the ground in accordance with a
     detailed pre-arranged schedule agreed between the police and management.
     Their numbers and location should not be less than the minimum stated in the
     safety certificate. Their duties may be divided into four main categories:
     (a) Controlling or directing members of the public who are entering or leaving
          the ground.
     (b) Patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, e.g. raising alarms,
           extinguishing fires etc.               1
     (c) Manning entrances, exits and other strategic points, particularly exit doors
           and gates which are not continuously open whilst the ground is in use.
     (d) Undertaking specific duties relating to emergencies and evacuation
           procedures.

4.   Emergency Procedures:
     The importance of the provision of formal emergency procedures at each ground
     can not be over-emphasized. Joint consultation in this respect should be taken
     between the police, the management of the ground, fire, ambulance and other
     services. It is essential that stewards and their supervisors are fully aware of the
     part they have to play in the plans which are produced.
Management should ensure that written instructions detailing the action to be
taken in the event of an emergency are served on all stewards, and that staff and
stewards receive practical instruction and training appropriate to their
responsibilities in the event of an emergency.
Bodies such as the fire service, the police and ambulance service have expressed a
willingness to assist in such training and clubs are urged to take full advantage of
the offer.
Exercises for staff and stewards should be carried out regularly to ensure the
smooth operation of the procedures for dealing with an emergency. A record
should be kept containing details of the training and instruction given and
exercises held, and should include the following matters:—
(a)   Date and time of the instruction or exercise.
(b)   Duration.
(c) Name of the person giving the instruction.
(d) Names of the persons receiving the instruction.
(e) Nature of instruction or exercise.


Control of stewards should be from a central point containing efficient means to
communicate with stewards at key points identified in discussion between
management and the police.


Chief Stewards
Clubs should appoint a Chief Steward responsible for co-ordinating the duties of
stewards and to be immediately available for discussions with the senior police
officer present concerning any problem in the ground.


Specific Duties of Stewards
Specific Duties to be undertaken by stewards include:
(a) On taking up duty, making contact with the relevant police officer and
    knowing his location.
(b) Preventing overcrowding, preventing any deliberate crowd surge or sway,
    ensuring that the crowd limits in various parts of the ground are complied
    with and that gangways and exits are kept clear and free from obstruction.
    Understanding fully all directional signs, Exit Routes, and being aware of
    alternative Exit Routes. Ensuring a smooth, uniform and unimpeded crowd
    flow.
(c) Preventing, so far as possible, standing on seats, and the climbing of fences
     and other structures. Where by virtue of the scale of the incident stewards are
     unable to comply with this requirement, they should without delay report the
     matter to the nearest police officer, or, if no police officer is present, to the
     Chief Steward or designated club official.
(d) The investigation and identification of any incident or occurrence, reporting
     their findings to police or management in accordance with instructions given
     at the pre-match briefing.
(e) Being aware of the location of the fire fighting equipment in the area for
     which they are responsible and being capable of effectively operating the
     same. “No Smoking” is a condition of entry to stands constructed of
     combustible material and stewards are responsible for the enforcement of
     this condition.
(f) Being fully conversant with the methods and signals used to indicate an
     emergency situation which should have been previously set down in writing
     and served on them.
(g) Being capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect packages.
     Reporting the discovery of any structural defect and being aware of the fire
     risk caused by voids under seating. Such findings to be reported immediately
     to the nearest Senior Steward or, in his absence, designated club official or
     police officer.
(h) Except in an emergency stewards should not leave their place of duty without
     the consent of the Senior Steward or senior police officer present who
     should, if it is considered necessary, arrange for a replacement.
(i) All exit gates must be manned at all times while the ground is being used by
    the public. If manning a gate, the steward must remove completely all
    padlocks, test sliding drawing bolts, and test the door itself to ensure that it is
    opening freely and fully and that it can be opened immediately, from inside,
    by anyone in an emergency.
(j) Reporting to the Chief Steward immediately any damage or defect likely to
     cause injury or danger to persons in attendance.
(k) In the event of an emergency or incident, the senior police officer present
     will take command and all stewards should promptly comply with any
      instructions given by him or by any police officer acting on his behalf.
Training
Training of stewards should be completed prior to the start of the season to a
standard acceptable to the police, fire and ambulance services and Local Authority.
Refresher training should be given by a competent person during the months of
October and January.
Stewards should be supplied with a handout detailing their responsibilities in
general terms as set out above.
The above list of duties is by no means exhaustive and club management should
liaise closely with appropriate senior police, fire, and ambulance services officers
to arrive at a final version that takes account of local factors.
