                                               he       Mr Bolton, G2
                                                        Mr Sticxkley, DoW
hs. 1.5/hillsbl.dm                                                 P8

                                         rCft*O u ^ b


                                                                    &   4   J/ift



                                           273 3099


F A Entwistle Esq
Chairman
Bath City Football Club Limited
Twerton Park                               FEP/89 35/40/2
BATH
                                           5 January 1990

Dear Mr Entwistle

This letter follows up your exchange of correspondence with the
Hillsborough Inquiry which, as you know, was copied to us for
information.

I quite understand your concern about the effects of safety
requirements on small, non-league football clubs whose fixtures
attract only a few hundred spectators.        Although I cannot
authoritatively interpret the Interim Report recommendations,
Home Office Circular 68/1989 sent to local authorities and police
forces with a copy of the Report did make the point that we felt
the recommendations were aimed primarily at football leacme
clubs. I enclose a copy of that Circular for your information.
Your attention is drawn to paragraph 4 of the Circular which, as
you would expect, also draws attention to the need for
consideration to be given to the application of the
recommendations &iseu>nere .

Police operational arrangements are a matter for the Chief
Constable.     I cannot say therefore how far the interim
recommendations relating to the policing of football grounds can,
or should, be applied to Twerton Park when it is used for
non-league fixtures.    Similarly, responsibility for terms and
conditions of the safety certificate rests with the local
authority (Avon County Council) who must decide whether it would
be right to build into the safety certificate additional
conditions on policing/stewarding for certain types of fixture.
Existing advice from the Home Office to local authorities does
allow for this (Home Office Circular 7/1986 refers) and I enclose
for your information a copy of the relevant extract from Annex C
to that Circular.

I am copying this letter to both Avon County Council and the
Chief Constable of Avon and Somerset Police. I am also copying
this letter to the Hillsborough Inquiry.

                                         Yours sincerely



                                         D J MOULD
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
Encs
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                  Direct line: 01-273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:    FEP/89 35/^8/88
Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
       Chief Officers of Police
       Chief Fire Officers
       Chief Ambulance Officers


                                                       4 August 1989




       Dear Sir/Madam
       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989
       INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
       Introduction
       The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
       on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
       attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.
      2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
      contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
      without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
      recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.
       Government response

      3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
      Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
      with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
      Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations

4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; the remaining 15 are those which,
although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
Put into effect. The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
start of the season.
The guide to safety at sports grounds

     It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations, if there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.
The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
Football clubs

8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.
Resource implications

9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.
Other

10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).

11.   Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.
                          Yours faithfully




                         A H TURNEY
                         Fire and Emergency Planning Department
      As regards the scope of a general safety certificate, section 2(5) of the
Act provides that different terms and conditions may be included for different
activities.     Although, therefore, a stadium riay be in regular use only as a foot-
ball ground, in cases where it is also used f rom time to time to stage other
events it would be desirable, and in many cas 2 S obviate the need for special
safety certificates, if the terms and conditi 3 ns appropriate to those events were
to be included in the general certificate,        is suggested that any such events

for which it is considered desirable to provi ie might conveniently be divided into

2 classes:-


      1.   those sufficiently similar in chara ;ter to the main purpose of the
      stadium for the normal terms and conditi sns to be equally applicable;


      2.   those of a fundamentally different    iharacter, eg boxing matches, pop

      concerts, etc which may involve all or part of the playing area being given
      over to    spectator accommodation and for which separate terms and conditions
      will have to be devised..   It' is. not, of course, necessary to provide for
      these contingencies in cases where no c .ear need is foreseen by the stadium
      authorities.


7.    There may also be circumstances in which the terms and conditions applicable
to the normal activity of the stadium may be found to be inappropriate, eg when a
special event, such as a cup tie or a "local Derby", is expected      ik>   attract signi­
ficantly more than the usual attendance.      In the case especially of cup re plays
these special events may arise with only a few days' notice, within which it would
not be possible to accommodate the whole of the statutory procedure appropriate to
 the grant of a special safety certificate.     In order to overcome this difficulty,
 it would seem desirable for the local authorities and stadium authorities to seek
 to work out in advance the modifications to the normal terms and conditions which
 might be appropriate to such occasions, eg the admission of increased numbers to
 certain areas on the condition that extra stewards and police are employed, that
 notice is given to the local authority, and so on, and to provide for their
 incorporation in the general safety certificate.


 8.    Once a general safety certificate has b ^en issued, subject to the determina-
 tion of any appeal, the terms and conditions(can be varied only by formal amend-
 ment of the certificate, which may be at the initiative either of the holder of
 the certificate or of the local authority (ses section 4(2) of the Act) and will

 presumably reflect changes in circumstances o :curring since the grant of the



                                     iii
                                                           tfcjjctfXrk.                                      I*!')*-
                                                       1 8 DEC 1989                            1°        ^
l . \ Q l IRY IN T O THE HILLSBOROl G H             The Rt Hon Lor-djustice Taylor
S'FA DU M DISASTER
                                                     1 1 J '- U . V   i . \i i i I L ‘ >   (   i . U c




                                                                               V -.
                                                                                  i/1            ^ !)


F A Entwistle Esq
Chairman
Bath City Football Club Ltd
Twerton Park
BATH

                                                    ’ate
                                                      14 December 1989




        |W.   tK /fw C ilrU
                              )
Thank you for your letter of 12 December.   In so far as you are
making points which you would like Lord Justice Taylor to bear in
mind m the course of the second part of his Inquiry, I can show
 lm your letter, and I know he will note what you say.   But the
application of recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
Report is not a matter for him, neither in general nor in an
individual case.  So far as the proposal in the last two
paragraphs of your letter is concerned, you must take it up with
those concerned with your arrangements locally.   I am, however,
copying your letter and my reply to those in the Home Office who
are concerned with safety of sports grounds, for information.


                                               Y<                          /




                                                    KHWw<
                                               R M WHALLEY
                                          Secretary to the Inquiry
                                                                 BATH CITY

                        FOOTBALL                                                                                CLUB LTD
                                                                              Founded 1889
                                      Members o f the Football Association Beazer Homes League and Western League

                                                                        Registered Office and Ground
                                                                          TWERTON PARK
                                                                              BATH
                                                                        Telephone 423087      -        313247

VAT No. 138 8814 34
                                                                                                                           Registered in England No. 176565




       Rt.Hon.Lord Justice Taylor,
       Home Office,
       50 Queen Anne's G a t e ,
       LONDON    SW1H 9AT


       12 December 1989


       Dear Sir,

       A PLEA ON BEHALF OF MINOR CLUBS

      I write to make representations on behalf of a small number of little clubs
      who find themselves in an invidious position because of the implementation
      of certain recommendations in your Interim Report. May I explain the
      problem by quoting the case of Bath City Football Club as an example.

      THE FACTS

       1. We own the freehold of our ground, Twerton Park, Bath, where we play all
          our home matches.

       2. We have issued a licence to Bristol Rovers Football Club, who are
          members of the Third Division of the Football League, to play their
          home matches at Twerton Park.

       3. Twerton Park is a designated ground and has a Safety Certificate for a
          total occupancy of 9B00.

      4. Bristol Rovers are responsible for implementing the recommendations at
         their home matches which are normally attended by 5000/6000 spectators.
         This causes no problems.

      5. Bath City Football Club is a member of the Premier Division of the
         Southern League (known as the Beazer Homes League).
      6. The attendance at Bath City's home League matches varies between 500 and
         700. This number of spectators is "lost" in a ground that can safely
         accommodate 9600.




                                                                                                                            /continued.

                                                                     Chairman: Mr. F. A. Entwistle
       V ice-C hairm an: .Mr.   R.   StnHr r> i rpr torc*   Mr   M   PurmM    VI   A T,«. „       ..    \i _   r>   r»_;
12 December 1989




7. At these home League matches we get very few "away" supporters and
   there has never been any need for segregation. All spectators enter
   through the same turnstiles and are free to go to any part of the
   terraces including the "segregation pens" (see 8. below).
8. At the western end of the ground, behind the goal, there are two
   "segregation pens" with perimeter fencing and having a total approved
   capacity of 3000, i.e. approximately 1500 each. These were provided
   to cope with Bristol Rovers matches.
9. At Bath City's home League matches the maximum number of spectators
   observed to be occupying these "pens" is 70 in total. Mostly, the
   number is less than this.

THE PROBLEM

This can be summed up as the rigid application of the recommendations
to all designated football grounds without regard to the nature of the
matches played there or the number of spectators attending those matches.
The best examples of this are recommendations 5 and 9 in Chapter 24 of
the Interim Report.

The Avon and Somerset Constabulary inform us that if any spectators are
allowed into the "segregation pens" (even though the two sets of supporters
are not being segregated and all gate^ of the "pens" are open), then they
must have a police presence there with radio contact to a police-manned
control room. The declared objective of such police officer(s) is to
relieve overcrowding.But at Bath City's home League matches they would be
dealing with no more than 70 spectators in an area approved for 3000. The
police inform us that the recommendations give them no discretion in the
matter and that they are bound to insist on this police presence even if
there is only one spectator in the area. Common-sense- dictates that this
cannot have been the intention of the recommendations.

Provision of police officers in   the circumstances indicated above would
represent a lamentable waste of   police manpower. It would also impose an
unnecessary financial burden on   minor clubs who are struggling to keep
their heads above water on very   small gate receipts.
It would be possible to seal off the "segregation pens" for Bath City's
matches so that spectators are not allowed into that area. However, we
consider this to be quite unnecessary. Moreover, it would create another
problem. At our level of football it is traditional for a small group of
supporters to gather behind the opposing team's goal and, at half-time,
to change over to the other end. It is common practice throughout our
League and has never caused any problems. We fear that if such a facility
were banned at our ground this would create resentment and a loss of goodwill
on the part of other clubs who are able to permit free movefnent.




                                                                  /continued
12 December 1989                                                           3.




THE PROPOSAL

The requirement to make attendance at football matches completely safe
has the wholehearted support of Bath City Football Club. On those rare
occasions when we have had a special match with a much larger attendance
than usual we have taken all the appropriate steps. For example, we
recently had a home match with Fulham in the first round of the F.A.Cup
and the attendance was 4283 - a much larger gate than we have had at any
match for many years. With the co-operation of Bristol Rovers the full
recommendations of the Interim Report were met.
However, we submit that with regard to our run-of-the-mill League matches,
the recommendations represent a "steam hammer to crack a nut". We believe
that, understandably, having regard to the time available, they were drawn
up primarily with the larger Football League clubs in mind. But their rigid
application to the "minnows" would result in hardship to these clubs and a
waste of police time and effort.

We propose that there should be a dispensation,suspending the application
of the recommendations, in all cases where the attendance is either less
than 25% of the total Safety Certificate limit or below a fixed number of
2000, whichever is the lower.

We have reason to believe that a proposal along these lines would have the
support of our local police and safety authorities and we submit this for
your earnest consideration.

Yours faithfully,




F.A.Entwistle
Chairman
