PHILIP HOOSON



Police Constable 42



On Saturday 15 April 1989, I was engaged on football duty at Sheffield

for the semi final football match between Nottingham Forest and

Liverpool Football Club at the Hillsborough Stadium.            My scale of duty

commenced at    8 am   at Barnsley DHQ.

The serial I was attached to was 'D' Division serial 16, which

consisted of other officers.

PS 2379 Swift

PC 42 Hooson (self)

PC 803 Tattershall

PC 3198 Akred

PC 2083 Packer

 PC 12 Taylor

 PC 1368 Mackenzie

 PC 1453 Phillips

 PC 2185 Cooper

 We all travelled to West Bar Police Station by transit van and paraded

 there for briefing at 9am.          Chief Inspector King conducted the

 briefing, Superintendent Bates was officer in charge.

 After briefing, personal radios were issued, one radio between two

 officers, but it was found that there wasn't enough radios to go

 round.   So myself      and   PC Tattershall teamed up w i t h ________ |having

 one radio between the three of us.           We were then joined by two

 officers frctn the HQ Drug Squad, who were attached to our serial

 working in uniform, one of whan was                                The other Drug
                                   -   2   -




Squad officers name I don't know.              We were each given a packed lunch.

Our allotted duty was to attend at Midland Station and escort the

Notts Forest fans and Liverpool fans who would be arriving by train,

separate them at the station and put them on a number of double decked

PSV's provided by South Yorkshire Transport.              After the fans were

placed in their respective buses they were transported to the

Hillsborough Stadium being escorted by 2 PC's per PSV.              Then

marshalled off the buses and into the stadium.              The PC's would then

return to the Midland Station.         We attended at the Midland Station and

commenced our duties at   1 0 am   that date.

My serial remained at the station all the time, not travelling with

any of the football fans on the PSV's.

All the fans who arrived at the station were well behaved and co­

operated with our requests.        All appeared to be decent, genuine

football fans from both teams.         There were exceptions when one or two

of the younger element from both Notts Forest and Liverpool tried to

get through the cordon and into the city and using all sorts of

reasons.    The snooker tournament being one of them.

Each of these were searched and when football tickets were found on

them they were sent to their respect PSV's without putting up much

argument.    This was the way in which my serial dealt with the fans

 filtering the non-fans through the station gates, but the vast

majority did what they were requested to do.              There were no unpleasant

 situations at the station, everything was good humoured having a laugh

 and a joke with sane' of the fans from both sides.

 At about 2.25pm we were informed by the British Transport Police that

 all the expected football fans who were travelling by train had

 arrived at Midland Station and that they were not aware of any large'




            'r   ;■,
groups of fans still being in the rail system.

In view of this my serial along with other officers frcm other serials

boarded the PSV's at Midland Station and were transported to the

Hillsborough Stadium.

The route taken by the driver of the PSV in which we were travelling

took us along Middlewood Road past Hillsborough Park and right into

Leppings Lane.    I noticed that there were large-crowds of people

walking along Leppings Lane towards the football ground.    These people

were walking on the pavements and into the road on both sides of

Leppings lane.    As we neared the corner of the road where the entrance

road is to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, the area was completely

swamped with football fans.    I could only see Inspector Sykes who was

standing on the corner to the entrance and he was totally surrounded

with Liverpool fans.    It was like a sea of faces in that area

stretching frcm half way along the pavement from the junction with

Vere Road and well past Gate C at the Leppings Lane turnstile.       This

area of the turnstiles was wall to wall people who seemed to be packed

into that area.     I could see several fans climbing over the top of the

gate.   I did not see any Police Officers in this area, unless they

were lost in the sea of people.     I could see two mounted officers who

were completely surrounded also and were quite obviously struggling to

 control this crowd of fans.    It would be fair to say that this area at

 this time was totally congested with fans trying to get into the

 ground at these turnstiles and still more large numbers of fans were

 converging on Leppings Lane fran the direction of Penistone Road and       -

 Middlewood Road.

 With difficulty the driver of the bus in which we were travelling

 managed to work a way through the fans making their way along Leppings
                                -   4   -




Lane from the direction of Penistone Road, towards the turnstiles at

the rear of the West Stand.    I could hear on other officers radios

that officers at the Leppings lane turnstiles were shouting for

assistance.   I couldn't make out any specific request only calls for

assistance and more mounted officers to attend at this location.

I have worked football duty at Hillsborough Stadium on more than

several occasions during my service including a number of semi finals,

but I have never seen such a large number of fans at the Leppings Lane

end at that time of day, the area was totally over-run.          This would

have been at 2.50pna.

At about 2.55pm we arrived outside the gates to the North Stand in

 Penistone Road and debused.   My serial went straight into the

 gymnasium where we were to be held on standy as a reserve serial.            We

 managed to get a hot drink and were just about to eat our packed

 lunches, having only been seated for a natter of a minute when

 Sergeant Swift told us we had to leave because we were required on the

 track in front of the West Stand.          We immediately left the gymnasium

 and went into the playing area of the stadium.          This was before 3pm

 because as we entered the playing area I saw players frcm both teams

 on the football pitch warming up.

 We walked along the track in front of the North Stand towards the West

  Stand and when passing sane fans in the North Stand I heard sane of

  them "hissing".   As we made our way along the track, there was no

  indication to us at this time, that anything was wrong in the West

  Stand of the stadium.

  My serial at this time, including myself consisted of PS Swift, PC

  Tattershall, PC McKenzie, PC Akred, PC Taylor, PC Packer and PC

  Cooper.
                                     -   5   -




We reached the corner of the track between the North Stand and the

West Stand and without looking too carefully I got the impression that

the area was not as full as the West Stand appeared to be.               As we

began walking along the track in front of the West Stand the noise was

deafening.      The whole stadium seemed to be shouting but I didn't take

any particular notice at this time, this sort of behaviour not being

unusual for a game of this importance.               PC Packer was in front of me

at this time.         As we made our way further along the track towards the

South Side I began to sense something was not quite right.                I could

see at this time that there were already three other Policemen

standing on the track in front of us.               As I neared Gate 4 I realised

that the people in the West Stand were not shouting but were

 screaming.     I realised then that something was seriously wrong and I

 heard people in the crowd screaming "let us out," "Oh God help us."                 I

 looked at the people in the crowd and I could see by their faces and

 ■(■hat people were crushed up against the fencing that they were clearly

 in a desperate situation.        I iirmediately grabbed the officer on the

 track and asked him to get sane assistance to us.               I knew that I had

 to open the gate to get people out even if it meant getting a

 bollocking.          I can remember thinking "If you're wrong Phil lad,

 you'll get a right bollocking for this."               I then went straight to Gate

 4 at the fence behind the goal posts and shouted to Sergeant Swift who

 was a number of yards away frcm my position to my right: "I'm opening

  the gate" and I opened the gate.               PC 3198 Akred was with me at this

  time.

  On opening the gate, the crush was so great that the people behind the

  safety fencing in this stand could not move to free themselves.                With

  PC 3198 Akred I ’immediately began pulling people out fron the crowd


          !
    •     /i-   /v;     •
                                       -    6   -




and through the gate and on to the track.               Most of the people that we

pulled out initially were able to walk and did not have any apparent

serious injuries.           Each and every person that we pulled out from Pen 4

took a great deal of physical effort, not one of them came out easy.

Each one was trapped in one way or another by various parts of their

body.

After a short while at Gate 4 we were joined by Sergeant Swift and we

continued to pull these people free.                On more than several occasions

jackets, pullovers, shirts etc were ripped on peoples backs in the

effort to free them.

ipj^g-^.0           no doubt that the people in the stand were desperate for

their lives.            The best description would be to say that people were

drowning in a sea of people.               All the faces that I saw at the front

were pale, grey, white or blue all with panic and pain written all

 over them.           The people at the front couldn t scream for help only

 stare, screaming at your with their eyes.               There were many whose eyes

 were closed.

 Whilst we were standing at the gate, I could see two men on the floor

      the gate opening, we were frantically pulling people out as fast as

 we could to try and get to the people at the front, but as soon as one

 was pulled free the space was filled with another and pressure was

 still being pushed forward frcm the back of the stand.

 I got down on my hands and knees and grabbed hold of one of the men

 who was on the floor face down, hanging out of the gate into the

  track, I put my- arm .under his, armpits and tried pulling him out,.

''■whilst I was doing this people who were being pulled free above me

  were standing on my back to get to the track, other officers present

...grabbed hold- of -me and.-other parts, of the man and with.a,,great ,.deaI_ of .


            .   !
                i
physical effort we managed to pull him free.      We carried him to the

grass area behind the goal nets, put him down, established that he was

breathing and alive, he muttered sane words and we left him and

immediately returned to the gate and continued pulling people fron

the pen.   I became aware that the man we had pulled out frcm the floor

was in fact being attended to by another officer.

It is difficult to say how many we physically pulled from the pen but

it must have been in the hundreds, most of whom were walking, sane

unconscious, sane dead, sane collapsed.     The ones who were brought out

unconscious were tended to immediately by whoever pulled them out.

They were brought round by slaps across the face or if they were

collapsed mouth to mouth resuscitation where necessary.       I didn't

count how many times I did this, I couldn't guess.       As time was

passing more and more officers were arriving at the scene, this was

quite obviously within minutes of opening the gates even though we

seemed to have been there a hell of a long time before anyone actually

came, but it was only minutes.

The main problem was that no matter how many were pulled fran the

 front, the crush was so great fran the back we couldn't relieve any

 pressure to get to the people at the very front or sides who were in

 serious trouble.

 It became obvious that pressure needed to be released fran the rear

 where there was now space appearing.     Officers were telling or

 shouting to people to move back fran the front but they wouldn't so

 the situation continued.                                                        '

 I made a request to one Inspector who was standing on the grass to get

 a serial in through the back to pull the people out.       Whether he did

 or n o t 1--don't-knowy-he--seemed a.-.little non plussed and, walked away. *
                                -    8   -




I can remember pulling a boy of about 16 years frcm the crowd who had

a broken arm.    By that I mean I could clearly see that the bone in his

right forearm was broken.    He had somehow managed to pull himself

above the people in the crowd and shouted to us that he had broken his

arm, with another officer we managed to grab him and pull him through

the gate and on to the track.       He just thanked us and walked off.

Most of the ones who were pulled out, who were able thanked us and

were crying, thanking god that they had got out.

As more and more officers arrived at the scene, they began to tear

down the fencing with their bare hands, trying to get to the people in

the pen.   Seme even tried to kick it down.       Sane officers were hanging

over the fencing and pulling people over quite clearly in seme danger

of falling into the pen themselves.

At this time I moved away frcm the gate and started checking the

people laid down on the grass, I cannot remember how many were laid on

the grass at this time but my estimation would be in the region of

about 30 to 40.    Other Police Officers were engaged in attempts to

revive people.

I made several attempts to revive people with artificial resuscitation

and whenever I thought I felt a pulse I would shout any medical

personnel who were near at hand.         I seemed to have found more dead

 than alive.

 The situation in this area was quite chaotic, bodies all over the

 place, people wandering about crying, screaming, shouting, Police

 Officers and what few medical personnel were there trying frantically

 to revive people.

 After sane time at checking bodies and making several hopeless

 attempts to revive people it became obvious to me that there was
                                      -   9   -




nothing more that I could do.                 I was feeling absolutely physically

shattered.             By this time all the people in Pen 4 had been pulled out

and there only remained the dead bodies in Pen 3, a large number of

which had been taken out and placed on the field.

During the roost frantic moments of trying to revive the people on the

grass there were no medical personnel to speak of and the St John's

Ambulance Brigade consisted of what I could see, two old men and one

young boy of about 12 - 14 years who was totally overwhelmed by the

situation.             Although on saying that, once they had gathered their

senses they got stuck in and worked very hard.

With regard to the behaviour of the fans I can say that the ones who

were seated above the pens were shouting and screaming abuse, but the

ones who were on the ground got organised into groups and helped us

with the injured etc by carrying them on advert boards and were a

credit to themselves.

As I have previously stated I have worked football duty at

Hillsborough on quite a number of occasions and have always been

impressed by the pre-planning and organisation of the duties and

crowd.           I would consider it one of the best policed grounds in the

country.          Whatever happened on this occasion to cause such a tragedy

can only be speculated upon, but again I have never seen as many fans

at the Leppings Lane end at that time of day.


             \

  t      !         ~
