                                   George Howarth MP

                      c c : KOM* Jecrttouu        ft r   c /a < v a tt        H ome O ffice
                         ttr HiCKOUU             H S C liff o r d            QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                         Hr O h o . a 4          rtf Q a f A £ f              LONDONSW1H9AT
                         H i g o u s - Sm*»tv\
                                                 I l f O io tt
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER
                         Hr M iddleton
 SECRETARY OF STATE      Hf Pacjh
                         M /C lifo rd

       Trevor Hicks Esc, .                                               £     July 1998
       Chairman
       Hillsborough Family Support Group
       Central Buildings
       41 North John Street
       Liverpool L2 6RR




       When I responded to the adjournment debate on Hillsborough on 8 May I
       undertook to write to you about the 20 questions in the Support Group’s press
       release issued that day. A number of the issues raised were covered by the
       Home Secretary in his speech or in the course of the debate and I enclose a
       copy of the Hansard extract for ease of reference. I will respond to the
       questions in order.

       Question 1 on your press release referred to the theft of two video tapes from
       the ground. As the Home Secretary indicated during the debate, Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith is quite clear that the loss of these tapes did not hinder the
       inquiry into the disaster since they would not have shown anything relevant
       (Page 18 para. 21 & 22 of his report). Your press release suggests that their
       importance rests on the motive behind the theft, but since investigations at
       the time failed to identify who was responsible, it is not possible to draw any
       firm conclusions from the incident either about who took the tapes or their
       reason for taking them.

       Question 2 referred to an extract of the inquest proceedings when PC Bichard
       gave evidence that appeared to indicate that footage from Camera 5 had
       disappeared. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith discusses this dialogue between the
       Coroner and PC Bichard at some length (Page 26, para. 62 and following).
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusion (at para. 75) is that ‘PC Bichard was
       mistaken in thinking that there was tape from camera 5 of the same scene
       prior to 15.02.’ He states categorically (at para. 77) that there is no foundation
       to the allegation that video tape was suppressed or hidden by the police.

        Question 3 suggested that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had ignored
        contradictions about the performance of camera 5. The Support Group’s

                                                  submissions about the video/.
submissions about the video evidence were dealt with in detail in Chapter
Two of the report. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found that the police did not
blame their failure to appreciate the overcrowding at the Leppings Lane
terraces on the performance of camera 5. He therefore concluded that
suggestions that evidence about the performance of the camera had been
exaggerated were of no consequence to the Taylor inquiry and other
proceedings.

Question 4 referred to the Support Group’s submission about the
implementation of the major disaster plan and Mr Wardrope’s article in the
British Medical Journal. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to Mr Wardrope’s
article at paragraph 49 on page 47 of his report. At paragraph 64 the Judge
concludes that Mr Wardrope’s article does not differ significantly from the
evidence which he gave at the inquest. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered
the question of whether there should be a fresh inquiry into the response of
the emergency services in Chapter Three. He concludes (at page 61, para.
102) that in the ‘light of Lord Taylor’s full and detailed inquiry, and specific
findings and recommendations’ no useful purpose would be served by having
any further inquiry into the rescue operation.

Question 5 asks why Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not interview any
ambulancemen and why he had not thought it necessary to see Tony
Edwards, whom he eventually saw at Mr Edwards’ own request. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith says (at Page 45, para. 33) that he was asked to consider the
evidence of three ambulancemen, including that of Tony Edwards. At
paragraph 48, he indicates that he did not consider it necessary to interview
these witnesses because their statements were available to the police at the
time and he accepted what was said in them. The conduct of the scrutiny
was, of course entirely a matter for the Judge. In this case, he clearly felt no
purpose would be served by interviewing the ambulancemen concerned. In
fact, as you note, Tony Edwards did give evidence to the scrutiny at his own
request and this is dealt with at paragraph 98 of the report.

Question 6 referred to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions about the
evidence of Roger Houldsworth. The judge considers the evidence of Mr
Houldsworth at some length in Chapter Two of his report. Lord Justice Stuart
Smith concluded that the police had not blamed their failure to appreciate the
overcrowding on a faulty camera and, on page 25 paragraph 56, he says that
the Coroner’s jury went to the police control box and saw for themselves the
view which each police officer had. Mr Houldsworth also demonstrated the
capability of the CCTV cameras. On page 36 paragraphs 97 and 98, Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith says that Mr Houldsworth’s existence and evidence were
known to both the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner but there was no reason
for him to be called since what he was then saying about the police and club
systems was dealt with by other witnesses.

                                                        Question 7 asked/..
Question 7 asked why Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made no reference to Dr Ed
Walker’s allegation that Sgt Appleton added her signature as a witness to his
statement at a later time. I cannot, of course, answer for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith on the content of his report but there is no suggestion by Dr Walker that
the evidence given by him in the statement was incorrect or that it was altered
in any way by the police.

Question 8 refers to an undertaking given by Mervyn Jones, the investigating
officer from West Midlands Police, to the then Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire about the use of police statements. This concerned an undertaking
not to use original police statements for the purpose of the Taylor Inquiry
where they had been superseded by a subsequent statement. I understand
that you have now been supplied with a copy of the letter from Mervyn Jones
to the Treasury Solicitor referred to in the letter shown at Appendix 8 of the
scrutiny report.

Question 9 asks about missing copies of police statements. As I indicated in
the House on 8 May, officials have been making enquiries of South Yorkshire
Police about the statements which the Support Group indicate were missing,
and we have now arranged for these to be supplied. I understand that some
of the police statements were held separately from the others as part of the
police discipline enquiry papers and that this is how they came to be omitted.
It was never the intention to withhold any of the police statements and I am
sorry for the delay in providing them.

Question 10 asked whether the Home Secretary was satisfied that sufficient
enquiry had taken place into the implementation of the disaster plan and the
emergency response. The Home Secretary noted in his speech to the House
on 8 May that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had found no evidence of want of
care by the emergency or medical services and that no purpose would be
served by any further inquiry into the disaster. The Home Secretary has
accepted this conclusion.

Question 11 refers to South Yorkshire Police receiving a copy of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s report in advance of its presentation to Parliament. The Chief
Constable is mentioned in the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny as the disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and
therefore one of the parties to whom the report is directed. While I understand
the families’ concern, it was entirely proper that the Chief Constable, as
disciplinary authority, should have been given the opportunity to consider the
report once it was submitted by the Judge.

Question 12 asks about access to material gathered in the course of Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny. We have made it clear that we will place all
the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the House of


                                                       Commons Library/..
Commons Library unless there are overriding reasons against doing so. In
addition to the South Yorkshire Police statements, we have already placed in
the Library the following:

      Transcripts of interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith

      Other records of discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
      transcripts were not made

      Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses

      Other written statements consulted at the request of the families

      South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989
      semi-finals

       Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority

       Report produced by David Phillips of Devon & Cornwall Constabulary

       Report by Noel Burne (a structural engineer)

       Police videotapes TB1,2,3 and 4

       Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6 October
       and meeting with Counsel on 30 September


Question 13 queries South Yorkshire Police’s inability to supply information to
the Support Group during March because of staff absence on leave. As you
will appreciate, I cannot answer for the South Yorkshire Police and I can only
advise you to pursue any concerns with the force direct.

Question 14 asks about the decision to allow Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield to retire on ill health grounds. Under the Police Pension
Regulations 1987, the responsibility for considering an application for
retirement on ill health grounds rests with the police authority for the force
concerned. Before reaching a decision, the police authority is required to
obtain the views of a suitably qualified medical practitioner on whether the
officer is permanently disabled for police duties. The decision is entirely a
matter for the police authority concerned, and the Home Secretary has no
role in the matter. The Home Secretary indicated in the House that it was
‘plainly unacceptable’ that no police officer was brought to book in this case
and he signalled his determination to ensure that discipline procedures are
strengthened so that, in future, hearings can be decided in the absence an

                                                        accused officer,/..
accused officer, subject to appropriate safeguards. However, it would be
wrong in principle and contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights
to apply these new procedures retrospectively, and it would be wrong for me
to suggest that any such action could now be taken against Mr Duckenfield.

Question 15 refers to the South Yorkshire Police’s failure to bring disciplinary
charges against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
Murray until directed by the Police Complaints Authority. Again, this was a
matter for the force and the Police Complaints Authority and it would be
inappropriate to comment on the decisions that were taken. The Police
Complaints Authority, quite rightly, has the power to direct that discipline
charges are brought where the police have failed to do so.

Question 16 refers to the failure to bring any criminal proceedings following
Hillsborough. The possibility of criminal proceedings was ftiliy examined by
the then Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) who sought Counsel’s opinion
on the report submitted by the West Midlands Police. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith explains (at page 10 paragraph 56) that the DPP had to consider the
‘significantly different and greater degree of culpability’ which is involved in a
criminal offence of manslaughter compared to liability under the civil law. I do,
however, understand people’s feelings about this and I did refer to this in my
speech on 8 May.

Question 17 refers to the Home Secretary’s offer to meet the families. The
Home Secretary understands the families’ disappointment at the outcome of
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny and that is why he has been happy to
meet them on a number of occasions; and why he has offered to meet the
families again to explain his decision not to re-open the inquiry, if they would
find that useful. Clearly, he has accepted the findings of Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny but his offer to meet the families again to explain his decision
remains open, and I hope that you will feel able to make the necessary
arrangements for such a meeting to take place.

Question 18 asks how the inquest verdict of ‘accidental death’ can be
maintained when so many things associated with Hillsborough have been
found wanting. The Home Secretary made it clear that there are deficiencies
in procedures covering inquests and police discipline which Hillsborough
helped to highlight and which he intends to address. He emphasised his
support for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a
Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the
coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by
the Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after an inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the families of those who died

                                                         unnecessary distress/..
unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the
same ground as the Inquest. The scrutiny conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith considered carefully the arguments submitted that the inquest verdict
should be quashed, but he found no grounds for recommending such a
course of action. With regard to police discipline, the Home Secretary
responded, in March, to the recommendations of the Home Affairs Select
Committee on police disciplinary and complaints procedures. In addition to
the changes we propose to make to the procedures relating to retirement on
ill-health grounds which I outline above, the Home Secretary also confirmed
his intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline
procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy provision which
restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts.

Question 19 asks whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and others associated
with the scrutiny are Freemasons. This is entirely a matter for those
concerned to disclose. The Home Secretary is satisfied that Lord Justice
Stuart Smith has conducted his scrutiny with the utmost integrity. His report
clearly sets out what evidence he considered, his conclusions and the
reasons for those conclusions.

Question 20 refers to the role played by Superintendent Beechy in the
Hillsborough investigation. The deployment of Superintendent Beechy was a
matter for the Chief Constable of West Midlands and the investigating officer,
Mr Jones. I understand that he was involved in the examination of specific
ancillary matters rather than part of the main team investigating the disaster,
and that he was subsequently assigned to assist the Coroner in the
arrangements for the inquests.

I hope this is helpful. I realise that there are many issues which still leave the
families with a deep sense of frustration and injustice. This was vividly
brought out in many of the speeches during the debate on 8 May. I hope that
although the families may not accept the reasons for the Home Secretary’s
conclusions, they will appreciate that we have listened to their concerns very
carefully. I am sure it was right to establish the scrutiny. I am only sorry that
the families’ burden has not been eased by its outcome.

I am copying this letter to those Merseyside MPs and others with a particular
interest in the disaster who spoke in the debate on 8 May, and I am also
arranging for a copy of this letter to be placed in the Library of the House.




                              GEORGE HOWARTH
