   MEMORANDUM


   From: C F BONE
         Room 1106
         0171 273 2512

   Date:     21 January 1998

  To:       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




           Underneath this you will find your red folder, which contains my fully (as far as I
           know) updated version o f your report, Chapters 1 to 7. Your working copies o f
           these Chapters, with your comments and riders, are on the meeting table.

           I have not pulled all the Appendices together yet. But that is folly in hand and they
           should all be ready early next week.

           You wanted to look over Chapters 1 to 7 again.

           We also had in today the letter from Mr Wells about the apologies and Mr M etcalfs
           reply to his ‘M axwell’ letter. These are attached, with the letters from us to which
           they are replying. (Mr M etcalf is replying to two letters, one from you dated 12
           December and an addendum from me dated 2 January).

           I have been looking again at the section about the state o f the ground in Chapter 6.
           The conclusion, at para 20, seems to me to hint - to a very small extent - that there
           might be some new inquiry. Is this what you intend? I wonder if w e might not
           instead say something like


                  These matters do not give grounds fo r re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any
                  other proceedings. Lord Taylor might, if he had known o f them, have
                  criticised Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, their consultant engineers, and
                  those responsible fo r licensing the ground in more stringent terms than he did,
                  but I do not consider that there would have been any question o f his changing
                  his central conclusion, borne out as it is by the overwhelming mass o f the
                  evidence, that the primary cause o f the disaster was a failure o f police control.
                 However, if the responsibility o f other parties was somewhat greater than had
                 earlier been appreciated, that might have a bearing on any reconsideration o f
                 criminal proceedings against police officers.



G: WILL SBOR\S-S\051.DOC
           In the summary Chapter, we might delete the last sentence o f paragraph 27 which
           deals with this, so that it reads


                   There are two questions to do with the state o f the Hillsborough football
                   ground which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord
                   Taylor s otherwise very full Inquiry.   These questions are to do with the

                   height o f the crush barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster
                   happened and the overall capacity o f that terrace.   I do not consider that they
                  give grounds fo r reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.




  ~ F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\051.DOC
