                                                fk&ff           jig       t&8
                                                                      57 *
    NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON THURSDAY 3 MAY WITH THE HILLSBOR
    FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP



    Present:   Lord Ferrers       Mr Trevor Hicks
               Mr Bolton          Mr Devonside
               Mr Mould           Mr Pemberton
               Mr Smith           Mrs Sefton
               Miss Nicholson     Mrs Berry



    The meeting had been agreed to following representations by
    Robert Hughes MP requesting that Lord Ferrers should meet with the
    group.

    2.   Before going on to discuss matters Mr Hicks handed to
    Lord Ferrers a copy of a report they had submitted to Lord Justice
    Taylor dated 7 November 1989 (copy attached). Mr Hicks also
    referred to meetings the group had had with MPs and said that as a
    group they had tried to conduct themselves, despite their loss, in
•   a dignified manner.

    3.   Mr Hicks said that they were happy with the manner in which
    the enquiry had been conducted. He believed that the interim
    report dealt fairly with the issues as did the final report.   They
    were however concerned that like all the other reports (since
    1926) that had come about following such incidents nothing
    significant would happen in order to prevent further disasters.
    Mr Hicks referred to a police report he had seen, the contents of
    which suggested that the Rotherham and Barnsley football stadiums
    should be closed down and the police were, in effect, policing
    grounds which in their own view were unsafe. As a business man Mr
    Hicks' view was that if a contract was broken (and that is how he
    saw the failure of a club to ensure that its ground was safe) then
    the police had every right to refuse to police the ground on match
    days. No club, in his view, would want to hold a match without a
    police presence and therefore they would as a result ensure that
    the ground met safety standards. Football, like any other
    entertainment, should not be allowed to function if its standards
    of safety weren't up to scratch.

    4.   Lord Ferrers, in reply, said that it was situations such as
    those mentioned which the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) might
    well be able to redress. The FLA would be set up on or after
    1 June;  it would have 8 or so members who would have had some
    expertise in such matters as fire safety, policing, engineering
    and perhaps members with experience/knowledge of the professional
    game. Mr Hicks welcomed this response. While the clock could not
    be put back for those who like they had lost family at
    Hillsborough it was important to try to ensure the future safety
    of others.



                                                    /5.   Mr Pemberton.
E.R.

    5.   Mr Pemberton spoke of the poor standard of grounds - this
    seemed to be a historical thing and over the years fans had become
    accustomed to it and therefore accepted it. Lord Ferrers
    mentioned that he had only recently visited Liverpool's ground
    (Anfield) and what he saw had impressed him. Mr Hicks felt that
    Anfield was a good ground but most other grounds did not reach the
    same standard.   The Group considered that not only were some of
    the grounds of a lesser standard but also that, when dealing with
    crowds such as those that followed Liverpool, the police were not
    always capable of dealing with the volume of people turning up for
    the match.   It was for these reasons, Mr Hicks said, that he had
    stopped following Liverpool when they played other than at
    Anfield.   It was only because it was the semi-final of the FA Cup,
    and therefore a special event, that he and his family had decided
    to go to Hillsborough.   The Group also drew Lord Ferrers'
    attention to a press cutting and photograph which apparently
    showed an old, second hand crash barrier installed on the
    redeveloped kop terraces at Hillsborough which in their view was
    unsafe. Bearing in mind that the collapse of a barrier had been a
•   major factor in the disaster the Group were concerned.

    6.   Another area of concern was the "Green Guide" which in their
    view, in the light of Taylor, needed upgrading and enshrining by
    way of legislation. Mr Bolton said that the Green Guide was being
    revised as quickly as possible. There was a difficulty in making
    the guide mandatory because of the different circumstances which
    might prevail in sports grounds. Mr Hicks understood the
    difficulties in making it mandatory but said that as it stood the
    Guide was a recipe for misinterpretation.   He hoped that the
    margin for error could at least be narrowed. Mr Mould said that
    this would be achieved during its revision.

    7.   Mr Hicks spoke of the difficulties he and his colleagues had
    had with the South Yorkshire Police Authority. He himself had
    registered complaints against the police and similar complaints
    could have been made by at   least another 50 or so families. Mr
    Hicks said that the Police   Authority had conducted its
    investigation into alleged   remarks by Mr Wright which were
    reported in the press as being critical of supporters. He had met
    Mr Sharp (Chief Constable of Cumbria) who had taken over the
    enquiry following Mr Dear's departure from the West Midlands
    Police and as a result of his conversation with him Mr Hicks and
    his colleagues had accepted that Mr Wright's comments had been
    unfairly reported in the press. However they had since understood
    that the press, in particular the local Sheffield newspaper, were
    maintaining that Mr Wright had been reported accurately.
    Moreover, the timing of Mr Wright's press interview coincided with
    the Coroner's Inquest and therefore all parties should have
    remained silent.



                                                 /8.   Mr Hicks
8.   Mr Hicks referred to comments which Sir Jack Leyden (Chairman
of South Yorkshire Police Authority) had made following
Lord Justice Taylor's interim report, ie, that the report did not
properly reflect the true events of the Hillsborough disaster.
Mr Hicks' view was that the Chairman was an extremely strong
character and the Group was concerned about what seemed to them to
be the concentration of power held by, and within, Police
Authorities. The Group referred to a Police Authority meeting
which had been held on 27 April to discuss Mr Sharp's enquiry and
to reach a decision as to whether there was a case to answer by
Mr Wright. Yet the night before the meeting members of the Group
had been informed, via a telephone call what the view of the
Authority would be. In addition the South Yorkshire Post had
published the findings of the Authority before the meeting had
taken place. Whilst the Group felt they would have to accept the
decision of the Authority they were concerned about the
proprieties of the way it had been reached and were disappointed
not to have been given an opportunity to make representations
either in writing or verbally to the Police Authority. Mr Hicks
added that it would have helped to disperse bad feeling had Mr
Wright made a public statement denying the accuracy of the press
reports.

9.   Lord Ferrers recognised their concerns. He explained he
could not comment on the specific issues (the Group did not expect
him to do so) and pointed out that Mr Wright's press interview was
on the occasion of his retirement and not specifically about
Hillsborough.  He welcomed the opportunity to meet and receive the
Group's views and hoped they would not hesitate to keep the Home
Office in touch with their concerns.




                         BARBARA NICHOLSON (Miss)
                       Assistant Private Secretary


17 May 1990

Private Office, QAG.




cc   Mr   Goddard
     Mr   Bolton
     Mr   Smith
     Mr   Mould
