                                                         a 16
                                                      2 0 NOV 1389

hs.11.17/hillsb22.dm



From:   D J Mould                         cc   Ms Craig
        G2 Division                            Ms Rex
        X3099                                  Ms Nicholson
                                               Mr Moriarty
        17 November 1989                       Mr Turney
                                               Mr Mower
                                               Mr Bolton
                                               Mr^Clayton
                                               Jfr Goddard
                                               Mr Whalley
                                               Mr Godfrey
                                               Mr Brandon-Bravo



Miss Dent
Private Office




HILLSBOROUGH:    MEETING WITH MR EDEY 16 NOVEMBER 1989

As promised I enclose a copy of my note of the meeting which
I had with Mr Edey on 16 November,   You will see that I remain
of the view that any further correspondence from him should
continue to be dealt with at official level.




                                          D J MOULD



FEP/89 35/48/109



Enc
hs.11.17/hillsb22.dm



SAFETY AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS:   HILLSBOROUGH - MEETING WITH MR EDEY
ON 16 NOVEMBER 1989


Introduction

I saw Mr Edey as arranged.      I gave him a copy of circulars
earlier sent to him and up to date details of designation orders
as he had requested. He said he wanted these as a duplicate set
to present to the court at the hearing scheduled for next Tuesday
(21 November). He seemed grateful for the assistance.

General

2.   In talking to Mr Edey it was clear that he was not to be
shaken from his desire to seek a judicial review.     I made no
attempt to dissuade him therefore except insofar as I made it
clear that I did not accept his assertions of negligence or the
criticisms he had levelled against the Home Office. He said he
did not expect me to take any other view.

Points Arising

3.   Mr Edey asked me what inspections the Secretary of State
"had caused to be made under section 11 of the Safety of Sports
Ground Act 1975 (the 1975 Act)". I explained that there was not
a clear-cut answer to this:      the discretionary power under
section 11 for the Secretary of State to inspect sports grounds
was originally included because of his appellate functions (up to
1.1.1988) and to enable him to inspect sports grounds for the
purposes of designation. In practice, when Home Office officials
visited sports grounds they were there by consent and did not
need to exercise the power of section 11.

4.   Mr Edey's point was that the Secretary of State should
(have) exercise(d) the power to inspect all major sports grounds
to see that they met minimum standards, that this was something
for the Home Office and should not be left to local authorities.
He did not accept the role of the Home Office under the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as had previously been explained to
him in correspondence. He felt that any inspections carried out
after the Bradford fire were inadequate because they were
orientated towards fire safety; that Popplewell had been wrong
in "assuming" that safety certification was effective; and, he
felt the Home Office should have acted immediately after
Hillsborough (if not before) by setting down minimum safety
levels and then enforcing them. He considered these were matters
for the Home Office rather than judges who were not very good at
that sort of thing.   He felt the Home Office were negligent in
not doing so and pointed to the absence of any provision in the
legislation for renewal of safety certificates annually despite
the Popplewell recommendation.      He considered the Football
Licensing Authority created under the Football Spectators Bill
was no more than an afterthought.    I told Mr Edey I could not
agree with his sentiments.     I confirmed the previous details
about the Home Office and Secretary of State's role under the
1975 Act; I referred to the Home Office inspired inspections
carried out after the Bradford fire; I drew his attention to the
present Inquiry's remit; and pointed out that changes to the 1975
had been the subject of a quite extensive consultation exercise
before they were made into law.

Mr Edev's Interest/Standing

5.      Mr Edey told me that



He witnessed on return from a holiday in Scotland the horrific
scene at Hillsborough on television.     He was appalled.    His
horror was compounded when in the local press pictures were
published of Mr Hick's two teenage girls who had both died at
Hillsborough on that day.      He told me he applied to the
stipendiary magistrates in Sheffield for proceedings to be taken
against the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and the Directors
of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for manslaughter.       His
application was regarded as vexatious and frivolous. Since then
he has been pressing the DPP to prosecute for manslaughter. He
told me he expected such a prosecution would take place: if it
did not he would take action himself.     In the meantime he is
pursuing separately his application for judicial review against
the Home Secretary.

Other

6.   Mr Edey said he had a letter which he was about to send to
(if I understood correctly) the Lord Advocate for Scotland on
action to be taken to secure safety at Scottish sports grounds.
Mr Edey seemed to be under the impression that the Lord Advocate
was the Scottish equivalent to the Home Secretary.     I did not
disabuse him of this notion but doubtless there will be
correspondence on its way north of the border either to the
Secretary of State for Scotland or to Lord Advocate, or both.

Conclusion

7.    (a) So far as I could tell Mr Edey is a lone campaigner
with no special standing in relation to the Hillsborough
disaster. As such I do not believe he merits the attention given
to him so far - although this has been due primarily to the
publicity he has managed to gain.

      (b)      Despite a plausible manner, nothing that he said led
me to think that the advice from Legal Advisers about the
prospects of his application succeeding in the High Court is
affected.
+




         (c)        Further correspondence from him (and I believe there
    will be more) should continue to be dealt with at official level
    rather than by Private Office.




                                           D J MOULD
                                           G2 Division

    17 November 1989



    FEP/89 35/48/109



*
