The Institution of                                                                                           HI IV
Structural Engineers                                                                                          C,ly
                                                                                                                     The Institution of
Founded     1908
rm inH o /4 1QAO Incorporated
                 Ir w H r tv ir a la ^ by
                                       k«i Royal  Charter
                                                    V iartar 1'
                                           D nval ("’        1
                                                                                                                     Structural Engineers
                                                                                                                     11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                                                     London SW lX 8BH

                                                                                                                     01-235 4535
From the President                                     v
P L C am pbell        IP D i e C R n * F I S tn i c tE F1CE F IM a r E F 1H T F ID E F A S C E M C o n s E           Fax: 01-235 4294
   PLC/JWD/MT                                                                                                           26 April 1989

  R Whalley Esq
  Secretary to the Taylor Inquiry
  Room 662
  Queen Annes Gate
  London
  SW1H 9AT

  Dear Mr Whalley

  Re:          The Hillsborough tragedy - Saturday, 15 April:
               Evidence for the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor

  The Institution of Structural Engineers has an ad hoc committee that has been working
  since December 1986 to produce a report on the appraisal of sports grounds. The background
  to the work of this committee is given in the accompanying paper with the title 'Appraisal
  of sports grounds: Evidence to the Taylor Inquiry'. The work is not yet fully complete
  but has reached a stage where a complete draft is available together with minutes of
  the committee's discussion of the draft. This stage was reached before the Hillsborough
  tragedy so that the views expressed are not influenced by that particular event.

  I believe strongly that the views developed by the committee are important and will be
  a valuable source of evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry. Accordingly I enclose,
  together with the cover paper, the third draft report and minutes of the committee meeting
  held on 16 September 1988.

  The fact that the Institution is in the process of producing a report on appraisal of sports
  grounds has been reported in the technical press and there has been some speculation
  on its contents. However, it is not our intention to release the draft report to the press
  or other interested parties, at least at this stage. Our view, within the Institution, is
  that the draft cannot be separated from the minuted discussion and, in the context of
  Hillsborough, should be considered with all the other evidence that is available to the
  Inquiry.

  In addition to making the formal submission, I write to offer my own services as a chartered
  structural engineer and President of this Institution to help with the work of the Inquiry.
  In addition members of the Institution ad hoc committee on Appraisal of Sports grounds
  will be available to give evidence in their own right if so required.

   Finally, may I offer my best wishes for the success of the Inquiry with the expectation
   that the resulting report will provide guidance so that events like those of 15 April cannot
   happen again.

   Yours sincerely
                 THE   INSTITUTION    OF   STRUCTURAL     ENGINEERS


                        APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                       EVIDENCE TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY

Current position of recommendations being prepared by an ad hoc committee of
the Institution of Structural Engineers.


Summary

The Institution of Structural Engineers has an ad hoc committee engaged in preparing
a report on the appraisal of sports grounds. The work was started following the
report of the Popplewell Inquiry. However the work has already reached a stage
where the main thinking and recommendations of the ad hoc committee are evident
from the current (3rd) draft report and the minutes of the discussion of this draft
(both enclosed). Because of this, the Institution is submitting the 3rd draft report
and minutes of the discussion on 15 September 1988 as evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.
It must be emphasised that the report should be read in conjunction with the minutes.
The copy of the report enclosed has therefore been annotated to cross-refer to
the minutes.


Background
As part of its work the Institution sets up ad hoc committees to prepare reports
to help structural engineers and, where appropriate, others in their professional
activities.    Following the report of the Popplewell Committee, it was decided to
set up an ad hoc committee to produce a report on appraisal of sports grounds with
the remit and membership annexed.


Technical reports of the Institution are produced by the voluntary efforts of members
of the committee. Because of the public interest, an application was made in this
case to the Department of the Environment to fund the drafting so that the
preparation of the report could be speeded up. Although no funds were forthcoming,
help has been received by the presence on the committee of two members from
the DoE and one from the Home Office. The combination of skills and knowledge
of this committee has been carefully put together to reflect the interactive systems
nature of all the component elements in assessing the safety of any facility, stand
or ground. The committee has among its members two building control officers,
experts in crowd psychology, pedestrian flow and fire engineering, as well as members
with experience of design and appraisal of grandstand and stadium and sports
structures.
Report preparation
The committee, which first met on 17 December 1986, allocated drafting of sections
of the report to members of the committee according to their expertise, experience
and background. The committee as a whole last met on 15 September 1988, and
had before it the 3rd draft.    Section 4 (Fire safety) had not been brought up to
the '3rd draft' standard, basically because of difficulties in developing the fire
tables for practical use. The latest version of Section 4 is represented by the
draft sent out to committee members in November 1988. Since this date the 3rd
draft and Section 4 have been used to appraise a number of existing sports grounds
as a means of evaluating the draft and its ease of use.


Drafts are discussed at committee meetings and, where necessary, amended in
light of the discussion. The 3rd draft was so discussed, and the amendments proposed
are recorded in the minutes of that meeting. The committee would continue to
discuss drafts, refining the content and the wording until it was satisfied that the
document was suitable for publication.     The draft would then be submitted to the
Institution's Engineering Committee for assessment with the recommendation that
the document be published as an Institution report.


The trial applications to existing sports grounds and the 4th draft of the report
(under preparation) will be considered a t a meeting of the committee on Tuesday,
9 May 1989, the meeting having been arranged prior to the Hillsborough tragedy.
While the committee will no doubt wish to carry on with its consideration of the
4th draft it is anticipated that the committee would not recommend publication
until it had had the opportunity of considering at least the interim report from
the Taylor Inquiry.


Associated work
In 1980 the Institution produced the report Appraisal of existing structures (copy
enclosed) and more recently has been involved in the preparation of a report on
Safety considerations in the design and erection of demountable grandstands which
is at page proof stage (un read copy enclosed).


Further evidence
The Institution wishes to be as helpful as possible and should the Taylor Inquiry
so desire will arrange for those members concerned with this work to give evidence
or help in any other way within the Institution's powers.




RJWM/MT
