HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - END OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Accusation

The bereaved families are still fighting for justice 10 years after the disaster. The
Government should order a fresh public inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

Facts

The Hillsborough Family Support Group began a private prosecution against former
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray, the most senior
officers in charge at Hillsborough on the day of the disaster. Murray was acquitted of
manslaughter and the jury was discharged after failing to agree a verdict against
Duckenfield. On 26 July, the Judge ruled against an application from counsel for the
Support Group that Duckenfield should face retrial, bringing an end to the criminal
proceedings.

The families continue to call for a new public inquiry into the disaster and allegations that
police statements were altered to cover up police failures on the day.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked by the current Home Secretary to cany out a
scrutiny to determine whether there was significant new evidence not available to the
original public inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the disaster and the later inquests. His
report, published in February 1998, considered all the material allegations about missing
or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and the altering
of statements, as well as concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the
Inquest. His conclusion was that the evidence submitted to him did not add anything
significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor inquiry and the
inquests.

Lines to take

Understand the abiding pain felt by those who lost loved ones.

The original Taylor Inquiry into the disaster was very thorough and was unequivocal in
identifying the main cause of the disaster as a failure of police control.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny at the Home Secretary’s request
to determine whether there was any significant new evidence not available to the original
inquiry and inquests. The conclusion, which the Home Secretary accepted, was that there
were no grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered all the material evidence, including the alteration of
statements and allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence.

A number of statements were altered by police officers following advice from the force
solicitors. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny investigated this matter in detail. He was
satisfied that the procedure was legitimate, that the Taylor Inquiry was aware that the
statements had been vetted in this way, and that it had no material effect on the outcome
of the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public
Prosecutions.


F:\Oppu\COMPINTS\BRIEF\mp-1506.doc
