                                                                     ©

                                                    3472




P H Brook Esq                                  12 September 1989
Treasury Chambers
HEI Division
Parliament Street
LONDON SW1P 3AG




PROBATION PAY 1989

Thank you for your letter of 5 September. X have indeed seen the
earlier correspondence with Simon Hickson, but from my reading
of the files the doctrinal aspects were left unresolved.

2.   What your letter seems to be saying is that the fact that
Home Office Vote XI. 1 is not cash limited will be regarded by the
Treasury as academic: if it appears that any component of the
Vote is at risk of spending beyond its Voted provision,
offsetting savings will be sought. And because the Treasury will
seek such savings from a cash limited Vote, the practical effect
will be to treat any potential overspend as equivalent to a
breach of a cash-limited Vote.       If I have misunderstood the
position, perhaps you could explain the manner in which the
Treasury differentiates, in the case of potential overspends, in
its treatment of non-cash limited Votes from those subject to a
cash-limit.

3.   At the risk of restating the obvious, probation expenditure
is not cash limited for the simple reason that we do not have in
place mechanisms for managing the service in a manner which
enables us to control its expenditure. It is true that the Home
Secretary has to authorise pay settlements, but we are not in a
position to ensure that if pay negotiations result in a higher
settlement than that assumed in the PES provision, we can obtain
offsetting savings from within the service. In this particular
case, I note that the Treasury has not objected to the level of
the settlement which has been negotiated (it is no higher than
that secured for its local authority comparators). To get down
to the level envisaged in the PES provision would require a
reduction in the settlement of more than 2%, a totally
unrealistic aspiration in the present pay climate.

4.   Turning to the prospect for securing offsetting savings, we
do not at this stage of the financial year know whether Vote 1
is heading for an overspend.    If savings prove to be available
from Vote 1, I cannot see the force of the argument against
allowing those to offset any potential overspend elsewhere on the
Vote. Savings are savings, and if there is less expenditure on
particular Vote 1 subheads that is as much a benefit to the
Reserve as an offset on Vote 3. As it happens it looks as if
the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board is heading for an
underspend (currently estimated at around £7.5 million).        I
therefore propose that any savings needed to offset the excess
£1.3m of probation expenditure should be found from this
prospective shortfall.

5.   As you will already be aware, there is unlikely to be any
other source for offsetting savings. Vote 3 is already in great
difficulty and we are having to take remedial action to contain
expenditure. Vote 2 is also facing some difficulties on running
costs, and it is unlikely that further help could be available
from this source. In the circumstances you will understand why
an undertaking from us that we would use our best endeavours to
find offsetting savings for probation pay from a cash-limited
Vote could be no more than a hollow statement, which you and I
both know we are unlikely to be able to deliver. On this basis,
I should be grateful for your agreement that we may now approve
the probation pay settlement as negotiated.
I

6.   Finally, I should mention that our position on the proposed
special grant to South Yorkshire police authority in respect of
the Hillsborough police investigation has to be the same as that
on probation pay.   While it is just possible that we might be
able to find the additional sum from Vote 2 or 3, because the
amount is so much smaller (£120,000 down to end-June), if this
does not prove practicable we should wish to pray in aid the
shortfall on the CICB.

7.   A copy of this letter goes to Peter Leniston.




                                    N A NAGLER




cc   P Leniston
     Mr Sandiford
     Miss Drew
