E.R.
                                              cc    Mr Turney (o/r)
                                                    Mr Goddard
                          ..                        Mr Haslam

       Mr Bolton


       HILLSBOROUGH REPORT


       In the course of our discussion yesterday we touched upon your
       recent exchange of correspondence with Mr Haslam about whether
       paragraph 5 of the Home Office Circular about the Interim Report
       had changed the emphasis which Lord Justice Taylor intended to be
       given.

       2.   The drafting of the Circular was, of course, for the Home
       Office and not for the Inquiry team. But I think the inclusion
       of the words "or immediately thereafter" in paragraph 5 of the
       Home Office Circular was at factual variance with what Lord
       Justice Taylor intended.  I think he would take the view that
       paragraph 316 was open only to one interpretation and that
       paragraph 5 of the Circular introduces a qualification to the
       status of the 28 asterisked recommendations which he did not
       intend.  It was precisely because he knew that some
       recommendations could not sensibly be completed before the start
       of the next season that he separated out those which he thought
       could be achieved from those which he accepted could not. The
       purpose of paragraph 316 was to explain that distinction.

       3.   In paragraph 2 of your note of 24 August to Mr Haslam you
       say "I did not draft the Circular but in my view paragraph 5 is
       consistent with paragraph 304 of the Report which accepted that
       it might not be possible implement particular asterisked
       recommendations before the start of the season". That sentence
       would be an accurate description of paragraph 304 if it did not
       contain the word "asterisked". The reference to asterisking
       comes later on, in Chapter 24, rather than in Chapter 23, which
       is an introductory and descriptive chapter. What Lord Justice
       Taylor was saying in paragraph 304 was that on any sensible view
       the scope for taking action in the brief space before the start
       of the next season was limited. But when he came to paragraph
       316 he took the view that some of the measures he proposed were
       capable of implementation before the start of the season. Hence
       the addition of the asterisks after the recommendations had been
       drafted




                                               R M WHALLEY
                                          Secretary to the Inquiry

       1 September 1989
