                                                HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne’s Gate London^J^lJI 9AT
                                                Direct line: 071-273-
                                               Switchboard.


Our reference:

Your reference:




P . Hammond, Esq.,
Hillsborough Family Support Group,
21 Roesmont Road
Liverpool L17 6BX                                  12 February 1992




3             'TTj-. Mo
Thank you for your letter of 22 October 1991 addressed to the
Home Secretary to which I have been asked to reply.

May I first apologise for the delay.     I wanted to be able to
send you the latest possible information, but the details took
longer to resolve than I had anticipated.

You ask, firstly, whether any steps have been taken to follow up
the recommendations of the Home Affairs Select Committee in 1989.
Indeed they have. Two Home Office Circulars have been approved
by Ministers on the subject, the first covering a number of
matters relating to ill-health retirements and pensions generally
and the second (which is still at the printers and is the reason
for the delay in my writing to you) advising chief officers as
to the measures they can take to ensure that officers do not
negate disciplinary proceedings by avoiding attendance at
disciplinary hearings.   An officer must appear at such a hearing
unless he has a good reason for not doing so and the new advice
reminds chief officers that officers should be required so to
appear unless doing so would cause permanent damage to their
health and that, if there is any liklihood of their health
improving to the point where disciplinary proceedings could go
ahead, medical retirement should be deferred.

The particular case of Mr Duckenfield is not a matter for the
Home Office.     His retirement would have been a matter for the
police authority.     It may however be useful for me to offer the
comment    that no criminal charges were involved and that the
ultimate sanction of police disciplinary proceedings, for the
worst possible offence against discipline, would be dismissal
from the force.      If Mr Duckenfield wished to leave the force
anyway,     there would be littlepoint in mounting police
disciplinary proceedings which might or might not attain the same
end.    Nor do I think it would necessarily be right to debar an
officer    in his situation from ill-health retirement, if his

GIM-095.GIM
health were to be genuinely sufficiently marred to render this
the appropriate course.  As I have said, the particular case of
Mr Duckenfield is not one for the Home Office, and I have no
information as to the basis on which the decisions relating to
his case were taken.




                                   MRS 6 I MOODY
                                   F2 DIVISION




GIM-095.CHM
