                     THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                     Room 1106
                     50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                     Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




   Dr S L Popper                                               Your reference:

                                                               Our reference:

                                                               Date:         U T October 1997


                    €jCxT            Or              PojppeJ
  Thank you for your letter of 23 September.

  I apologise for this slightly delayed reply. Since you wrote, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
  received a major submission on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support and had the
  opportunity to discuss it with them and their legal representatives. He has been to Liverpool
  and met many of the families involved.

 We have also had a letter from the Coroners’ Society of England and Wales - 1 attach a copy
 or that and of our reply to it.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith takes the view that it is a matter for you whether you have any
 contacts with the Family Support Group. It is not clear to him why the group should wish to
 contact you. In view of the fact that they seek the quashing of the verdicts on the
 Hillsborough deaths by Judicial Review or under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 you
 may think it wiser not to have any direct contact with them.

I anticipate that it will be helpful if Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could see you at some point to
  iscuss various questions which the Support Group and others have raised about the Inquests
It so, we would notify you by letter with full details of the topics the Judge will wish to
discuss. It would be helpful if any such meeting could take place at our offices here (we
would meet your travel expenses). If you wished to have somebody with you such as a
legal representative or a representative of the Coroners’ Society (or both), there would of
course be no difficulty about that. We would arrange for a full shorthand note to be taken
and would send you a copy.

Can I take it that you would be willing to meet the Judge on that basis?

I am copying this letter to Mr Dorries.

       %
                                      ----------
CFBONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G : \ H I L L S B O R \ H A I N \ D R P O P P E R . 104
