From: C F Bone                                                cc Mr Pugh
      Hillsborough Scrutiny                                      Mr Pyne
      534 QAG                                                    Mr W ard
      8 2589



         17 August 1998



M r Edmundson. OPPU



HILLSBOROUGH



My note of 24 February discussed the material from the Hillsborough Scrutiny which
was wanted for the House Libraries. Following my World Cup diversion I now put
on my Hillsborough hat for (I hope) the last time to hand over to you

       a)      the Scrutiny’s files and

       b)      some other material which it accumulated that is not required for the
               Libraries but which OPPU may wish to keep. I expect you will find
               that some of this is in the House Libraries, and/or that you have copies
               of it yourself, already.

2.     I have agreed with Mr Pyne that this material can remain for now in the top 3
drawers of the locked 4-drawer cabinet in Room 534.


The scrutiny files

3.      These are all in the PW series, numbered PW/97 110/145/1 to 110/145/18.
File PW/97 110/145/15, divided into Parts A to G, contains transcripts of the
interviews which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith conducted during his scrutiny. There is
one exception - it contains no transcript of the interview with (ex) PC Derek Bruder
on 6 October 1997. There was a Bruder transcript, and I made a copy of it available
for the House Libraries. I imagine that what with that and the copies which we
routinely sent to Mr Bruder himself (via his lawyer) and, with his permission, to Mrs
Anne Williams - the mother of Kevin Williams, the boy Mr Bruder tried to help - we
simply ran out of copies for the file (we usually had just 3 copies of each transcript).

4.     You may have the Bruder transcript anyway, but if not I expect it will be
possible to borrow one back from the House Libraries for copying if need be.
 Two missing files

 5.     I am sorry to say that I must also tell you that two of the files have gone
 missing. These are PW/97 110/145/2, called ‘Examination of Evidence’ and PW/97
 110/145/16, called ‘Miscellaneous’.

6.     I simply cannot understand how this has happened. I kept all the files together
in an unlocked four-drawer cabinet in my Hillsborough office, room 1106. (I am
fairly sure that 110/145/2, at least, was down on the 5th floor during - probably - May,
since Neil Radford, who helped us out with our World Cup work, was minuting it. I
remember him commenting that I seemed to have sent a lot of notes to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith, and this was the file on which I kept copies of these notes. Having
minuted the file, Neil would have returned it to its drawer in 1106, as he did with
other scrutiny files which he worked on. I have of course asked him about this).

7.     I have looked down here and on the 11th floor without success (including a
check to see that the files hadn’t fallen down inside the 4-drawer in which they were
kept). I confirmed last week that the two files have not been P/A’d.

8.      I imagine that you will want to institute a proper search for these files. But it
may help you to have a mock-up of PW/97 110/145/2, so I have made one. The file
contained nothing but notes from me to LJS-S, detailing the things I had given him to
look at. I kept copies of these notes on disk and have used that to replicate the file. I
think the result is pretty accurate. It will miss out on any comments of the Judge’s
that I decided to file, but he didn’t make many.

9.     The other file (110/145/16, ‘Miscellaneous’) contained as I recall mainly
domestic papers, about accommodation, equipment, travel and so on. There may
possibly have been one or two substantive scrutiny papers on it, but all the important
papers went onto other files.


Other material

10.   The remaining material consists of non-file papers and videotapes.      The
papers are

       a)     legal submissions (in blue binders, marked Annexes A to G) prepared
              by lawyers acting for the Family Support Group for their judicial
              review of the Inquests (ex parte Stringer) in 1993;

       b)     a copy of the computer print of the evidence database in the South
              Yorkshire Police archive;

       c)     copies of the agreed documents at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry;
        d)     a statement by Trevor Hicks, which I was told he handed to Sue
                McDougall when he met her here in March 1997 (probably on your
                files already);

        e)     two documents prepared by the South Yorkshire Police and also I
                believe handed to Mrs McDougall in March last year - one of these
                (black ring-binder) contains material showing, up to a point, how
                various people came to be treated in the Northern General Hospital and
                the other (light blue folder) contains contemporary statements from PC
                Bichard (the police CCTV operator on the day) and Roger
                Houldsworth, the club video engineer;

        f)     the police operational orders for the Hillsborough semi-finals in 1988
                and 1989; and

        g)     various books, which are

                       the 1989 version of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

                       the Home Office (Emergency Planning) book ‘Dealing with
                       Disaster’ (1997, post-Election);

                       report of the Home Office Disasters and Inquests Working
                       Group (1997, pre-Election. This suggested that major fatal
                       incidents subject to a Judicial Inquiry should not be subject to
                       the usual form of Coroner’s inquest but that the functions of the
                       Inquest should be subsumed within the Inquiry - a conclusion
                       which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith endorsed);

                       ‘No Last Rights ’ - Hillsborough book by Professor Scraton and
                       others;

                      ‘The Day o f the Hillsborough Disaster’ (two copies) -
                      eyewitness accounts assembled by Rogan Taylor and others;

                      my float of copy correspondence.

11.     There are also a few spare copies of the Taylor Report(s) and of the interview
transcripts which are contained in file PW/97 110/145/15.

12.     Of the books, I would avoid the Scraton effort - for dedicated masochists
only. But Rogan Taylor’s is worth a browse. The stories it collects are illuminating
and (inevitably) quite moving.



13.    The videotapes are
 HS1 - the copy of the parts of tape TB2 shown to the inquest which
 was given to Mrs McDougall by the Support Group in March 1997.
 The contents of this tape are blurred and completely useless (but we
 found - through looking at the video of the actual proceedings at the
 Coroners Court which the Coroners office still retain - that the extract
 from tape TB2 actually shown to the inquest jury was a much better
 copy than this and allowed them to view the output of the police
 CCTV cameras clearly);

 HS2 - copies of extracts from tape TB2, given to Mrs McDougall by
 the Support Group in March 1997;

 HS3 - continuation of HS2, from same source;

 HS4 - the Hillsborough compilation tape, made up by the West
 Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry (the numbers HS1 to 4 are ones
 1 made up to distinguish these tapes at the start of the scrutiny);

tape marked ‘Hillsborough P3 - VHS PAL’. This is a copy, made by
Col at my request, of the South Yorkshire Police VRM2 tape showing
scenes in the temporary mortuary at the football ground. Col copied
this from a Betacam tape lent to the Scrutiny by Yorkshire Television.
Peter Wright, then Chief Constable, had in 1989/90 allowed YTV to
make copies of all the SYP video material, including this VRM2 tape,
for a programme they were making (see f). At the time of the
Scrutiny South Yorkshire were making a fuss about not letting
relatives see the VRM2 mortuary tape. It turned out that Trevor Hicks
had it anyway, since (like me) he had copied Yorkshire TV’s version.
But there are plainly sensitivities about this tape - I have always
kept it under lock and key and I suggest that you do the same;

Yorkshire TV’s programme ‘Disaster at Hillsborough", made with
police co-operation and shown (in the First Tuesday series) on 6
February 1990;

2 copies of police CCTV tape TB1;

1 copy of police CCTV tape TB2 (the crucial one);

the ITV (Jimmy McGovern) Hillsborough ‘drama-documentary’
(shown 5 December 1996)

tape marked ‘PI Part 1, PI Part 2’ - copied by Trevor Hicks from the
copy tapes the South Yorkshire police gave to Yorkshire Television;

tape marked ‘PI Part 3 + P2 + P3 + P4’ - continuation of j);
        1)    the ‘CookReport" programme shown on 2 June 1994 (called ‘Kevin’s
               M um\ about Anne Williams and the death of her son Kevin;

       m)     a ‘CookReport' programme shown on 16 December 1997 which
              contains a brief update of the Kevin Williams story;

       n)     a n extract from ‘Calendar’ (Yorkshire TV regional news programme)
              on 28 March 1991, the day of the inquest verdicts, with interviews with
              Trevor Hicks and Richard Wells; and

       o)     a set of three videotapes which are appendices to the report on the
              disaster by Mr Phillips.

14.     Of these I would say that the two Yorkshire TV items, f) and n), might both be
worth watching. They offer good general summaries and contain worthwhile
original material. The 1991 ‘Calendar' programme, n), features Ian McBride, who
produced the Jimmy McGovern TV film in 1996, in his then role as reporter - he
covered the inquests. (It also includes some bizarre questioning of Mr Wells by
Richard Whiteley, of Countdown fame).

15.     By prior agreement with the BBC we did not make or retain any copies of
their ‘Match o f the Day ’ videotapes of the disaster.




C F BONE
(formerly) Secretary to the Scrutiny
