t
                                                                                                       0
                   THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                   Room 1106
                   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW 1H 9A T
                   Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Detective Sergeant T Bichard                                          Your reference:
South Yorkshire Police
Main Street                                                           Our reference:
ROTHERHAM
S60 1QY                                                               Date:             October 1997




               c         J       u         ^         j   & feJ-vCvA

We spoke, and I am grateful to you for agreeing to meet Lord Justice Stuart-Smith at our
office here. I confirm that the time and date for this meeting will be 2 p.m. on Friday 31
October.


 The scrutiny

2.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been asked by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny
of evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium in April 1989. His
objective is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence about the disaster
which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the
prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities.

 3.     If there is significant new evidence, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith intends to see whether
 it might have affected the outcome of any o f the proceedings. He hopes to report his
 findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.

 4.    You may wish to see Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference, and I attach a
 copy.


 Questions

 5.     There are a number of issues on which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would like your
 help. First, you have said that police CCTV camera 5 - the one mounted on the scoreboard
 near the police control box, giving a view, in effect, from the rear comer of the Leppings
 Lane terracing - was not up to scratch. In what way was it not up to scratch? I should add
 that Roger Houldsworth, the club video engineer, has said it was working perfectly.

    6.        Second, the Judge would like to know where camera 5 was trained after 2.20 p.m.,

    G: | H IL L S B O R | M A IN \B IC H A R D . 1 2 4
when it recorded a group of people in pen 2. Was it then readjusted so that it showed pens 3
and 4?

7.    Third, were you looking at the screen showing output from camera 5 at all before
1502-1503, when the video recording which we have shows shots from camera 5 of people
climbing over the perimeter fence onto the pitch?

8.     Fourth, were cameras 2 or 3 trained onto the Leppings Lane terraces before 3.05, and
if so why?

9.     Fifth, you have described seeing people being pulled into the West Stand seating area
from the terrace, and climbing over the perimeter fence. Were you talking about what you
could see through the window of the control box or about what you could see on the video
screens?


A rrangements

10.    There will be a shorthand note o f your meeting with the Judge, of which we will let
you have a copy. We will also send a copy of it to Superintendent Alan Hepworth.

11.     You may wish to be accompanied by other people, including your legal
representative. That would of course be perfectly acceptable, although it would help if you
could let us know in advance who these people might be.

12.        We look forward to seeing you next week.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G: | H IL L S B O R | M A IN \ B IC H A R D . 1 2 4
Terms o f reference


To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


          (a)         to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


          (b)         to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
          General for the purpose o f discharging their respective
          statutory responsibilities; or


          (c)          to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation
          to police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State fo r
the Home Department o f a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
(c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.




G: | H IL L S B O R | M A IN \ B IC H A R D . 1 2 4
