                                                       rf.'



NOTE OF DISCUSSION WITH NEIL KINGHAN (DOE) ON 16 NOVEMBER



1.   Mr Kinghan said that the invitation to tender (ITT) for the
national football membership scheme had not yet been issued.          The
present draft had contained some mistakes,    and the final version
would probably issue in the week beginning 20 November.       There
had also been difficulty over whether it should specify a
definitive timetable.    DOE had been unhappy about total precision
and felt it was for the suppliers to decide what timetable would
meet the specified objectives.     Some seven companies were waiting
to submit bids in response to the ITT, and would be expected to
do so within about six weeks of receipt.     Two clubs had been
suggested to enable potential tenderers to test out their
costings on a comparative basis:    one of these would be Reading,
but the second might not be Chelsea, as mentioned in the press.


2.   The ITT would suggest that a machine readable system was
desirable.   This would almost certainly eliminate Check-In, but
that company maintained that they could satisfy the
identification requirements in the ITT.     A further weakness in
Check-In's proposal was likely to be the risk that books of
vouchers would become lost or stolen, and the question whether
the whole book of vouchers or merely the one in question would
need to be presented to gain entry.


3.   In discussion on the action to be taken when specific
colours registered, Mr Kinghan indicated that on a red light,
(prima facie evidence of a criminal offence because of the
presentation of a banned card) it was also possible that the
machinery could be at fault.     A red light could indicate a banned
spectator or a card reported lost or stolen.     In this event,
stewards or the police would take the spectator to a suitable
place for questioning.    If the reason was a fault in the machine,
he would be released.    If there was no obvious reason for a red
light, and the referral list indicated that a banned card had
been presented, he would be arrested.     In the case of an amber
light, the likeliest explanation was a fault in the card, so that
the card would be retained by the operator who would admit the
spectator and give him a receipt,      enabling him to    reclaim his
card at the end of the match or later.


4.   In order to deal with the variety of situations arising at
turnstiles,   a security presence would be necessary close to the
turnstile.


5.   Where a spectator lost his card, he was likely to be refused
admission:    clubs were unlikely to be keen on a temporary
membership scheme.


6.   On the question of testing, Mr Kinghan indicated that the
object was to enable comparisons to be made between the
individual tenderers so that valid     conclusions could be drawn.
This would include,   for example, the need for equipment    such as
boxes or cabins at each turnstile booth, wiring etc.      The DOE
would be looking for flexible schemes readily adaptable to the
existing configuration of turnstiles, and there was thus a good
case for portable readers which would remove the need for cabling
which could be sabotaged or damaged and would be an added expense
for clubs.    The consultants would be asking suppliers on the
possibility of paying for restructuring of turnstiles and
recovering costs through mailing lists and other commercial
opportunities.   A relatively small portable reader would be able
to retain a referral file.    Clubs    would be sent floppy disks in
the middle of the week during the      football season,     so that
individual club computers could be updated by the weekend.
Necessary consequences of the scheme, such as an increased police
presence and physical alteration at grounds, would need to be
faced, and the FMA,   the Government   and the police would need to
be satisfied before   a scheme could be implemented.


7.   Lord Justice Taylor asked what procedures were envisaged for
vetting up to 2 million applications for national membership.             Mr
Kinghan said that the details would be specified in the ITT.          A
possibility was that the Post Office would receive applications
as an alternative to the FMA, and that Post Office clerks would
carry out the identification test.     Applications once processed
would probably be returned through the post.      Where applicants
had no adequate means of proof of identity,   recourse to simple
measures such as a recently received letter might be necessary.
Forms would be sent to a central bureau, on whom would rest the
responsibility to check the form had been filled in.    A
requirement might be imposed that the photograph had to be
signed.
