                     Football Spectators Bill [h .l .]




                             COMMONS AMENDMENTS




                [References are to Bill 160 as first printed fo r the Commons.]



Amendment
  No.



                                             Clause 1
              Page 1, line 14, at end insert—
              ‘( ) The Secretary of State shall not make a designation under
            subsection (2) above without giving the Football Membership Authority
            an opportunity to make representations about the proposed designation,
            and taking any representations he receives into account.’.
              Page 1, line 15, after ‘above’ insert—
                ‘(a)’.
              Page 1, line 17, at end insert ‘; and
                (b) may provide, in relation to the match or description of match
                     designated by the order or any description of match falling
                     within the designation, that spectators admitted to the ground
                     shall be authorised spectators to the extent, and subject to any
                     restrictions or conditions, determined in pursuance of the order
                     by the licensing authority under this Part of this A ct.’.
              Page 2, line 2, after ‘if insert—
                ‘(a)’.
              Page 2, line 4, after ‘match’, insert or
                (b) he is an authorised spectator by virtue of subsection (3)(b)
                     above,’.

                                            Clause 2
              Page 2, line 40, at end insert—
               ‘( ) Where a person is charged under subsection (1) above with an
            offence of entering or remaining on premises, and was at the time of the
            alleged offence not disqualified from being a member of the national
            football membership scheme, it shall be a defence to prove that he was
                  H L Bill 98                                              50/2
                                           ( 2    )

                                    Clause 2 —continued
         allowed to enter the premises as a spectator by a person reasonably
         appearing to him to have lawful authority to do so.’.

                                          Clause 3
7         Page 3, line 5, at beginning insert ‘Subject to subsection (3A) below,’.
8         Page 3, line 11, at end insert—
           ‘(3A) The Secretary of State shall not designate any body corporate as
         the Football Membership Authority unless he is satisfied that its articles
         of association make provision securing—
              (a) that its Board shall comprise a Chairman and six other members,
                    of whom the Chairman and four of the other members are
                    persons approved by the Secretary of State before their election
                    as Chairman or as member, as the case may be, and the
                    remaining two members are persons nominated by the
                    Secretary of State, and
              (b) that the Chairman shall be a person who has no such financial or
                    other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the performance
                    of his functions as Chairman;                                       13
         and all the members of the Board shall hold office in accordance with the
         articles of association of the body corporate.
           (3B) The Secretary of State may withdraw the designation of a body
         corporate as the Football Membership Authority if he ceases to be
         satisfied of the matters mentioned in subsection (3A) above.’.
9          Page 3, line 19, leave out ‘withdrawn’ and insert ‘divested’.
10         Page 3, line 34, at end insert—
            ‘( ) Where the Secretary of State withdraws the designation of a body
         as the Football Membership Authority, he shall, as soon as it appears to
         him to be appropriate to do so, lay before each House of Parliament a
         report stating his reasons for the withdrawal.’.

                                            Clause 4
11         Page 3, line 47, after ‘section’, insert—
               ‘(a)’.
12         Page 3, line 47, after ‘Association’, insert ‘, the Football Association of
          Wales’.
    13     Page 3, line 48, at end insert and
             <b) give such persons as appear to it to represent the interests of
                   football supporters an opportunity to make representations.’.
    14     Page 4, line 3, leave out ‘may’
    15     Page 4, line 4, after ‘requirements’ insert‘may if he thinks fit’

                                             Clause 5
    16     Page 5, line 12, at end insert ‘and requiring     that in Wales any
          application form for membership of the scheme shall also be available in
          Welsh’.
                                        ( 3    )

                                 Clause 5—continued
17     Page 5, line 15, after ‘th at’, insert ‘, except in an emergency,’.
18     Page 5, line 17, at end insert—
       ‘( ) to such effect, in relation to the admission of spectators to the
             premises, as the Secretary of State may specify in writing;’
19     Page 5, line 33, leave out ‘imposing charges specified in’ and insert ‘for
     the imposition of charges under5.

                                       Clause 6
20     Page 6, line 20, leave out ‘of this A ct’ and insert ‘above’.

                                       Clause 7
21     Page 6, line 44, leave out from ‘with’ to end of line and insert ‘the date
     of the conviction.’.
22     Page 6, line 47, leave out ‘be withdrawn’ and insert ‘cease on the date of
     the conviction’.
23    Page 7, line 9, after ‘court’, insert—
          w-
24     Page 7, line 10, leave out ‘of this Act’ and insert ‘above’.
25     Page 7, line 11, at end insert—
                    ‘(ii) shall explain to him in ordinary language the effect of
                 the conviction on his membership of the national football
                 membership scheme; and’.
26    Page 7, line 14, leave out ‘give’ and insert ‘send’.
27     Page 7, line 15, leave out ‘administrator of the scheme’ and insert
     ‘Football Membership Authority’.
28     Page 7, line 19, leave out ‘send’and insert ‘give’.
29     Page 7, line 20, at end insert—
        ‘( ) Where, on an appeal against a person’s conviction of the relevant
     offence or against a sentence of imprisonment imposed on him in dealing
     with him for the offence, his conviction is quashed or the sentence is
     reduced to one which is not a sentence of imprisonment taking immediate
     effect, the court which determines the appeal or, as the case may be, the
     court to which the case is remitted, shall cause notice of the quashing of
     the conviction or of the sentence imposed to be sent to the persons
     specified in subsection (7)(b)(i) and (ii) above and, where his conviction is
     quashed, the Authority shall re-admit him to membership of the scheme,
     but without prejudice to any proceedings under the scheme to exclude
     him from membership’.

                                   Before Clause 8
30     Insert the following new Clause—
        ‘ .—(1) There shall be a body called the Football Licensing Authority        The Football
     (in this Part of this Act referred to as “the licensing authority”) which       Licensing
     shall perform the functions assigned to it by this Part of this Act.            Authority.
                        Before Clause 8—continued
  (2) The licensing authority shall consist of a chairman and not less than
4 nor more than 8 other members.
  (3) The chairman and other members of the licensing authority shall be
appointed by the Secretary of State.
  (4) Schedule (The Football Licensing Authority: Supplementary
Provisions) to this Act shall have effect with respect to the licensing
authority.
  (5) The expenses of the licensing authority shall be paid by the Secretary
of State.’

                                   Clause 8
  Page 7, line 42, after ‘prove’, insert ‘either that the spectators were
admitted in an emergency or’.

                                   Clause 9
   Page 8, line 9, at end insert—
   ‘(2A) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant a licence
w ithout—
      (a) notifying the applicant in writing of the proposed refusal and of
           the grounds for it;
      (b) giving him an opportunity to make representations about them
           within the period of twenty-eight days beginning with the
            service of the notice; and
      (c) talcing any representations so made into account in making its
            decision.’.
    Page 8, line 16, at end insert ‘and, if the Secretary of State gives to the
 licensing authority a direction under section (Power o f Secretary o f State
 to require conditions in licences relating to seating) below, the conditions
 may include conditions imposing requirements as respects the seating of
 spectators.’.
   Page 8, line 16, at end insert—
   ‘(4A) A licence to admit spectators may also include conditions
 requiring specified descriptions of spectators to be refused admittance to
 the premises to watch designated football matches, or specified
 descriptions of designated football matches or a particular such match.
   (4B) Where a designation order includes the provision authorised by
 section l(3)(b) above as respects the admission of spectators to any
 ground as authorised spectators, the licensing authority may, be notice in
 writing to the licence holder, direct that, for the purposes of any match or
 description of match specified in the direction, the licence shall be treated
 as including such specified terms and conditions as respects the admission
 of spectators as authorised spectators as the licensing authority considers
 appropriate; and the licence shall have effect, for that purpose, subject to
 those terms and conditions.’.
    Page 8, line 31, after ‘notice’, insert ‘in writing’.
                                         ( 5     )

                                  Clause 9—continued

36   Page 8, line   35, a fte r‘holder’, insert‘in writing’.
37      Page 8, line 40, leave out ‘his’ and insert ‘the’.
38      Page 9, line 2, after ‘that’, insert ‘, except (in the case of the procedures)
     in an emergency,’.
39      Page 9, line 13, leave out ‘, where he is not the licensing authority,’.
40      Page 9, line 24, at end insert—
        ‘( ) The fees charged on the issue of licences—
           (a) may be fixed so as to reimburse the licensing authority their
               expenses under this Part of this Act; and
          (b) shall be paid by the licensing authority to the Secretary of State.’.
41     Page 9, line 29, after ‘licence’ insert ‘or in the case of subsection (4B) in
     the direction’.
42      Page 9, leave out lines 32 to 34.

                                     After Clause 9
43      Insert the following new Clause—
        ‘.—(1) The Secretary of State may, by order, direct the licensing Power o f
     authority to include in any licence to admit spectators to any specified Secretary o f State
     premises a condition imposing requirements as respects the seating of t0 require
     spectators at designated football matches at the premises; and it shall be ®°nditionsj“
     the duty of the authority to comply with the direction.                    seating r     g t0
        (2) The requirements imposed by a condition in pursuance of this
     section may relate to the accommodation to be provided at, or the
     arrangements to be made as respects the spectators admitted to, the
     premises.
       (3) A direction may require the licensing authority to include the
     condition in the licence when granting it or by way of varying the
     conditions of a licence.
       (4) Before giving a direction under this section in relation to any
     premises the Secretary of State shall consult the licensing authority which
     may, if it thinks fit, make recommendations to him.
       (5) The licensing authority shall not make any recommendations under
     subsection (4) above without consulting the local authority in whose area
     the premises are situated.
        (6) The power to make an order containing a direction under this
      section is exercisable by statutory instrument which shall be subject to
      annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
        (7) In this section “local authority” has the same meaning as in the
      Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.’

                                        Clause 10
44      Page 9, line 47, leave out ‘, where he is not the licensing authority,’
                                      ( 6    )

                              Clause 10—continued

                                  After Clause 10
45      Insert the following new Clause—
        ‘ —(1) The licensing authority shall have the function of keeping Licensing
     under review the discharge by local authorities of their functions under
     the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at ^ S y “ t
     which designated football matches are played and shall have the powers football grounds,
     conferred in relation to those functions by the following provisions of this
     section.
        (2) The licensing authority may, by notice in writing to the local
     authority concerned, require the local authority to include in any safety
     certificate such terms and conditions as are specified in the notice; ana it
      shall be the duty of the local authority to comply with the requirement.
        (3) Before exercising its power under subsection (2) above to require the
     inclusion of specified terms and conditions in any safety certificate, the
     licensing authority shall consult the local authority, the chief officer of
     police and either the fire authority (where the local authonty is m Greater
     London or a metropolitan county) or the building authority (in any other
     case).
        (4) As respects those terms and conditions, the local authority need not
      consult the chief officer of police, the fire authority or the building
      authority under section 3(3) or 4(8) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
      1975 before issuing a safety certificate or about any proposal to amend or
      replace one.
         (5) A notice under subsection (2) above may require the issue under that
      Act of a safety certificate incorporating the specified terms or conditions
      or the amendment under that Act of a safety certificate so that it
      incorporates the specified terms or conditions,
        (6) Any inspector appointed by the licensing authority may, for the
      purposes of the discharge by the licensing authority of its function under
      subsection (1) above, on production, if so required, of his a u th o n ty -
           (a) enter at any reasonable time any sports ground at which
                designated football matches are played;
           (b) make such inspection of the ground and such inquiries relating to
                the ground as he considers necessary; or
           (c) examine the safety certificate and any records kept under the
                Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or this Part of this Act, and
                take copies of such records.
         (7) The licensing authority may, by notice in writing to any local
       authority, require the local authority to furnish to the licensing authonty
       such infonnation relating to the discharge by the local authority of its
       functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as is specified in
       the notice; and it shall be the duty of the local authority to comply with
       the requirement.
          (8) Section 5(3) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (appeals
       against terms and conditions of safety certificates) shall have effect with
       the insertion, after paragraph (ii), of the words “but not against the
       inclusion in a safety certificate of anything required to be included in it
       by the Football Licensing Authority under section (licensing authonty s
                         After Clause lit—continued
powers in relation to safety at football grounds)(2) of the Football
Spectators Act 1989” .
   (9)   Any expression used in this section and in the Safety of Sports
 Grounds Act 1975 has the same meaning in this section as in that Act.’.

                                   Clause 11
   Leave out Clause 11

                                   Clause 12
  Page 11, line 20, leave out ‘designated reporting agency’ and insert
‘police station’.
   Page 11, line 31, at end insert—
   ‘( ) The “enforcing authority” means such organisation established by
the Secretary of State under section 41 of the Police Act 1964 (common
services organisations) as the Secretary of State designates for the
purposes of this Part of this Act by order made by statutory instrument.’.
   Page 11, line 32, leave out subsection (7).

                                  Clause 13
   Page 12, line 21, leave out from ‘the’ to end of line 26 and insert ‘police
station in England or Wales at which the person subject to the order is to
report initially’.
  Page 12, line 28, at end insert ‘in ordinary language’.

                                  Clause 14
  Page 12, line 43, leave out from beginning to end of line 6 on page 13
and insert—
     ‘(a) to report initially to the police station specified in the order
          within the period of five days beginning with the date of the
           making of the order, and
     (b) subject to any exemption, to report on the occasion of designated
         football matches when required to do so under section 17(7)(b)
         below to any police station in England or Wales at the time or
         between the times specified in the notice by which the
         requirement is imposed.’.
  Page 13, line 12, leave out ‘the designated reporting agency’ and insert
‘any police station’.

                                  Clause 16
  Page 13, leave out line 45 and insert ‘enforcing authority;’.
  Page 14, line 2, leave out from beginning to ‘at’ in line 3 and insert
‘police station (addressed to the officer responsible for the police station)’.
  Page 14, line 16, leave out from beginning to end of line 19 and insert
‘enforcing authority; and’.
  Page 14, leave out lines 20 to 24.
                                        ( 8     )

                                 Clause 16—continued
58     Page 14, line 31, leave out ‘an agency,’ and insert ‘a police station’.
59     Page 14, line 35, leave out from ‘the’ to end of line 36 and insert
     ‘enforcing authority’.

                                       Clause 17
60     Page 14, line 41, leave out from beginning to end of line 49 and insert—
        ‘(1) The enforcing authority and the officer responsible for the police
     station at which he reports initially shall have the following functions as
     respects any person subject to a restriction order.
       (2) On a person reporting initially at the police station, the officer
     responsible for the station may make such requirements of that person as
     are determined by the enforcing authority to be necessary or expedient for
     giving effect to restriction orders.’.
61     Page 15, line 1, leave out subsections (3) to (6).
62     Page 15, line 27, leave out ‘registered with it, the agency’ and insert ‘the
     enforcing authority’.
63     Page 15, line 30, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘authority’.
64     Page 15, line 31, leave out from third ‘to’ to end of line 34 and insert ‘a
     police station at the time or between the times specified in the notice;’.
65      Page 15, leave out lines 37 to 44 and insert ‘authority shall,if that
     person is one as respects whom subsection (8) below is satisfied, by notice
     in writing to that person, require him to report to a police station at the
     time or between the times specified in the notice’.
66     Page 15, line 45, leave out subsection (8) and insert—
        ‘(8) No requirement to report under subsection (7)(b) above shall be
     imposed by the enforcing authority on any person unless imposing it is,
     in their opinion, necessary or expedient in order to reduce the likelihood
     of violence or disorder at, or in connection with, the designated football
     match; and the authority may establish criteria for determining whether
     any person or class of persons ought to be required to report under that
     paragraph.’.
67     Page 15, line 49, leave out from beginning to ‘shall’ in line 4 on page 16
     and insert—
       ‘(9) The enforcing authority, in exercising their functions under this
     section’.
68     Page 16, line 7, leave out from ‘subsection’ to ‘shall’ in line 8 and insert
     ‘(2) above’.

                                       Clause 18
69     Page 16, line 16, leave out ‘designated reporting agency with which he
     is registered’ and insert ‘authority empowered to grant exemptions under
     this section (“the exempting authority”)’.
70    Page 16, line 18, at end insert—
        ‘(1A) The enforcing authority may grant exemptions under this section
     in all cases; but where the application is for an exemption as respects
     matches to be played within the period of five days beginning with the
                                        ( 9    )

                                Clause IS —continued
     date of the application, or a particular match to be played within that
     period, the officer responsible for a police station may, subject to
     subsection (IB) below, grant the exemption.
       (IB) The officer responsible for a police station shall not grant an
     exemption without referring the question of exemption to the enforcing
     authority, unless he considers that it is not reasonably practicable to do
     so.’.
71     Page 16, line 19, leave out from beginning to ‘from’ in line 20 and insert
     ‘(2) The exempting authority shall exempt the applicant’.
72     Page 16, line 21, leave out ‘agency’s’ and insert ‘authority’s’.
73     Page 16, line 26, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘exempting authority’.
74     Page 16, line 29, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘exempting authority’.
75     Page 16, line 30, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘authority’.
76     Page 16, line 33, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘exempting authority’.
77     Page 16, line 34, leave out ‘agency’ and insert ‘authority’.
78     Page 16, line 36, leave out ‘the agency is situated’ and insert ‘he resides’.

                                       Clause 19
79     Page 17, line 9, leave out ‘designated reporting agencies’ and insert ‘the
     enforcing authority’.
80      Page 17, line 16, leave out ‘designated reporting agencies’ and insert
     ‘the enforcing authority’.
81     Page 17, line 17, leave out ‘registered with them’.
82     Page 17, line 18, leave out ‘them’ and insert ‘police stations’.
83     Page 17, line 18, leave out from ‘o f to ‘to’ in line 19 and insert ‘the
     enforcing authority’.
84     Page 17, line 25, leave out ‘an agency’ and insert ‘the enforcing
     authority’.
85     Page 17, leave out line 30 and insert ‘a police station’.
86     Page 17, line 31, leave out ‘an agency’ and insert ‘the enforcing
     authority’.
87     Page 17, line 35, leave out ‘, out of money provided by Parliament,’.
88     Page 17, line 36, leave out ‘designated reporting agencies’ and insert
     ‘the enforcing authority’.

                                       Clause 20
89     Page 18, line 42, at end insert ‘and a document in that form shall be
     taken to be such a certificate unless the contrary is proved.’.
90     Page 18, line 42, at end insert—
        ‘( ) In proceedings against a person under this section, the facts stated
     in such a certificate shall, on production of the certificate and proof that
     that person is the person whose conviction is certified, be taken to be
     proved unless the contrary is proved.’.
                                       (   10 )

                                      Clause 21
91    Page 19, line 3, at beginning insert ‘Subject to subsection (1A) below,’.
92    Page 19, line 6, at end insert—
        ‘(1A) A court may, in any particular case, make a declaration of
     relevance notwithstanding that notice to the defendant as required by
     subsection (1) above has not been given if he consents to waive the giving
     of full notice or the court is satisfied that the interests of justice do not
     require more notice to be given.’.

                                   After Clause 23
93    Insert the following new Clause—
       ‘ .—(1) Any expenses of the Secretary of State under this Act shall be        Financial
     paid out of money provided by Parliament.                                       provision.

       (2)    Any fees received by the Secretary of State under this Act shall be
     paid into the Consolidated Fund.’.

                                      Clause 24
94     Page 20, line 16, leave out from beginning to ‘shall’ in line 17 and insert
     ‘A statutory instrument appointing a commencement date for section 3
     or section {Licensing authority’s powers in relation to safety at football
     grounds) above’.
95     Page 20, line 25, after ‘Act’ insert ‘, except paragraph 14 of Schedule
     (The Football Licensing Authority: Supplementary Provisions),’.
96     Page 20, line 26, leave out subsection (7).

                                   In the Schedule
97     Page 21, line 22, at end insert—
        ‘( ) any offence under section 12 of the Licensing Act 1872 (persons
     found drunk in public places, etc.) of being found drunk in a highway or
     other public place committed while the accused was on a journey to or
     from a designated football match being an offence as respects which the
     court makes a declaration of relevance;
        ( ) any offence under section 91(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1967
     (disorderly behaviour while drunk in a public place) committed in a
     highway or other public place while the accused was on a journey to or
     from a designated football match being an offence as respects which the
     court makes a declaration of relevance;’.
98     Page 21, line 32, at end insert—
       ‘( ) any offence under section 4 or 5 of the Road Traffic Act 1988
     (driving etc. when under the influence of drink or drugs or with an alcohol
     concentration above the prescribed limit) committed while the accused
     was on a journey to or from a designated football match being an offence
     as respects which the court makes a declaration of relevance,’.
                                                      (    11 )

                                               After the Schedule
    99     Insert the following new Schedule—
           T h e F o o t b a l l L ic e n s in g A u t h o r it y : S u p p l e m e n t a r y P r o v isio n s

                                              Status and capacity
           1-—(1) The licensing authority shall be a body corporate.
           (2) The licensing authority shall not be regarded as the servant or agent
         of the Crown, or as enjoying any status, privilege or immunity of the
         Crown; and its property shall not be regarded as property of, or property
         held on behalf of, the Crown.
            (3) The licensing authority shall not be exempt from any tax, duty, rate,
         levy or other charge whatsoever, whether general or local.
           (4) The licensing authority shall have power to do anything which is
f        calculated to facilitate the discharge of its functions, or is incidental or
         conducive to their discharge.
                                  Appointment and tenure o f members
           2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of State—
              (a) to satisfy himself, before he appoints a person to be a member of
                    the licensing authority, that he will have no such financial or
                    other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the performance
                    of his functions as a member; and
              (b) to satisfy himself from time to time with respect to each member
                    that he has no such interest.
           3. Any person who is, or whom the Secretary of State proposes to
         appoint to be, a member of the licensing authority shall, whenever
         requested by the Secretary of State to do so, furnish to him such
         information as the Secretary of State considers necessary for the
         performance by him of his duties under paragraph 2 above.
           4. Subject to the following provisions of this Schedule, a person shall
         hold and vacate office as a member or the chairman of the licensing
         authority in accordance with the terms of his appointment.
           5. A person shall not be appointed as a member of the licensing
         authority for more than three years at a time.
            6. A person may at any time resign his office as a member or the
         chairman of the licensing authority by giving the Secretary of State a
         signed notice in writing stating that he resigns that office.
            7. Where a member becomes or ceases to be the chairman, the Secretary
         of State may vary the terms of his appointment as a member of the
         licensing authority so as to alter the date on which he is to vacate office as
         a member.
           8. If the Secretary of State is satisfied that a member of the licensing
         authority—
              (a) has been absent from meetings of the licensing authority for a
                   period longer than three consecutive months without the
                   permission of the licensing authority, or
              (b) has become bankrupt or made an arrangement with his creditors,
                   or
                                  (   12 )

                      After the Schedule—continued
      (c) is unable or unfit to discharge the functions of a member,
the Secretary of State may declare his office as a member of the licensing
authority vacant, and notify the declaration in such manner as he thinks
fit; and thereupon the office shall become vacant.
   9. A person who ceases to be a member, or ceases to be chairman, of the
licensing authority shall be eligible for re-appointment.
                 Remuneration and pensions o f members
  10. The licensing authority may pay to each member such
remuneration and allowances as the Secretary of State may determine,
   11. The licensing authority may pay, or make provision for paying, to
or in respect of any member such sums by way of pensions, allowances or
gratuities as the Secretary of State may determine.
   12. Where a person ceases to be a member otherwise than on the expiry
of his term of office and it appears to the Secretary of State that there are
special circumstances which make it right for him to receive
compensation, the licensing authority may make to him a payment of
such amount as the Secretary of State may determine.
  13. The approval of the Treasury shall be required for any
determination under paragraphs 10,11 or 12 above.
Disqualification o f members o f licensing authority fo r House o f Commons
                      and Northern Ireland Assembly
  14. In Part II of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification
Act 1975 (bodies of which all members are disqualified), the following
entry shall be inserted at the appropriate place in alphabetical order—
  “The Football Licensing Authority”;
and the like insertion shall be made in Part II of Schedule 1 to the
Northern Ireland Assembly Disqualification Act 1975.
                                Proceedings
   15. The quorum of the licensing authority and the arrangements
relating to its meetings shall be such as the licensing authority may
determine.
   16.—(1) A member of the licensing authority who is in any way directly
or indirectly interested in any matter which falls to be considered by the
authority shall disclose the nature of his interest at a meeting of the
licensing authority and the disclosure shall be recorded in the minutes of
the meeting.
  (2) The member shall not take part after the disclosure in any
deliberation or decision with respect to the matter.
  17. The validity of any proceedings of the licensing authority shall not
be affected by any vacancy among the members or by any defect in the
appointment of a member or by any failure to comply with the
requirements of paragraph 16 above.
                    Inspectors, officers and employees
   18. The licensing authority may appoint such inspectors as it may
determine to perform such functions as are assigned to them by or under
this Part of this Act.
                                (   13 )

                     After the Schedule—continued
   19. The licensing authority may appoint a secretary and such other
officers, and take into their employment such other persons, as it may
determine.
  20. The terms and conditions of appointments under paragraphs 18
and 19 above shall require the approval of the Secretary of State and the
consent of the Treasury.
  21. The licensing authority shall, as regards such of its inspectors,
officers and employees as with the approval of the Secretary of State and
the consent of the Treasury it may determine, pay to or in respect of them
such pensions, allowances or gratuities (including pensions, allowances
or gratuities by way of compensation for loss of employment), or provide
and maintain for them such pension schemes (whether contributory or
not), as may be so determined.
  22. If an inspector, officer or employee of the licensing authority—
     (a) is a participant in any pension scheme applicable to that
          employment, and
     (b) becomes a member of the licensing authority,
he may, if the Secretary of State with the consent of the Treasury so
determines, be treated for the purposes of the pension scheme as if his
service as a member of the licensing authority were service as an employee
of the licensing authority, whether or not any benefits are to be payable
to or in respect of him by virtue of paragraph 10 or 11 above.
                           Accounts and audit
  23. The licensing authority shall keep proper accounts and proper
records in relation to the accounts, and shall prepare for each accounting
year a statement of accounts in such form as the Secretary of State, with
the approval of the Treasury, may direct.
  24. The accounts of the licensing authority shall be audited by auditors
appointed for each accounting year by the Secretary of State.
  25. A person shall not be qualified for appointment for the purposes of
paragraph 24 above unless he is—
     (a) a member of a body of accountants established in the United
          Kingdom and recognised for the purposes of section 389(l)(a)
          of the Companies Act 1985; or
     (b) a member of the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and
          Accountancy;
but a firm may be appointed if each of its members is qualified to be so
appointed.
  26. A copy of any accounts of the licensing authority which are audited
under paragraph 19E above and of the report made on those accounts by
the auditors shall be sent by the licensing authority to the Secretary of
State as soon as reasonably practicable after it receives them; and the
Secretary of State shall lay before Parliament a copy of any accounts or
report received by him under this paragraph.
   27. The Comptroller and Auditor General may inspect any records
relating to the accounts.
  28. In paragraphs 23 and 24 above, “accounting year” means the
period beginning with the day when the licensing authority is established
                                        ( 14 )

                             After the Schedule—continued
      and ending with the following 31st M arch, or any later period of twelve
      months ending with the 31st March.
                      Authentication o f licensing authority’s seal
        29. The application of the seal of the licensing authority shall be
      authenticated by the signature of the chairman of the authority or some
      other person authorised by the authority to act for that purpose and that
      of one other member.
       Presumption o f authenticity o f documents issued by licensing authority
         30. Any document purporting to be an instrument issued by the
      licensing authority and to be sealed in accordance with paragraph 29
      above, or to be signed on behalf of the authority, shall be received in
      evidence and shall be deemed to be such an instrument without further
      proof unless the contrary is shown.’.

                                      la the Title
100     Line 3, after ‘spectators;’, insert ‘to provide for the safety of spectators
      at such matches by means of such licences and the conferment of
      functions on the licensing authority in relation to safety certificates for
      grounds at which such matches are played;’.
101     Line 4, leave out ‘by designated agencies’.
        Football Spectators Bill




    COMMONS                AMENDMENTS




    Ordered to be Printed 31st October 1989




                        LONDON
                 Printed and published by
              Her M ajesty's Stationery Office
             Printed in the United Kingdom at
                  The Parliamentary Press

                      £2-80 net

HL Bill 98               (4* 9890)               50/2
                                                                           Q U E E N A N N E ' S GA T E

                                                                            LONDON       SWIH 9A T




F O O T B A L L S P E C T A T O R S BILL:   P A R T II

I t h o u g h t that you w o u l d like to know the b a c k g r o u n d to the
G o v e r n m e n t am en d m e n t s r e la t i ng to the re por tin g ag en cy provi-sions to
Part II of the F o o t b a l l S p e c t a t o r s Bill, w h i c h w e r e agreed by the
C o m m o n s S t a n d i n g C o m m i t t e e on 25 July.

As i n i t i a l l y drafted, Par t II p r o v i d e d for a series of local
r e p or ti ng agencies, e a c h of w h i c h wa s c ap ab le of ca rr y i n g out all of
the a g e n c y functions.          S in ce then, after fur th er d i s c u s s i o n s w i t h the
A s s o c i a t i o n of Chief P o l i c e O f f i c e r s ( A C P O ) , it has be en agr eed that
the p o l i c e se rv i c e s h o u l d ta k e on the se fun ct io ns but that there
sh oul d be a d i v i s i o n of r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s un de r w h i c h the m i n i m u m
p r a c t i c a l amount of w o r k w i l l fall to local po l i c e stat ion s and the
bulk wi l l fall to a c e n t r a l unit, ca l l e d the "enfor cin g authority" in
the Bill.

The G o v e r n m e n t amend ments, w h i c h w e r e agr ee d by the
St an d i n g Committee, p r o v i d e for this split in fu nc tio ns in keeping
w i t h the p r a c t i c a l a r r a n g e m e n t s w h i c h w e r e agr eed in det ail w i t h ACPO.

In this w a y we shall have the ben ef it of the po li ce n e t w o r k of local
stati ons as the pl ac es w h e r e those subject to re s t r i c t i o n orders
sho uld report.           The local po li ce wi l l have the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of the
initial r e g i s t r a t i o n of the person, e s t a b l i s h i n g his id en t i t y and
f o r w a r d i n g his d e ta i ls to the "e nfo rci ng authority".

W h e n e v e r an of fe nd er is r e q uir ed to report on the o c c a s i o n of a
d e s i g n a t e d m a t c h b e in g p l a y e d abroad, he m a y attend w h i c h e v e r police
s t a t i o n is mo s t c o n v e n i e n t to him.      Th e local pol ic e need do no mor e
than e s t a b l i s h his identity, stamp a d o c u m e n t to pr o v i d e the offender
w i t h e v i d e n c e that he has d u l y reported, and for wa rd a rec ord of his
a t t e n d a n c e to the e n f o r c i n g authority.

We do not ex p e c t the n u m b e r s repor tin g to be high.               Our best guide is
the e x c l u s i o n order p r o v i s i o n s u nde r Part IV of the Pu bl ic Order
A c t 1986.           T h e s e or d e r s are being m a d e at a rate of about 1,000 per
y e a r so w e m i g h t e x p e c t an a c c u m u l a t i o n of some 2,000 re st ri ct io n
ord ers in force after a b u i l d - u p over two years.                  Mo s t F ir st Di vi si on
clubs are n o w in the L o n d o n area and there is lik ely to be a higher
c o n c e n t r a t i o n of fo ot b a l l of f e n de rs there.




                                                                         /If we es ti mat e


T he Lo r d G r a h a m of E d m o n t o n
If we es t i m a t e that o n e — f ift h of the total num be r of p e op l e w h o are
o bl ig ed to report are in the M e t r o p o l i t a n Pol ic e District, an even
spread w o u l d result in no m o r e th a n one p e r s o n rep or ti ng to each
pol i c e station.     W i t h around 30 o c c a s i o n s a ye a r w h e n t ho se w h o are
subject to re st r i c t i o n orders m a y have to report - and not all of
them wi l l have to report on all of t ho se oc c as io ns - the p ro vis ion s
should not be too b u r d e n s o m e to the police.

It is e n v i s a g e d that the staff r e q u ir ed for the                  en fo rc in g aut hority
wi l l be c i v il ia ns w o r k i n g un de r p o l i c e d i r e c t i o n in a c o mm on police
services or ga nisation.             T h e y w i l l m a i n t a i n records of th os e w h o are
subject to r e s t r i c t i o n orders and t h e y w i l l r e ce iv e d e ta il s of
fixtures abroad fr o m the footba ll authorities.                           T h e y w i l l select
those w h o are re qu ir ed to report for " d is cr et io na ry " fi xt ure s and
wil l issue notice s of the r e q u i r e m en t to report in all cases.                         They
wi ll give c o n s i d e r a t i o n to a p p l i c a t i o n s for e x e m p t i o n fr o m the duty
to report, and wi ll p r o v i d e cou rt s w i t h e v i d en ce in the case of an
appeal.       T h e y wil l also pr o v i d e a report for the court as nec es sa ry
 in app lic at io ns for t e r m i n a t i o n of the order.               The bu l k of the wor k
 of o p e ra ti ng the r e s t r i c t io n order ar ra ng e m e n t s w i l l t h e r e f o r e be met
by the "enforcing authority".

 I hope that you w i l l agree that t he se ar ra ng e me nt s should pr ovi de an
 e f f ic ie nt and co nv e n i en t m ea ns of pr ov id in g t h e . r e p o r t i n g agency
 facility.

 I am w r i t i n g in simil ar terms        to N i c h o l a s Bethell,       John Harris     and
 Phi li p Knights.


                                                                  \i
                                                                   I Q lcfl
                                                                                    f




                                                                              FERRERS
                                                    2/2/40(     )
                                                    5/5/15(     )
                                                    9/8/7 (     )
                                                   10/9/15(     )
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

LORDS CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS AMENDMENTS
NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


CLAUSES 2, 5, 9 AND 10

Page 2, line 40, at end insert -

          '( ) Where a person is charged under subsection (1)
     above with an offence of entering or remaining on
     premises, and was at the time of the alleged offence not
     disqualified from being a member of the national football
     membership scheme, it shall be a defence to prove that he
     was allowed to enter the premises as a spectator by a
     person reasonably appearing to him to have lawful
     authority to do so.'

     Page 5, line 15, after "that" insert, "except in an
     emergency".

     Page 9, page 8, line 7, after "prove" insert "either that
     the spectators were admitted in an emergency or".

     Page 10, page 9, line 15, after "that" insert, "except
     (in the case of the procedures) in an emergency,".



GOVERNMENT AMENDMENTS

Purpose and effect

The first amendment concerns Clause 2 which in subsection (1)
establishes a criminal offence of unauthorised entry to
designated grounds. The offence at present is 'absolute', ie
it contains no defence.

2.   The amendment adds a defence for the person who is
admitted as a spectator by someone appearing to him to have
lawful authority to do so, but only if the defendant is not
disqualified from being a member of the national football
membership scheme.

3.   The remaining amendments make some form of provision for
people to be admitted to a designated ground in England or
Wales, without regard for whether they are members of the
national football membership scheme or not, in an emergency.


4.   The second amendment qualifies the mandatory requirement
in Clause 5(2)(h) that the scheme must ensure only authorised
spectators are admitted to grounds, by adding the words
'except in an emergency'.


5. The third amendment relates to the criminal offence in
Clause 9(1) of admitting spectators to unlicensed premises and
provides a new defence in Clause 9(2) that spectators were
admitted in an emergency.


6.   Amendment [   ] adds explicit reference, to emergency
procedures, to the new criteria which the licensing authority
must take into account when licensing a around to admit
spectators. The reference to such procedures therefore
implicitly provides for admission of persons in an emergency
without the club committing an offence of breaching a licence
condition.

Speaking note


1.   I beg to move that this House doth agree with the Commons
in the said amendments.


2.   This group of amendments provides in one form or another
for emergency admission to grounds.


3.   We have given careful thought to whether it was right for
the offence of unlawful entry in Clause 2(1) to be absolute -
that is, to have no defence provided in the Bill.


4.   In the light of debates during the Commons Standing
Committee's consideration of the Bill we believe that on
balance it is right to provide a defence. The Amendment [      ]
achieves that.
5.   Following Hillsborough, a great deal of concern has been
expressed at the possibility of a dangerous crush developing
outside grounds - despite everything we are doing to try and
avoid that - and it becoming essential, to reduce the risk of
serious injury or loss of life for those outside the ground to
be admitted quickly and safely, without proper checks on
membership.


6.   In such circumstances it would be impractical to
distinguish properly between members and non-members of the
scheme and we now consider it right to exempt from the offence
innocent people who were not members of the scheme - those
perhaps who joined the queue unaware of the requirement for a
card or who were unintentionally caught up in the crowd.

7.   There is however one important qualification to this
defence. If your Lordships think this one carefully through I
am sure you will agree it would be a nonsense to extend the
new defence to persons disqualified from the scheme.


8.   The implications of doing so would be a free licence for
the very hooligans the scheme will seek to exclude, to try to
kick up enough trouble outside grounds for the club and the
police to let them in. They may indeed try that on. But with
the defence as proposed here, they could not be let in free of
the criminal offence of unlawful entry. And if they are not
seeking admission, it is difficult to justify why they are in
the midst of a crowd queuing at the turnstiles for that very
purpose.


9.   My Lords, the Government has consistently maintained that
any provision for adapting admission procedures in an
emergency should be dealt with as far as possible in the
scheme rather than solely in this Bill. Amendment
[ ] therefore introduces the mandatory requirement for the
scheme to so provide.
10. Amendment r 1 qualifies the offence in Clause 9(1) of
admitting spectators to unlicensed premises by the new defence
that the responsible person did so in an emergency.
Similarly, Amendment r 1 requires the licensing authority to
consider arrangements to deal with emergencies when granting a
licence to admit spectators. Implicitly that therefore puts
within the scope of a licence the provision to admit
spectators in an emergency, safeguarding the licensee from an
offence of admitting spectators in breach of a licence
condition in such circumstances.


11. My Lords, there are two additional points I would like to
explain.


12. I mentioned that the new defence of acting on lawful
authority would not, and should not, apply to those
disgualified from the scheme. That is right. However the
same is not necessary in respect of offences by the club, who
could not be expected to discriminate between disqualified
persons and others in an emergency, and the offences should
reflect that, as provided by amendments [ ] and [ ].


13. The other point, my Lords, is over the practical meaning
of the term emergency. The Bill does not define this term
explicitly - because the search for a precise definition is
probably doomed to failure. There are in fact many degrees of
emergency. All though, to my perception, require a genuine
risk of injury or loss of life. An emergency is not, for
example, a convenient shorthand for simply an operating delay
or inconvenience.

14. In other words, the various provisions for emergencies in
the Bill - and in due course the scheme - will only come into
play at a football ground when such a risk actually arises.
The Bill does not set out who should declare whether an
emergency exists or not. However, it is the club's
responsibility to get that right since it is their licence
that is at stake and it is they who would risk committing an
offence.


15. Unless the most dire    and immediate emergency arises,
therefore, the club would   be very well advised to consult the
police or other emergency   services present. Otherwise it
would be shouldering full   responsibility for declaring an
emergency to have arisen, and could risk a court ruling that
it was wrong. Conversely, if the police themselves spotted
that an emergency had arisen it is only to be expected that
they would quickly communicate that to the club.


16. My Lords, I believe this group of amendments makes
sensible provision for emergencies.
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL                               Title/4
                                                       12/11/20
                                                       12/11/31
                                                       12/11/32
LOROS CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS AMENDMENTS              12/12/21
                                                       14/12/43
                                                       14/13/12
NOTES ON AMENDMENTS




TITLE/ CLAUSES 12, 13 AND 14

Title, line 4, leave out 'by designated agencies'

Page 11, line 20, leave out 'designated reporting agency' and
insert 'police station'.

Page 11, line 31, at end insert -

'( ) The "enforcing authority" means such organisation
established by the Secretary of State under section 41 of the
Police Act 1964 (common services organisations) as the Secretary
of State designates for the purposes of the Part of this Act by
order made by statutory instrument'.

Page 11, line 32, leave out subsection (7).

Page 12, line 21, leave out from 'the' to end ofline 26and
insert 'police station in England and Wales at which the person
subject to the order is to report initially.®

Page 12, line 43, leave out from beginning to end ofline   6 on
page 13 and insert -

     '(a) to report initially to the police station specified in
the order within the period of five days beginning with the date
of the making of the order; and

      (b) subject to any exemption, to report on the occasion of
designated football matches when required to do so under section
17(7)(b) below to any police station in England and Wales at the
time or between the times specified in the notice by which the
requirement is imposed.'

Page 13, line 12, leave out 'the designated reporting agency' and
insert 'any police station.'
GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect



This group of amendments replaces references to a designated
reporting agency with the term "enforcing authority" or by
reference to a police station, as appropriate by function.

speaking Notes


1.   I beg to move that this House doth agree with the Commons in
the said amendments.


2.   After the restriction order scheme was conceived we looked
carefully at how best its requirements might be carried out.
Various organisations were considered for carrying out the role of
reporting agency but from the outset the police service was a
strong candidate, in terms of their experience in dealing with
offenders and their unparalleled network of local stations. In
consultation with the Association of Chief Police Officers, we set
about developing a scheme which would be effective without
imposing an undue burden on the police service.


3.   We concluded that it would be right for police stations to be
the locations to which those subject to restriction orders would
register initially and thereafter report as required. The police
will, of course, have a role to play in follow-up action should it
appear that an offence under Part II has been committed. However
in order to keep to the minimum the work falling on the local
police station it is desirable to separate these essentially local
functions from the great bulk of administration work which could
be carried out most efficiently in a central office: it appears
in the Government amendments as "the enforcing authority".

4.   It will be the function of this central office to maintain
the records of those subject to restriction orders; to decide on
requirements to report and to notify the subjects of the orders
accordingly; to decide applications for temporary exemption from
the duty to report; and to deal with all other miscellaneous and
administrative tasks. In other words, only those functions which
require face to face meetings will be dealt with at local police
stations; all other functions will be removed from the local
force.


5.   Initial registration will be to a police station specified by
the court at the time of the making of the order. The court will
no doubt select the police station nearest to the offender's given
address. Thereafter, whenever required by the enforcing agency
(in writing) to report on the occasion of a designated match, the
offender may attend at any police station, convenient for him,
where he will establish his identity and, in return, the police
officers will furnish him with proof that he has attended as
required and notify the enforcing agency accordingly.


6.   I do not believe that the level of counter work and follow-up
action locally will be in any way burdensome and I am pleased to
say that the Association of Chief Police Officers are happy with
the arrangements as proposed. I am very grateful for their
cooperation in this matter.
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL                                16/13/45
                                                        16/14/2
LOROS CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS AMENDMENTS               16/14/16
                                                         16/14/21-24
                                                        16/14/31
NOTES ON AMENDMENTS                                     16/14/35
                                                        17/14/41
                                                        17/15/1
                                                        17/15/27
                                                        17/15/30
                                                        17/15/31
                                                        17/15/37-44
                                                        17/15/45
                                                        17/15/49
                                                        17/16/7
                                                        18/16/16
                                                        18/16/18
                                                        18/16/19
                                                        18/16/21
                                                        18/16/2 6
                                                        18/16/29
                                                        18/16/30
                                                        18/16/33
                                                        18/16/34
                                                        18/16/36
CLAUSES 16,17 AND 18                                “

Page 13, leave out line 45 and insert "enforcing authority".
Page 14, line 2, leave out from beginning to "at" in line 3 and
insert "police station (addressed to the officer responsible for
the police station)".

Page 14, line 16, leave out from beginning to end of line 19 and
insert "enforcing authority; and ".

Page 14, leave out lines 20 to 24.

Page 14, line 31, leave out "an agency" and insert "a police
station".

Page 14, line 35, leave out from "the" to end of line 36 and
insert "enforcing authority".

Page 14, line 41, leave out from beginning to end of line 49 and
insert -

    '(1) the enforcing authority and the officer responsible for
    the police station at which he reports initially shall have
    the following functions as respects any person subject to a
    restriction order.

    (2) On a person reporting initially at the police station,
    the officer responsible for the station may make such
    requirements of that person as are determined by the
    enforcing authority to be necessary or expedient for giving
    effect to restriction orders.'
Page   15, line 1, leave out subsections (3), (4), (5) and (16).

Page 15, line 27, leave out "registered with it, the agency" and
insert "the enforcing authority".

Page   15, line 30, leave out "agency" and insert "authority".
Page 15, line 31, leave out from third "to" to end of line 34 and
insert "a police station at the time or between the times
specified in the notice,".

Page 15, leave out lines 37 to 44 and insert "authority shall, if
that person is one as respects whom subsection (8) below is
satisfied, by notice in writing to that person, require him to
report to a police station at the time or between the times
specified in the notice".

Page 15, line 45, leave out subsection (8) and insert -

       "(8) No requirement to report under subsection (7)(b) above
       shall be imposed by the enforcing authority on any person
       unless imposing it is, in their opinion, necessary or
       expedient in order to reduce the likelihood of violence or
       disorder at, or in connection with, the designated football
       match; and the authority may establish criteria for
       determining whether any person or class of persons ought to
       be required to report under that paragraph."

Page 15, line 49, leave out from beginning to "shall" in line 5 on
page 16, and insert -

       "(9) The enforcing authority, in exercising their functions
       under this section."

Page 16, line 7, leave out from beginning to "subsection" to
"shall" in line 8 and insert "(2) above".

Page 16, line 16, leave out 'designated reporting agency with
which he is registered' and insert 'authority empowered to grant
exemptions under this section ("the exempting authority").
Page 16, line 18, at end insert -

       '(1A) The enforcing authority may grant exemptions under
       this section in all cases; but where the application is for
       an exemption as respects matches to be played within the
       period of five days beginning with the date of the
       application, or a particular match to be played within that
       period, the officer responsible for a police station may,
       subject to subsection (IB) below, grant the exemption.

       (IB)   The officer responsible for a police station shall not
       grant an exemption without referring the question of
       exemption to the enforcing authority, unless he considers
       that it is not reasonably practicable to do so.'
Page 16, line 19, leave out from beginning to 'from' in line 20
and insert '(2) the exempting authority shall exempt the
applicant'.

Page 16, line 21 leave out 'agency' and insert 'exempting
authority'.

Page 16, line 29, leave out 'agency' and insert 'exempting
authority'.

Page   16, line 30, leave out   'agency' and inset 'authority'.

Page 16, line 33, leave out     'agency' and insert 'exempting
authority'.

Page   16, 34, leave out 'agency' and insert 'authority'.
Page 16, line 36, leave out     'the agency is situated' and insert
'he resides'.

GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


1. Clause 16 deals with the information circulated by the court
when a restriction order is made. The purpose of this group of
amendments to Clause 16 is to ensure that the local police station
to which the hooligan is to report initially and the "enforcing
authority" receive the necessary information to carry out the
requirements of the restriction order provision.

2. Amendment [ ] deletes the subsections which provided for
transfer by agreement from one local agency to another.



3. Clause 17 is concerned with the functions of those responsible
for meeting the requirements of the restriction order provision.
The amendment places the responsibility for the initial
registration of the subject of the order on the officer
responsible for the police station specified by the court on the
order. The amendment also renders that officer responsible for
imposing the requirements on the subject of the order deemed
necessary or expedient by the enforcing authority.
4. The remaining amendments to Clause 17 establish the procedure
for dciding when someone subject to a restriction order should
report and advising them accordingly. Their effect is to place
the responsibility for these functions on the enforcing authority.

5.   Clause 18 sets out the procedure for a person subject to a
restriction order to apply for exemption from the requirement to
report on the occasion of a particular designated football match,
or a series of such matches. The amendments to Clause 18 give the
responsibility for considering and granting such applications to
the enforcing authority (except in cases of exceptional urgency
when such applications may be handled by a police station)



Speaking note


1.   I beg to move that this House doth agree with the Commons in
the said amendments.


2.   This group of amendments establishes the responsibility for
the functions of the restriction order provisions under the new
arrangements for a central enforcing authority and reporting to
local police stations.


3.   The amendments to Clause 16 ensure that the organisations
which need to know receive the information required to operate the
restriction order arrangements.


4.   It will be helpful for the police station specified on the
order as the place where initial registration should take place to
receive a copy of that order for information. However, no further
information will be required by that local station. The offender
may thereafter report to any police station convenient for him and
all records of reporting will be maintained centrally by the
enforcing authority.


5.   The central enforcing authority will need to be kept up to
date with all changes in circumstances. This group of amendments
serves to ensure that they receive a copy of the original order
from the court; that they receive a note of the offenders's
discharge from prison if he was sentenced to immediate
imprisonment and on release was still subject to the restriction
order; and that they receive a copy from the court of any
terminating order.


6.   I have explained   that after initial registration, those
required to report on   the occasion of a designated match will be
free to report at any   police station. Amendment [ ] to Clause 17
renders redundant the   existing subsections which provide for a
transfer by agreement   between local "agencies". The amended
system should be both   simpler to operate and more convenient for
the offender.


7.   Clause 17 is concerned with the functions of those
responsible for meeting the requirements of the restriction order
provision. The purpose of this amendment is to clarify the areas
of responsibility regarding initial registration. Initial
registration will take place at the police station named by the
court on the restriction order. That police station will be
responsible for giving notice in writing to the subject of the
order of any requirements he should fulfil for the effective
running of the scheme. On these occasions the local police
station will be acting under the instructions of the enforcing
authority who will decide centrally what those requirements might
be.  [A good example of the sort of requirement imposed would be
to notify the enforcing agency of any change of address.] ‘fhis
amendment sets out these duties clearly and unambiguously.


8.   Subsections (7) and (8) of Clause 17 go to the heart of the
restriction order provisions. They deal with the way in which
those subject to an order should be "called up" when designated
matches are being played abroad.

9.   The amended subsection 7(a) requires the enforcing authority
to advise every person subject to an order, by notice in writing,
of the time when he needs to report on the occasion of those
designated matches which attract an obligatory reporting
requirement. We envisage that these will include matches
involving the national team. Reporting may be done at any police
station but the time of reporting will be set so as to preclude
attendance at the designated match.


10. The amended subsection 7(b) establishes the procedure for
designated matches which do not attract an obligatory reporting
reguirement. The enforcing authority will require a person to
report if it is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient to do
so to reduce the likelihood of violence or disorder at the match
in question. Criteria may be established including, for example,
the offender's club allegiance and previous history. The
enforcing authority shall also have regard to any guidance on the
exercise of it functions issued by the Secretary of State under
Clause 19.


11. This mechanism itself is not new to the Bill. The amendment
places the responsibility of the enforcing authority for taking
decision about calling up those subject to restriction orders, it
is right that such decisions should be made by the enforcing
authority which will hold the relevant information about the
offenders. It is also desirable that the administrative work
should not fall on local police stations.


12. Clause 18 sets out the procedure for a person subject to a
restriction order to apply for exemption from the requirement to
report on the occasion of a particular designated football match,
or a series of such matches. This amendment is tabled to place
the responsibility for the consideration and granting of
exemptions on the enforcing authority. The enforcing authority
will of course need to be satisfied that special circumstances
exist and may wish to seek advice from the applicant's local
police station. But I believe it is right to take such decisions
centrally, both to relieve the burden on the police and also to
ensure a consistent approach to such applications.
13. The amendment also provides that in urgent cases where it is
not practicable to consult the enforcing authority the local
officer is empowered to grant exemption, subject of course to him
being satisfied that the conditions of sub-clause 2 (a) and (b) are
met.
                                                          20/18/42
                                                          20/18/42
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

LOROS CONSIDERATION OF COMMONS AMENDMENTS


NOTES ON AMENDMENTS



     CLAUSE 20


     Page 18, line 42, at end insert "and a document in that form
     shall be taken to be such a certificate unless the contrary
     is proved.".


     Page 18, line 42, at end insert -

          "( ) In proceedings against a person under this section,
          the facts stated in such a certificate shall, on
          production of the certificate and proof that that person
          is the person whose conviction is certified, be taken to
          be proved unless the contrary is proved.".



GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect


This amendment provides that a document in the form prescribed is
a certificate admissible as evidence of the facts stated in it
unless the contrary is proved. Its effect places the burden of
proving the contrary on the defendant. It introduces a necessary
(and precedented) requirement for proof that the defendant is the
person named in the certificate.

Speaking note


1.   I beg to move that this House doth agree with the Commons in
the said amendments.
2.   Clause 20 enables the courts to impose restriction orders on
those convicted of corresponding offences outside England and
Wales. Subsection 9 provides for an Order in Council to specify
the authority in each country which will be responsible for
certifying the information required and the form of such
certification. Subsection 10, with which we are concerned here,
declares that such a certificate is admissible, as evidence by the
courts in England and Wales, of the facts stated in it. This
amendment ensures that a document in the proper form is such a
certificate unless evidential proof is provided to the contrary.
This provides the defendant with the opportunity to adduce
evidence that the document is not a proper certificate but, unless
such evidence is forthcoming, the court will accept the document
as evidence of the facts stated.


3.   The amendment provides a safeguard for the defendant by
requiring proof that the defendant is the person named in the
certificate. This will normally be satisfied by the court asking
the defendant: "Are you the person named in the certificate?" or,
if he disputes that he is this person, by reference to the details
provided in the certificate.


4.   Noble Lords will I am sure appreciate that a certificate is
not intended to prove facts on which a finding of cruilt is to be
made, but simply proof of a conviction, consequent on which some
further action is being considered (ie the making of a restriction
order).
