                                   South YorkmMn PoUcm
                                                                              /TV
                                   PO kiet MSAOQUAATSAS                c <-   nic '-fafes
                                   SNlQ HILL                                  /Kr iMcnuus
                                   ■MIMIILO M*UY
RELEASE                            TtklPMONI (0741) 7 I I U 1
                                   TVLIX SS9MS
                                                                              ffMUt
                                                                              Wu fAoit>&£.

                                                                              /Rr   SecLasj
                                                        'srcy~b<               m r Smtih--
                                                                   A August 1989


  STATEMENT OF PETER WRIGHT, CHIEF CONSTABLE, SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE,
  IN RESPONSE TO THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY REPORT

  The report of the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor has been received by
  ate and I have noted the criticisms that have been directed against
  members of the South Yorkshire Police both individually and collectively.

  To sake it clear to all concerned I would say at the outset that I
  accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry insofar as they
  relate to the South Yorkshire Police.

 The fact that we are held to have contributed to the terrible tragedy
 of Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all members of the
 Force, and both personally and on their behalf I once again extend my
 heartfelt regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury.

 Lord Justice Taylor and all concerned may be assured that the South
 Yorkshire Police will pursue every action available to them to ensure
 that such an event could not occur again.    I am grateful for the
 consents he has made regarding the manner in which the Force has
 handled crowd control and public order events generally and for his
 recognition of the heroic efforts of many of my officers on the day.

 The Home Secretary has asked me for a report on the action I propose
 to take in the light of the Inquiry and this will be pursued. Before
 responding to the Home Secretary it will be necessary for me to consult
 with members of my Police Authority, the Director of Public Prosecutions,
 the Police Complaints Authority, and others.

 In my report to the Police Authority on 21 April 1989 I indicated that
 I accepted full responsibility for police action in connection with
 this event. In pursuance of this responsibility, and in the light of
 Lord Justice Taylor's findings, I have written to my Chairman and
 offered my resignation to the Police Authority so that members will
 have ttts opportunity to consider my continuance as Chief Constable,
 and my Office is now at their disposal.




 Embargoed until 1.00 pm, A August 1989
