                                                                                                                                 '2-7)
^Yr-
                         F r o     m :        J E F F          R O O K E R                                 tlr
     *
 *

                                                                                    iVW l/tdcJUo^ ' Jz^v           u c   Iaa .


                                         HOUSE OF C O M M O N S                                ,     . -            ^
                                           LONDON SW1A0AA                                                           SrgV ^ ~ t

                                                                                             9th MAy, 1989       (^6-    t0j^
             Rt Hon D o u g l a s H u r d MP
             Home Secretary                                   E £ ® S tt® D S j'                     rc A fs /k ^ ^ ^     •


             H o m e Off i c e ,                                  1 ^ ** --v
                                                                                                       rtr~ gcxJr& S
                                                                       . . »■ . i   ■»   ✓
             Q u e e n A n n e s Gate,                                                                        £ s V,/<££>^
                                                                                                     rtrt?c~/c.
                                                                            •                 »*>V
             L o n d o n SW1                                                                         ft)/-' fio          Ty-f


                                                                                                                                   Hy

             Dear Home Secretary
         %
             H I L L S B O R O U G H S T A D I U M T R A G E D Y * P O L I C I N G C O S T S OF J U D ICIA L
             INQUIRY

             I am e n c l o s i n g a l e t t e r I h a v e r e c e i v e d f r o m the W e s t
             Midlands Police Authority.

             T h e G o v e r n m e n t will be seen as s h o r t c h a n g i n g t h e W e s t
             M i d l a n d s a g a i n u n l e s s a s p e e d y p o s i t i v e r e s p o n s e is f o r t h c o m i n g .
             I h o p e y o u will see t h a t it is.

             I look f o r w a r d to h e a r i n g f r o m you.




                                                                                                                                         j
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                            Police Headquarters
Clerk                                                       Room 819 Lloyd House
                                                            Colmore Circus Queensway
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M.Soc.Sc
                                                            Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                            Tel. No. 021-236 5000
                                                            Ext. 2 3 1 8 /2 4 4 2
Please ask for:   Mr C Tomlinson
Tel: 021 230 5.000 Ext E Z Z ]
Our Reference:   CT/EYP/VAR2/13
Your Reference:




5 May 1939




Dear Member

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - POLICING COSTS OF JUDICIAL INQUIRY

You will   no doubt be aware that the Vest Midlands Police are carrying out
an  inquiry,  headed by the Chief Constable, Mr Geoffery Dear, in support of
the judicial review into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

The Authority   has been seeking assurances from the Home Secretary that it
will  be  fully reimbursed for the costs incurred. No such confirmation has
been received to date.

In the circumstances, the Police Authority held a special meeting yesterday
and passed the following resolution, namely:--

(a)     That the determination that no costs arising out of the Hillsborough
         Inquiry    shall fall on   the Vest Midlands   Police Authority be
         confirmed.

(b)     That   representations,  in the light of (a) above, be made to the Home
        Secretary    and he be asked to receive a deputation from the Authority
         as a matter of urgency to discuss the matter.

{c )    That  the deputation comprise    the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the
        Authority, -a  representative  of   the Conservative   Group and of the
        Magistrates, to be appointed by the Clerk through the usual channels.

(d)     That   West Midlands Members    of  Parliament,  constituent  District
        Councils and  Local  Police   Consultative  Committees be told of this
        Authority's determination   and asked for their support in relation to
         it.

(e)     That   the appropriate officers be authorised to enter into discussions
        with regard     to methods   of  recovering this Authority's costs; that
        additionally    officers be    authorised to seek counsel's opinion and
         initiate legal action, if expropriate, to determine the legal basis on
        which    this Authority is committing expenditure in connection with the
        Hillsborough    Inquiry  in   the absence  of  a satisfactory outcome of
        discussions with the Home Secretary.

(t)     That   a clear  timetable   for   recovering  costs incurred be drawn up
         including an  initial   payment,  to recover costs already incurred arid
        monthly payments to this Authority thereat'ter.
2

5 May 1989




A   copy   of the   report  considered  by   the   Authority   with   background
information is attached for your information.

The Authority would welcome your active support of their decisions.

Yours sincerely




Clerk: Police Authority

TO:- THE VEST MIDLANDS MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT
                                                       Agenda Item No. 4


                      WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY

                              4th MAY,   1989

              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY JUDICIAL ENQUIRY

   Joint Report of Chief Constable, Clerk. Solicitor and Treasurer




  PURPOSE OF REPORT

     To set out    the position with regard to the financing of the
 enquiry by the West Midlands Police in support of the judicial review
 into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

 BACKGROUND

     Members will be only too well aware of the   tragic  circumstances
 which took place at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 15th April
 and of the fact that the Chief Constable has been asked by the Home
 Office to assist with the judicial review.

     The    Finance and Management Committee at its meeting on 20th April
 received    an informal report from the Chief Constable and at that time
 it was     understood by the Chief Constable that the full costs of the
 enquiry    and consequential costs for maintaining the current level of
 policing   of the West Midlands would be met from central funds.

      In the light of this confirmation was sought       from the Home
 Secretary  that the cost of seconded officers and the additional costs
 incurred by the West Midlands would be reimbursed in full.

     This was reported orally to the meeting of the Police Authority at
 its meeting on 27th April when the matter was touched on as part of
 the Chief Constable's operational report.  The Authority took the view
 that, if it appeared that costs arising from the enquiry would fall on
 the West Midlands,     a   special   meeting   would  be called.    The
 Vice-Chairman following the meeting agreed, in the absence of the
-Chairman, to the calling of a special meeting on 4th May to consider a
 report of officers on the latest position with regard to the funding
 of the enquiry.

HOME OFFICE VIEW

    In a written reply to questions raised by West Midlands Members        of
Parliament  the Home Secretary has stated no additional costs will         be
borne by the West Midlands.

    Whilst no formal reply has been received from the Home Secretary
to the Clerk's letter referred to in paragraph 2.3, informally it is
understood  that  the basis for payment may be under  the mutual aid
arrangements which will mean South Yorkshire   Police Authority will
have the   financial burden placed  upon  it in the first instance.
                                         -2-




             However,  as explained in the financial implications section of
        this report the mutual aid basis of payment does have its limitations
        and in normal circumstances is not likely to allow for this Authority
        to be fully reimbursed.

 4*    MUTUAL AID ARRANGEMENTS


 4,1        Th® . current  arrangements for mutual aid are   contained   in    Home
       Office Circular    No 38/89 issued on 28th April


 5.    PROPOSAL

5.1         That consideration be given to the action, if any, the Authority
              ,           ^        o — * ------ ~w     J.X a n y 9 U IJC i
       would wisn to take in the light of the contents of this report.

6.      FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS


6.1     ^ 4.L.At thiS early staS e of the Judicial Enquiry an accurate assessment
       of the total cost can not be made.

6.2          Based on the Chief Constable's best assessment (as mentioned' to
       the Police Authority on the 27th April) an average of some 350 seconded
       police officers and related costs over the next two months could result
       in additional direct expenditure of some £2.Am representing overtime
       working, expenses, accommodation, travelling, etc.

            There would   also be consequential costs to the West Midlands
       Police Authority   arising from overtime worked by police officers   to
       cover the loss of the officers on the Enquiry.    Based on the Chief
       Constable's best assessment to date that cover will be necessary at the
       rate of 8 hours per day for five days a week for each officer seconded
       to the Enquiry, the additional costs over the next two months would
       total some £l.lm.

6.A         The most difficult additional costs to assess at this early stage
       are temporary    civilian staff support,   computer,  telephone, office
       accommodation,   printing,  stationery and other administrative  costs.
       But the position     is being closely controlled and monitored and an
       estimate will    be made as soon as possible.  Although  there will  be
       considerable costs involved they are not expected to be on the scale
       of the employees costs etc. mentioned above.

6*5         One of the major factors still to be determined relates to the
       basis of paying overtime to officers who are required to serve away
       from their normal place of duty and are not allowed to return home.
       The  Police Negotiating Board is being consulted on this matter and
       legal opinion may also be required.

6.6         There will clearly be considerable additional costs still     to    be
       incurred over   the remaining months of the Enquiry which can     not    be
       assessed at this stage.
                                                                                   1




                                        -3-




6.7        Initial indications from the Home Office are that these additional
       costs should be recovered on a "Mutual Aid Basis"      from the South
       Yorkshire  Police Authority who have already informed the Secretary  of
       State that they do not consider that such costs should be incurred   by
       their Authority.

6.8        A new Home Office Circular has been issued on the 28th April, 1989
       on "Mutual Aid Arrangements".   As outlined in Appendix   attached  the
       Home Office formula outlined in this Circular would not recover     the
       level of costs mentioned above in this report.

7.     LEGAL IMPLICATIONS

7.1        The liability for costs depends upon whether the Chief Constable's
       involvement is seen as "mutual aid" as part of the Home Office inquiry
       and at the direction of Lord Justice Taylor.

7.2        Normally inquiries of this sort are undertaken    by the Police Force
      for the area and borne by the Local Police Fund. Section 14 of       the
      Police Act,   1964,  enables  a Chief Constable of one area,     on  the
      application of a Chief Constable of another, to provide constables     or
      other assistance for the purpose of enabling the other Force to meet
      any special demand on its resources.     This   is generally known    as
      "mutual aid".    In such cases the Police are under the direction and
      control of the Chief Constable of that other Force.   If "mutual aid" is
      applicable in the present circumstances it follows      that the Chief
      Constable of the West Midlands is acting      under  the direction and
      control of the Chief Constable of South York shi re.

7.3         The Home Secretary has set up an Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor
       the costs of which are being met from Central Government    Funds.   The
       Chief Constable of Lancashire is assisting this Inquiry as an assessor.
       The Chief Constable along with every police constable has jurisdiction
       to act as a constable throughout England and Wales.   By virtue of this
       it is possible for him to undertake Police Inquiries outside the West
       Midlands.    The costs would then be met either by the West Midlands
       Police Authority or in accordance with such agreement which the Chief
      -Constable may have with the Home Office.    For the latter to apply,   it
       follows that the Chief Constable is acting other than under the
       direction and control of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

7.4        There are no other provisions for one       force  to investigate
      incidents  in another force area at the expenses of that other force
      except under the complaint procedures in the Police and Criminal Evidence
      Act, 1984, which do not apply here.
 8.    RECOMMENDATION

            (a)    That the determination that no costs arising out of the
       Hillsborough Enquiry shall fall on the West Midlands Police Authority
       be confirmed.

            (b)     That West Midlands Members of Parliament be told   of   this
       determination and asked for their support in relation to it.

           (c)      That representations, in the light of (a) above, be made
      to the Home Secretary and he be asked to receive a deputation from the
      Authority.

            (d)      That the appropriate officers be authorised to enter into
      discussions   with  regard  to methods of recovering   this Authority's
      costs.




           G J DEAR                                  A V ASTLING
           CHIEF CONSTABLE                           CLERK




           A.E.G. WILLIAMS                            L.T. BARNFIELD
           TREASURER                                  SOLICITOR




Contact Officer
Mr C Tomlinson,
Assistant Clerk,
(021) 236 5000 x
RPA45/EYP
                                                                          APPENDIX


                                HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

                    Estimated Costs for 350 officers for 2 months




Recovery on New "Mutual Aid" Formula Basis



                                                  Estimated          Estimated
                                                   Actual             Recover
                                                   Costs            H.O. Formula
                                                       £m                 £m


1.      Staff Costs
         Direct overtime        )
         Consequential Overtime )                   2.7                  2.3
        National Insurance etc.)

2.      Other Direct Costs
         Travel, subsistence/lodging etc.          0.8                  0.8


                                                   3.5                  3.1




3.      Administration including -                          These figures are not
        Office accomm, admin, support,                      yet known, but the 5%
        telephones (inc. freephone),                        administration charge
        printing, stationery, use and                       allowed for in the
        enhancement of computers,                           Home Office Circular
        equipment etc.                                      on these basic costs
                                                            would only give £0.15m.
                                                            This is very unlikely
                                                            to cover all additional
                                                            costs involved.




0591f
