                                                          Parly No. I 07167




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON THURSDAY
29 OCTOBER 1998


Maria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston):

To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, where (a)
transcripts and (b) all additional material arising out of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough
disaster is held; and in what form.




DRAFT REPLY


Transcripts of meetings, prepared by Harry Counsel & Co, are held in paper
form at the Home Office. Additional material arising out of the scrutiny is also
held in paper form at the Home Office. Copies of as much as possible of the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith have been placed in the
House of Commons Library. The scrutiny papers do not form part of the
material held by South Yorkshire Police.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90187# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed by the Home Secretary to carry out a scrutiny
to establish whether there existed any new evidence, which would justify a further
public inquiry into the disaster.


2.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found there were no grounds for such an inquiry,
and in announcing the judge’s findings to the House in February, the Home Secretary
gave an undertaking to make public the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith in the course of his scrutiny, other than that already in the public domain, by
placing copies in the House Library. This has been done.


3.     One area of controversy concerned amendments made to police statements,
ostensibly to remove statements of opinion. In a few cases, the judge found that
statements of fact had been excluded, but he declared himself satisfied that their
exclusion did not inhibit either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquests. As a consequence,
copies of all original and amended police statements have been sent to the Family
Support Group in Liverpool, as well as being placed in the House Library.


4.     The original copies of the police statements remain the property of the South
Yorkshire Police archive, to where they have been returned. All the material collected
by West Midlands Police in the course of their investigation into the disaster is also
held in the South Yorkshire archive. The Home Office holds, on file, hard copies of
all other documentation arising from the scrutiny.


5.     Statements collected by West Midlands Police in the course of their original
investigation into the disaster were entered on the HOLMES (Home Office Large
Major Enquiry System) computer. This included copies of both original and amended
statements.


6.     This is one of four questions raised by Ms Eagle relating to the location and
availability of documentation relating to the disaster, and follows an oral question on
26 October (copy enclosed) at which the same issue was raised.


 :odma\meridio\edrm#90187# 1
