. E.R.
                                            cc: Mr Cogbill - C4—
                                                 Mrs Lee - I Div.
                                            \   Mr Hopley - F8
                             (him zCx)       ]  Miss Wooldridge - F2
                                            J Ms Rex - Cl

         Mr Goddard
                                           A
         F8 Division

         BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES:   DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS

            Following the discussions at our meeting on 13 February,
     I attach a revised draft of these Instructions. You will no
     d o t ^ inform me if my anxiety to get the draft out as quickly
     as possible has resulted in a failure to do full justice to
     some of the points raised.

          2.   There is a new paragraph 1.2 as I believe we need to
     refer to the Wheeler Bill and to make clear that the
     Government propose to introduce their own Bill rather than
     knock the Wheeler Bill into shape.

          3.   I have not given effect to the last two sentences of
     paragraph 7 of your note of 15 January since, on reflection, I
     am no longer convinced that the CPS's suggestion is a useful
     one. The Bill would need to confer a special power on the
     constable to require to see the written authority of a person
     selling tickets and there would presumably need to be an
     obligation on such a person to carry it at all times on the
     day of the match. This seems somewhat heavy-handed. Is there
     any real likelihood of a duly authorised agent and a tout
     being confused? Would each employee of a duly authorised
     agent have his own written authorisation? Would it not
     instead be given to the authorised company? If, in fact, an
     individual duly authorised agent was operating in
     circumstances (i.e. away from an office or stall) when he
     might be confused with a tout, would he not simply produce his
     written authorisation when a constable moves to arrest him?

                                                                       1
. E.R.
              4.   With reference to the revision of paragraph 2.7, it
         seems to me that what matters is that the courts (rather than
         the football world) can understand the meaning of the phrase
         "organisers of the game". However, I hope this paragraph
         sufficiently nudges Counsel in the direction of that phrase.

              5.   The second sentence of paragraph 2.10 is new to this
         draft and is included to ensure that Counsel does not refer to
         the power of search in PACE in order to suggest that a
         specific power is unnecessary.

          6.   With reference to paragraphs 10 and 11 of your note
     of    4Q)
           January, I had attempted to construct an argument in the
     Instructions to justify limiting the offences to designated
     association football matches instead of applying generally at
     sporting events as Taylor proposed. Since the Bill is
     supposed to be implementing Taylor's recommendations, I think
     it is helpful to Counsel to explain the reasons why we depart
     from them: hence the last sentence of paragraph 3.3.
     "Really" in the final sentence of the earlier draft of
     paragraph 3.4 was not a typing error; however, I now concede
     that I may have pushed the argument too far and have
     accordingly modified that sentence.

          7.   I do not think the suggestion in paragraph 12 of
     your note helps. My object in paragraph 3.5 was to
     demonstrate why existing offences were inadequate. Since the
     possession and throwing of sharpened coins might constitute
     various other (existing) offences, reference to sharpening
     would rather defeat my argument.

          8.   I think it is useful for Counsel to be told in
     paragraph 3.9 of the draft Instructions about the other
     possibilities we have considered. If Counsel does not like
     what we have proposed, paragraph 3.9 may be of use in devising
     some other approach.



                                                                         2
♦
    E.R.
                9.        With reference to paragraph 28 of your note, I can
           see why you do not wish to touch section 22 of the 1989 Act,
           not least because it is not immediately obvious what amendment
           should be made. However, I thought there was some other
           technical error in the 1989 Act other than the one to which
           you referred, but I admit I cannot at present spot it.




                                                              R J CLAYTON
                                                   Legal Adviser's Branch

           19 February 1991




                                                                        3
