           Af            ^                                                   ^   C -./v U v .                     ...




 ,     ^Ax.                                                «-' (^ y a^c****C                               ^¥^t£shFlQ
**   f ^        £    s   z       ^       j y       ^       ^     ^      .~       s    ^
     13-11. AH                           4                           c c . ^ M r Boys Smith
5^/W>><                      fe n ****-'                                       Mr Mould, G2
             >5.             '           _                                     Ms Jago, F 8
                                                                              Supt Appleby, NFIU
                                     ^         ’                              Mr Lee, DoE




           Mr Goddard                                                                            W v IAJ


           RANGERS V CELTIC, IBROX, 4 NOVEMBER 1989

           I attended this fixture last Saturday with Supt Appleby of the
           National Football Intelligence Unit.                         The match was one of the
           great Glasgow 'Old Firm' confrontations, even more highly
           charged than normal with the signing in July of Mo Johnston
           (Catholic, ex-Celtic)                   for Rangers (Protestant).              Sectarian
           emotions, religious and footballing, run high in Glasgow at
           'Old Firm' matches: previous occasions have included a pitch
           invasion and riot in 1980 and the Ibrox disaster (66 dead) in
           1971.


           2.       We were hosted by John Dickson, ACC (Ops) of Strathclyde
           and during the afternoon we also met the Chairman, Secretary
           and Board of Rangers, and Alasdair Hood, security adviser to
           Rangers, who is an ex-ACC of Lothian and Borders and ex-deputy
           commandant of the Scottish Police College.                            After the match I
           also met M Louis Tabback the Belgian Interior Minister1                                   He
           told me his meeting with the Home Secretary during the week
           had been very useful.                       However, Ministerial itinaries for
           foreign visits are always rushed: he was glad to have attended
           a football match because he was now certain it was Saturday
           afternoon!


           3.       Strong emotions and forthright Glaswegian opinions were
           very much in evidence throughout the match, but crowd
           behaviour, and stewarding and policing, were good.                                   Only 19
           arrests were required out of a crowd of over 40,000, and Mo
           Johnston completed his act of affiliation with Rangers
           supporters (and severed any final ties with Celtic supporters)
by scoring the only goal, for Rangers, in the last two
minutes.    Expressions of approval were to say the very least,
ecstatic.


4.    Other points of interest in connection with the match
were:


     (i)    Stewardincr as at Hampden is undertaken by a
            professional company, Rocksteady. who also steward
            pop concerts.     We attended the briefing for the 200
            plus stewards, 2 hours before kick-off.        All were
            young and fit, and the briefing was effective and
            well conducted.     (Sadly, it began with a report to
            the stewards that a well known member of their
            number aged 26 had died unexpectedly during the week
            leaving a young family.     That was handled
            sensitively and well.)     During the match the
            stewards made a conspicuous, well disciplined
            presence.   This included at precise 10 minute
            intervals a co-ordinated walk fully up and down each
            aisle in the stadium by all stewards simultaneously.‘
            One wondered how other clubs could make do safely
            with anything significantly less effective or well
            run.


    (ii)    Ibrox Stadium is, except for one terrace of 7,000,
            all-seater.     This undoubtedly added to the general
            discipline (even though fans were quick to rise to
            their feet at moments of excitement).     There is no
            perimeter fence except in front of the terrace.
            Fans are deterred from pitch incursions by a 3 foot
            wall, and firm policing and stewarding.          (As an
            example of firm policing, the Celtic supporter who
            succeeded in hitting Mo Johnston in the face with a
            meat pie thrown from the stand departed his seat
            under police escort, horizontally, moments later.)


   (iii)    The local press had saved up for the previous
2.3
                                               cc: Mr Boys Smith
                                                   Mr Goddard
                                                   Mr Watts
                                                   Mr Stickley
                                                   Mr Blacklock SED
                                                     (see para 3)
                                                   Mr Lee DOE



Mr Mould


CONFERENCE OF POLICE COMMANDERS FOR FOOTBALL: SAFETY


On 8/9 June I attended the end of Season conference at Manchester
for the police commanders responsible for Division 2 grounds.
This note records some points raised on safety.


Safety reviews   Variation was noted in the practice of annual
reviews of safety at grounds, as to whether the Safety Committee
saw the ground during a match and with spectators present, or
not.   That is a fairly fundamental difference of approach: I
would imagine some very pertinent observations could arise from
the dynamics of a full stadium and busy ingress/egress, that
would be missed by only seeing the stadium empty.


Best practice    Reference was made to a committee Grampian region
had set up, inviting participation from all safety authorities
responsible for licensing of grounds in Scotland, to highlight
good initiatives and best practice at grounds.     That (in itself)
sounds a very good idea, worth being taken up more widely.       Does
Mr Blacklock have any information about this particular group?


Opaque barriers?    A officer at Hampden mentioned to me that he
once saw a ground where tarpaulins or some such opaque barriers
had been left tied to a radial fence (after building work),
separating opposing supporters.    There had been a noticeable
absence of gestures and taunting because the two sides could not
see each other; and the general atmosphere was much better than
he would have expected.    Any observations?   This sounds like an
interesting idea.
Grounds owned by local authorities     Some anxieties were expressed
about grounds wnere the club had sold to the local authority and
rented it back on match days (one example is Leeds United).        This
meant that the local authority (as safety authority) licensed
itself (as ground owner) and the lack of separation was seen as
unhealthy: for example there might be a less reasonable debate
between the authority and owner over significant changes to
capacity or perimeter fencing if they were the same.


Safety at Sports Grounds Acts     The local authority inspector on
the panel questioned the wisdom of requiring a safety certificate
to be issued, with limitations on capacity if appropriate, rather
than allowing an application for a certificate to be refused (eg
until some structural alteration was completed to the inspector's
satisfaction).


Hillsborough      We were shown a very grim 30 minutes of BBC video
(not broadcast)    from 3 pm to 3.30 pm at the Leppings Lane end of
Hillsborough on 15 April.     The two sights that struck me most
forcibly were (i) a youth pleading with two police officers on
the pitch and pointing to the terraces, being ordered robustly to
clear the pitch, and (ii) at about 3.15 pm, after many of those
who could walk had escaped from the terrace, the elevated view of
the perimeter fence and a narrow safety gate, with a tangle of
casualties and/or bodies along one side of the base of the fence
and a mass of rescuers (mainly police) on the other,, but that it
was proving almost impossible even to remove one single injured
person through the gate.




                                                    F J SMITH
                                                    F8 Division
12 June 1989
                                                                                                  hThCe*
                                ,
f f a v                         r tf'                                                                                   Boy* smith




                                             -       -           r       r        :           ^                                      "
     r         —                r        r           ,           ^                ; —                           ;»          —            “ “ ■


     •        s     z   s   g       Z    Z       ?           *       *        *       -           ■
                                                         *                                            a i l e the conference
         2.       Hillsborough has shaken                                e ^          ^                     ^       turning point was
         began in a slightly abstrac                                                                            my note on safety
         the 30 minute BBC video from                                                                               wh0 had been taken
          aspects of the conference).                                                             maintained the emotional
          aback by « » ^ a g e d y but ^                                                              suddenly confronted, raw,
          detachment necessary for poll                                                                          llnagine at the
          M i t h frantic, desperate scenes they                                                                        ^       was reinforced
          ground£ where they directed polioi g.                                                                 ^                        who t old

          I y two O         f       f   i        c       e           r       s        ^           ;    hardened             officers who sat

          t h e .c o n: ^ r ; i - - - t h e r escue.
              crying their          y                                                                     ^
                                                                                  , d and vulnerable at being
              3. The police also feel                                                 lt that has to make up for
              professional service as                                                    rding. No matter how
              deficiencies in the quality                                                         ility o£ the club, in
              safety is in principl. - e                                 -sponslhil                                 ^            ^
               practice the polic e have «                                ^                       ^     ^       ^            and are ^ e l y
               stewarding and inadequate d                                                             di££loulties arise.                   In
               to be the ones turned to when serl^ ^                                                                             ^   ^
               that situation their resp                                     t^e safety
                                             apfive of whose nameD e is
               s c r u t i n y , i r r e s p e c t i v e or          V O n and C o r n w a l l )
                                                                                                                                         =aid
                                                                                                                                         said to me
                  certificate.          David                                             ^           were ,already convicted
                  that in the public's mi        ns£er of responsibility in ml
                  the Hillsborough Inquiry. _ Tran              and ^    the risk
                  crisis is inevitably " “ ^ . s i g h t e d                                           a s to how pr ob le ms he now
                  leaving the new mcumben
     lias to solve built up.     Many police commanders think the police
     should have a larger j-oma_ responsibility for crowd control at
     lyot^Sxl maL.ones f m -tiiie w itn the situation they see as already
     existing in practice.


     4.   X mads tne points ^.o ivir P n i l n p s that greater control by the
     police would be an even larger drain on their resources; that
     showing spectators to their seats just was not a police task;
     that acquiring 'full control' meant more than just a monopoly on
     staff and command but surely also control of ground conditions
     and being the holder of the safety certificate (... the
     police?]), and that once others gave evidence to the Inquiry,
     major contributory blame might fall on them too, including
     s uewaras.   Bul. accepting some valid concern amongst police
     feelings of vulnerability, I suggested the key lay in stronger
     s uewaiding and stronger combined operations.       I drew the analogy
     of combined military operations; if a strong, professional army
     was in partnership with a weak air force the remedy did not lie
     in the army buying planes and training soldiers to fly.          The
     paragraph attacned sets out a text I agrees! with Mr Phillips as
     representing the position as we saw it for dual responsibility.


     5.   One suggestion Mr Phillips made to the conference, which was
     well received, was that there should be greater enforceability
 vP're-‘- adequate stewarding — a statutory/licensing/contractual
ii

                  > with teeth, that ensured, an adequate stewarding
 .presence at grounds.         I think that is probably right, because it
     does seem that clubs are able to get away with weaker stewarding
     than they should.


     6.   There was a recognition by the police that more could be done
     to identify and promote good practice in certain aspects of
 policing football, especiallyfccrowd control outside groundsr and
 •training of new commanders.


 7.       As I recorded after the de-brief of the policing of the FA
 Cup final, there seems to be a lack of an. authoritative solution
 to preventing‘severe congestion and pressure at vulnerable points
 outside grounds (eg nuK turnstiles at Wembly or Leppings Lane,
Hillsborough).    This was reinforced by discussion at the
conference.    We need to see that the police do more on this
front .


8.   On training and experience, one force ( I think it was
Staffordshire, in relation to the Stoke City ground) explicitly
identify officers with experience of managing large crowds, and
introduce officers safely to observe such operations in advance,
before ever taking command.    Continuity and experience is highly
valued.   This is contrasted with the ‘instant expert' approach of
someone who receives responsibility for a major ground simply as
a consequence of a new posting.    And while ACPO produce some
guidance on policing football, tSere is no set training course to
apply this,material.    Again, I think we will need to promote
action on this.




                                               F J SMITH
                                               F8 Division
12 June 1989
Responsibilities of clubs and police at football grounds


The dual responsibility of police and clubs in relation to crowd
control at football matches is in the Government's view
inevitable.    Public order and crowd control outside grounds, on
public property, must be the responsibility of the police.
Inside grounds, where a commercial enterprise admits paying
spectators to private property, the organisers must accept
primary responsibility of directing crowds in an orderly manner.


However, when various types of emergency or public disorder
arise, or in the view of the Chief Officer of Police seem likely,
it may be more appropriate for the police to take charge, in
whole or in part.     This emphasises the need to achieve:


     i) an adequate and effective presence by both police and
     stewards,


     ii) a clear understanding of who is in charge of what,
     when, and


     iii)     effective co-ordination between the organiser and the
     police including sufficient involvement at all times to
     enable the police to form a view about the risk of emergency
     and disorder, and to enable them to intervene effectively if
     and when the occasion arises.




12 June 1989
                                          cc: Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Turney
                                              Miss McLean, SED
                                              Mr Watts, G1
                                              Mr Mould, Gi
                                              Mr Stickley, DOW
                                              Ms Jago, F8


Mr Goddard


SCOTLAND V ENGLAND FOOTBALL INTERNATIONAL, HAMPDEN PARK GLASGOW,
27 MAY 1989


I thought it might be helpful to record a few points that
particularly stood out from this match.    I attended the event
with Mr Stickley (DOW) and Miss McDonald, Mr Blacklock and
Mr McPherson (SED).


Perimeter fences at Hampden Park were of intermediate scale being
high enough to make climbing quite a struggle but with no spikes,
overhangs or other intimidating defences to make climbing
(virtually) impossible - a good compromise, perhaps.    The fence
was set on top of a wall, which would bear most of the horizontal
pressure if the crowd pressed against the barrier.


A safety vehicle was kept on hand (a battered but serviceable
short wheelbase Land Rover) complete with generator; welding and
cutting gear; ladders; a hook and towing cable; and two-way
radio.   Its function was to demolish safety fencing and rescue
spectators if needed.   It was permanently staffed and parked just
out of sight but near the pitch.   Mr Stickley is unaware of such
an initiative at other grounds but we were all impressed at its
obvious worth.                                        •


Policing was based emphatically on the principle of asserting
strong control before difficulties arose, eg in crowd control
near the ground or on the terraces.   Wide passageways at frequent
intervals on the terraces were kept conspicuously free of
spectators.   Of the 500 officers inside the stadium, 120 were
held in reserve (a) to be free to be deployed should any major
public order problem arise and (b) to replace, one for one, each
officer leaving his position to escort a prisoner under arrest to
the charge unit.     That meant a lean but unyielding and effective
police presence on public show.

Ultimate Control inside Hampden was unequivocally in the hands of
the police not the stadium operators, by long standing consent.
Police and stadium controllers were co-located and thus fully
aware of each others' actions.     But no action of importance (for
example opening main gates to release English supporters into
exit routes cleared of Scots) was taken without express police
authority.

Stewards inside Hampden were mostly professionals, employed by a
private security company (Rocksteady) used at pop concerts.         The
only other stewards were in the main stand where potential
trouble was less likely and local knowledge more valuable: these
stewards were those from lesser fixtures at the ground involving
the local home team there.

 Intelligence was taken very seriously.     An intelligence office
 was established one week or more in advance and by match day was
 working busily with 12 officers, collating intelligence from
 contributing forces and 6 visiting undercover 1spotters      in
 Glasgow, plus local plain clothes officers.     This paid off in
 alerting police to substantial planned activity away from the
 ground by 'hard core1 hooligans, in part in reprisal for events
 at last year's fixture.

 Arrests were on a substantial scale.      Inside the ground (over 75
 arrests) there was a steady stream of minor trouble dealt with
 firmly but few large incidents, though one quite serious fight
 erupted between two sets of English fans unable adequately to
 provoke or reach the Scots.      Outside there were at least 100
 arrests in the streets leading to Hampden, as the police had
 predicted.     (Arrest figures are interim ones, as known at the end
 of the match but likely to rise.)      After further trouble in
 Glasgow city centre after the match, I gather total arrests rose
 to over 250.      210 or more were still in custody on Sunday,
 awaiting court on Tuesday.      Further arrests were reported after a
disturbance at Dumfries.


H aylor: Strathclyde police (and/or ACPO Scotland) will be
submitting evidence to Lord Justice Taylor about their approach
to policing football matches.   Strathclyde have just completed a
manual of police guidance for football which will feature in the
evidence; I have formally asked for a copy which will be sent to
me assuming the Chief Constable is content.


Football:. I cannot unfortunately record that the match was a
great sporting occasion: it was decidedly scrappy, with two goals
despite the absence of consummate skill on the field!




                                            s*?** F J SMITH
                                                  F8 Division
31 May 1989
       HOME OFFICE
       Queen Anne’s Gate London SWIH 9AT
                                     Direct line OI-2J3 2952
                                    Switchboard 01-/73 3000



R B Wells Esq QPM                                    Your reference
Deputy Assistant Commissioner
Metropolitan Police (7 Area HQ)                      Our reference
3 The Mall
Kenton                                               £je May 1989
Harrow
Middlesex IIA3 B I T ------------
■




Thank you very much indeed for letting me observe your policing
operation for the FA Cup final at Wembley last Saturday.

I found the day even more instructive than I had expected, and
attach a report I drew up for .the information of colleagues.  I
look forward very much to your de-briefing on Friday which I shall
now be able to attend.

The extent of attempts by some Merseyside supporters to enter
Wembley without tickets was troubling. Especially after
Hillsborough I found it hard to believe. My report is that of cin
inexperienced observer.  If you think the behaviour of the
irresponsible element of Merseyside supporters warrants an
authoritative reference to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry, can I
suggest you consider this with Mr Phillips of Greater Manchester
Police (who moves next week to Devon and Cornwall Constabulary),
who is drafting ACPO's evidence to Taylor.

I am therefore copying this letter and enclosure to Mr Phillips,
and to Commander Robinson and Chief Inspector Evans (with many
thanks), TO 20 Branch NSY.

 I was struck by the helpful notice you arranged to have passed to
-fill ticket holders and the letters you sent to publicans and coach
 operators. Might X have a copy of these, please?




                                                               F J SMITH '
                                                               F8 Division
 REPORT OF ATTENDANCE AT THE FA CUP FINAL, 2 0 MAY 198 9

 F J Smith
 Home Office/F8


 Or Saturday 2 0 May I attended the Everton v Liverpool FA Cup
 final at Wembley, to observe the policing of the match.


          am indebted to Deputy Assistant Commissioner Richard Wells
 and Ch Supt Bernard Luckhurst who commanded the operation, and to
 Ch Insp Brian Evans, TO 20, who escorted me during the day.        I
   d free access to all parts of the ground and every co-operation
 from the police.


 3.     The policing operation went relatively smoothly, much in line
 with the police plan.     Out of a crowd of 82,000 there were 81
 arrests.     The main feature I noticed, with surprise and
 disappointment, was the sheer scale of the attempts by some fans
 to get into the ground without tickets.     There was also a surge
    ticketless fans from outside when gates were opened early in
 anticipation of full-time.


4.      Of the 81 arrests, 76 were outside - over half for public
order offences.     One turnstile operator was arrested on suspicion
of false accounting (ie admitting spectators without tickets, for
payment).     17 police officers were treated for minor injuries
(mainly obtained ejecting fans without tickets) and 250 members
of the public were treated, mainly for heat exhaustion.


Attempts at forced entry without tickets


5.    Before the turnstiles opened there was a steady number of
fans seeking tickets, though I witnessed no touts operating.        it
was however impossible to walk any distance on the concourse
without being asked for any 'spare' tickets.     There was also a
great deal of alcohol being drunk around the stadium: it was not
uncommon to see individuals carrying 6 or more large cans of
beer.     The Sunday Times summed this up with the words "Outside
... m     the tropical heat, there were as many ticketless fans as
     beer cans popping".


         The serious business of attempting unauthorised entry to the
     ground began as soon as the turnstiles opened at about 1.15 pm.
     The main device was to press close behind someone whose valid
     ticket was being checked; when the legitimate ticket holder was
     admitted the second person would press through, squeezed into the
     same turnstile space.   Often the deception was aided by a ticket
     stub passed back through the fence, but often it was not.      Given
 the volume of people being admitted the only defence to this
 technique was for police and stewards constantly to watch every
 movement of every turnstile; and pounce on fans as they pushed
 in, bundling them into the revolving exit-only gate next to each
 group of turnstiles.


 7.      The scale on which this cheating was attempted was
 substantial. While I observed turnstiles operating, people were
 being ejected at the rate of 2 per minute, per group of
 turnstiles: if representative of all turnstiles throughout the
 time they were operating before kick-off some 1,000 attempts to
 g a m entry by that means were made,     of those, rather fewer'
 P         wou   ha\e attempted entry that way, since many were the
 same individuals trying the same ruse time and.time again.         For
 example, I saw the same person (with a distinctive cuts and
bruising to his face) thrown out at turnstiles 'E ' at 1.45 pm and
at turnstiles 'F' at 2.45 pm.       On the concourse I overheard two
fans regretting how difficult it had proved to be to get in at
any of the turnstiles without a ticket.


8.     Nor was the problem anything like over once the game began.
About half way through the first half the police ‘swept' the
concourse outside using foot and mounted officers to send
remaining people on their way to the public transport.      A large
number were shifted, though not without a ragged but brief
pelting of police with discarded beer cans, etc, before a mass
charge away from the stadium.


9.     Even so pockets of strongly motivated would-be spectators
 emained.     Shortly into the second half police units had to be
called urgently to disperse a group of perhaps one or two hundred
who as I understood it had tried to get through some of the
turnstiles before massing outside the stadium offices: a large
unprotected window not far from ground level seemed to be their
point of interest.   Most of these were, after scuffles, sent in
the direction of public transport.


10.   There were various other attempts to climb in, sometimes
successfully: eg over the roof of a toilet block near the
pedestrian way, and I heard a report that a large group had
gathered outside the players' entrance too.


The influx of fans without tickets at about 3.50 pm


11.   It is, I understand, stadium practice (and a condition of
the safety certificate?) that large shutter gates are opened next
to each group of turnstiles 10 minutes before the end of a match,
to allow free passage to spectators leaving the ground.     Standing
on the steps into bay 75 (which was full) just before full-time I
became aware of a rush of new spectators when I was pushed out of
the way by a swarm of 20 or more youths, euphoric at having
gained entry.   Unable to get to the top of the steps some scaled
the side wall and handrail of the steps into bay 75, to gain
access to the seated area.   Those quick enough were just in time
to see Everton score their very late equalising goal - taking the
game into 30 minutes' extra time.    The steward controlling access
to bay 75 was doing an excellent job but was powerless to resist
the charge by so many people.   A colleague sitting some way to
the right and behind bay 75 confirms that a sudden influx of
spectators in several bays to his left became apparent at that
time.


12.   In the circulating corridor outside, I found several more
groups running about, having just entered.    The source was two
shutter gates fully open at turnstiles 'F'.    These had been
opened by stewards under the direction of the stadium management;
the stewards however seemed to be taking no action in respect of
the rush of supporters - I would estimate at least 100 and
possibly   many more - that poured in.   The police, too, were
nearby and might have intervened sooner.   Eventually the gates
were re-closed on the direction of the police and/or a senior
steward who appeared.


13.   (For the record, at this point a well dressed male spectator
in his 40s or 50s appeared, furious, to remonstrate with the
first police officer he saw about the crush and lack of control.
                 f.
Ch Insp Evans who I was with also intervened in support of the
officer.   The gentleman took both officers' names before
departing, having largely regained control of himself.)


Perimeter fencing


14.   As was well publicised, perimeter fencing was entirely
removed for the match.   The police were prepared to cope with
clearing the pitch had there been a full scale invasion, and
reinforced stewards at the Liverpool end when invasion was though^
likely.    Otherwise, arrangements for clearing the pitch were
largely with the stewards.


15.   Two main types of incursion arose.   For much of the match
spectators sat on the greyhound track in front of the spectator
areas, especially at the Liverpool end.    This was largely
tolerated because it was considered not an excessive
encouragement to trouble (and because once established it is hard
to resolve: spectators behind move forward and those in front can
only be dealt with by being removed altogether.)


16.   Increasingly through extra-time, and especially after the
match, many fans did run onto the pitch.    Encouragingly, a chant
of "Off, off, off!" went up when several fans ran on wrongly
thinking the match was over.    In my view the very many stewards
could have been more effective in preventing the pitch invasion
at the end.   My conclusion therefore is that it is wrong to say
that the removal of fences was necessarily a failure, since
stewarding was not strong enough.    The more severe test, though,
never arose: as the Independent pointed out on 22 May the worst
moment might have arisen if the 89th minute Everton goal (which
resulted in extra time) had been disallowed for an 'off-side'
infringement.
Commentary

17.    It is very disappointing to record that with the backdrop of
Hillsborough so very many Merseyside fans were prepared to come
to Wembley without tickets, determined to gain entry without
regard for the consequences.     The perimeter of the ground can
only be described as having been under assault from the moment
fans arrived until they were leaving in large numbers after the
match.     I could not put an accurate figure on the 'hard core'
involved, but would be very surprised if it were fewer than
several hundred - certainly enough to be dangerous had their
efforts been suddenly successful at one point.


18.      It was a clear part of the policing plan to cordon off each
 set of turnstiles outside, to prevent ticketless fans reaching
 them.     That policing was carried out determinedly, as I
 witnessed.     However, since so many fans were intercepted emerging
 from turnstiles having pushed through without tickets, the
 policing immediately outside seemed to fail to prevent (though
 not reduce) this.     If the policing outside was ineffective m
 blocking the path of ticketless fans, this may have been a
 weakness not in its execution but in the basis of trying to do it
 so close to the turnstiles, and relying on a line of police
 horses and/or officers.     A serious   alternative for consideration
 may be excluding ticketless fans far further back, eg to prevent
 any reaching the main concourse, perhaps with the aid of some
 kind of physical barrier.

 19.     The attempts to gain unauthorised entry demonstrated that a
 substantial minority of fans - even Merseyside fans shortly after
 Hillsborough - were determined to force their way in irrespective
 of the overcrowding that would cumulatively have produced m           the
  capacity Wembley crowd.     Seemingly then some fans will behave
  very irresponsibly no matter what the circumstances.        On the
   ■—              -   -   -   -   -     -    -          ...................................




whole, however, the police and stewards succeeded in excluding
them.




                                                  F J SMITH
                                                  F8 Division
22 May 1989
 f"W

                           ~ c ~ T ^ - s .                .    <—tuv|<v-Jv 'J —»'J ' -   ^    U^" ^ C——C^—'^-^•»«r ^ " K
£-■                   hr   c<.—-»       -.r    <-v— -j>       _A“       . w__L4. >sJc        o ^ i, C^-           C^-A~

           ^                        ^         rk
                                           t- ^ U O A           cc MS Jago
                                                    ,     ,        Mrs Ferguson
                       f p \ _ J W — . *— ^ > % 4 . V w “ u-c-*~~ Mr Lee, DOE
^ w > .i       r ^ - k k - ^ r \~ - 'V                      -
           Mr ffafrne                                          ’ ~             v^ i —


           POLICING FOOTBALL


           I had a most useful visit to GMP on 10 February during which I
           had private discussions with Mr Phillips, Mr Ford and
           Chief Inspector Appleby; I saw the new 'Ford' hand-held package
           and viewed tapes recorded by it; and I saw it used in the evening
           at a noisy Division 4 match (Stockport v Crewe).                                       I also visited
           the Old Trafford ground (empty) to see the traditional fixed CCTV
           system, and saw the football intelligence office.                                        The following
           day I visited the joint British Transport Police/Metropolitan
           Police football control at New Scotland Yard.


           CCTV - Fixed installation


           Bluntly, the police feel these systems leave a lot to be desired.
           Even though the cost is fairly high at about £25,000, much goes
           in the installation, remote control and cabling.                                       Cameras are'
           fairly poor - they have old fashioned tubes that !flare out* when
           pointed at any lights; picture quality suffers badly when the
           scene is not well lit; the resolution of the lenses and VHS tapes
           are not very good for identification evidence; and moving the
           camera by remote control is so slow that any sudden punch up is
           likely to have been and gone before the scene is on tape.
           Cameras outside the ground can assist the ground commander by
           extending his field of view: inside the ground they often have
           little to offer over his own eyes and a pair of binoculars.


           Portable video


           Mr Ford's work has centred on specifying a new package which can
           be used on a tripod or shoulder by a 3 man crew (camera operator,
           recorder carrier and 'director').                             The package is almost half the
           price of the previous system, at £15,000, but a far greater
           proportion goes on technical qualify: the camera and the lens
each cost £4,500.   The Sony camera uses the latest type of CCD
sensor which is totally immune to burn out and works well in poor
lighting conditions.    The resolution is quite amazing: tripod
mounted, the camera can produce clear identifiable pictures of
spectators in the crowd at the opposite end of the ground showing
every gesture and movement, in moderately poor light, when it     is
hard to discern individual faces by the naked eye.    But at a
moment's notice the camera could be swung and re-focussed onthe
terrace immediately behind.    The U-MATIC tape system produces   *
very clear results, with perfect frame freeze, and the basic
equipment set includes a date and time generator recording onto
the picture.


Operating Environment


There is considerably more to good use of video than just the
technical equipment.    The police have developed effective methods
of using the equipment.    Operators can attend a practical
training course tied into the use of the new package at football
matches; and the video can provide valuable intelligence about
hooliganism over and above straight evidence of crime.    While I
was observing the match the GMP football intelligence officer
spotted two local hooligans conversing at the far end of the
ground - an association he had not previously known about.
Presence of cameras can, I was told, have a dramatic effect when
disorder seems imminent: an obvious police camera turned on the
scene from the touch line can stop the trouble immediately.       On
the other hand, effective covert use of video requires no obvious
video presence anywhere at the ground, or hooligans are on their
guard.


Football intelligence


GMP have a resourceful and committed sergeant as permanent
football intelligence officer.    In addition to holding brief
records on perhaps 400 troublemakers, and main files on about 80
'target' hooligans, he applies himself diligently to exploiting
opportunities to gather or distribute football intelligence - for
example analysis of video tapes and incident logs, attending
operational briefings, and producing an intelligence bulletin.
This gives some insight into how NFIU would operate in practice -
holding centrally an index of selected hooligans from all forces,
and acting as a stimulus to forces to set up and exploit good
intelligence.


Operational policing


I am no expert on this, but to my mind there were deficiencies -
or at least vulnerabilities - in the policing of the match I saw.
The senior officer I accompanied (who was observing, not in
charge) saw and correctly anticipated an impending ambush by home
supporters of the noisy and intimidating away supporters en route
from the station to the ground.   This had eluded the local
officers on the scene, and the response was further weakened
because just before trouble broke out officers rushed from that
point to meet the oncoming body of supporters who were getting
very much out of hand.   More could perhaps have been made of the
advance knowledge that many spectators had dismounted from the
train half way between Crewe and Stockport (a distance of only 25
miles!) for a couple of hours drinking.


These are not professional criticism of the officers involved.
(Nor was the ambush a very serious matter, I think).   The lesson
I learned was how important it is to read the omens of impending
trouble particularly where officers are not regularly in the
firing line for big match trouble.


Central London Football Reserve: BTP/MP liaison


The CLFR desk is a unit of 4 officers located in the main NSY
Information Room and is staffed on Saturday afternoons in the
football season.   Two officers are from BTP and keep in close
touch by radio and telephone with the main BTP information room
and with officers policing railway stations and the underground.
The two BTP officers input short reports to the MP command and
control computer recording the movement of football supporters,
and incidents requiring MP action.   The two other officers
sitting beside them are from the MP and allocate (under the
direction of a Chief Inspector patrolling by car) the deployment
of 3 Inspectors, 6 Sergeants and 60 PCs in vans, plus 6 dog
handlers.   These officers would normally form three quarters of
the mobile reserve force ('Commissioners Reserve1) on patrol to
deal with general public order problems in central London; on
football Saturdays they become the CLFR and are tasked
specifically with handling public order problems resulting from
the movement of football supporters.


On 11 February BTP themselves deployed a Chief Inspector, 3
Inspectors, 8    Sergeants and 66 PCs on underground      stationsand
trains used by football   supporters.   These officers are
controlled from BTP's 'L' (underground) Division HQ at
55 Broadway.     That desk too is in regular contact      with theCLFR
desk at NSY.     A further 88 officers were deployed      on football
duties on 11 February, eg at mainline railway stations.


Additional BTP/MP liaison is effected by attendance at each
other's pre-weekend briefings - MP T020 to BTP's Tuesday
conference and BTP to T020's Thursday conference for match
commanders.


(I understand that GMP have established a liaison similar to
BTP/MP CLFR, but this was not mentioned while I was in
Manchester.)


Pulling the threads together


I was struck during my visit by the strength of a properly
integrated approach to policing football: use of pre-planning,
special units, intelligence, video, normal operational resources,
and special legislative powers (control of alcohol, public order
offences, exclusion orders and, in due course, compulsory
membership).    Valuable as any element is, effective co-ordination
of all these parts offers a whole extra level of potential.


I have in the back of my mind a Home Office Circular drawing on
these elements and their integration, perhaps for issue in
conjunction with the setting up of the NFIU and/or after the end
of season police conferences.   I think this is worth further
consideration.




                                                   F J SMITH
                                                   F8 Division
14 February 1989
