                                    Q/                              '(M s C r*i*f
  ,7                                                                fui ^
$ 3' ^
   ai
                       THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                      ^ 7 ^
                                                                       /W ^
         ^                                                           /Ur
         ^ /                                                          Vtvj   (£*rpi% *vjfcK

               STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY:         17 APRIL 1989
                                                                            "J> /VLouJ-^V
                                                                       /bg f~ --\ »».'-'Lf'v
                                                                       /Ur M jO '^rV
                                                                         t\ArOr i Hs&sf*-
With     permission.        Mr    Speaker,   I    should    like    to malce a
                                                                                        jkj.

statement        about     the    disaster   at   the   Sheffield    Wednesday
Football        Club    ground at Hillsborough Stadium on Saturday.
Everyone has been horrified by this incredible tragedy in
which 94 lost their lives and 174 were injured.


Shortly after the start of the match there was a surge of
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace which crushed many at
the front against the perimeter fence.                     This accounted for
most of the deaths and injuries.


The match was due to start at 3 p.m.                To help ensure orderly
access, the gates of the ground were opened at 12 noon.                           At
2.30 p.m. most of the Nottingham fans were in the ground, but
many of the Liverpool supporters were still arriving.                        It was
clear to the police officers in charge that there was ample
capacity still to be filled in some parts of the enclosure
allocated to Liverpool.


At about 2.45 p.m.               there was a large crowd of Liverpool
supporters at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane behind the West
Stand.         There was difficulty in coping with the pressure on
the turnstiles and the police, used loudhailers to urge the
crowd to be patient.



                                                        /At about 2.50 p.m.
At about 2.50 p.m. more Liverpool supporters arrived and the
numbers     in        front   of     the   turnstiles       increased.        Some
supporters       started      to climb     the walls and turnstiles and
those at the front of the crowd outside the stadium were
under considerable pressure from those behind.


The senior police officer present considered that there was a
possible danger to the lives of the spectators at the front
of the crowd outside the stadium.                  In order to relieve the
pressure he arranged for an exit gate near the turnstiles to
be   opened      to     let   a section of        the crowd        through.     The
relationship of that action to the disaster on the terrace
shortly    afterwards         is    clearly   a   central     question I to      be
investigated.


My Rt Hon friend the Prime Minister and I yesterday visited
the football ground and the two Sheffield hospitals which
received casualties.               I would like to pay tribute to all
those     involved       in   the    rescue   operations      at     the   ground,
including the many spectators who gave their help;                     and to
those others,           including the hospital        staffs and voluntary
agencies who have since been working so hard treating the
injured and consoling the bereaved.                 We heard many accounts
of courage exerted on behalf of others.




                                                      /I have asked ...
I have asked for further factual reports from the police and
other     services,           the     local           authority          and     the     Football
Association.        Inquests will be held in due course.                                But over
and     above     this,       there       is     clearly        need       for    a     full   and
independent inquiry to identify the causes of the disaster
and to examine what needs to be done to prevent such an
accident        happening       again.            I    have        therefore          asked    Lord
Justice Taylor to carry out an inquiry, with the following
terms of reference:


          "To inquire into the events at Sheffield
          Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989
          and to make recommendations about the needs
          of     crowd        control       and        safety       at      sports



Mr Brian Johnson,              the Chief Constable of Lancashire,                               has
agreed      to     assist           the        inquiry        as      an       assessor;        and
arrangements will be made as necessary for other qualified
assessors to be appointed and for the inquiry to be provided
with technical advice and support.                                 I am asking that the
inquiry should proceed with all possible speed.                                   Lord Justice
Taylor      will          visit       Sheffield          tomorrow           to        begin     his
investigation.            I    am         grateful to           him        for    agreeing      to
undertake this task.



                                                                    /However, we need ...
However^ we need also to take a wider view.                     The Government
believes that the future of football in this country lies in
a national membership scheme in designated grounds and now it
seems also in providing all seated accommodation at major
football     clubs.         This would     involve    the disappearance of
terraces at those grounds.               It might also involve amendments
to   strengthen       the     Football     Spectators    Bill    so   that    its
provisions     for     the      licensing     of     grounds    matched      this
concept.     We shall be considering these matters urgently and
bringing changes forward as soon as possible.


An appeal fund is being set up by the civic authorities of
Liverpool. Nottingham           and Sheffield.       The Government will be
contributing £500.000 immediately towards this fund.


This was a devastating tragedy.                Our deep sympathy goes to
the families of those who died, to those recovering, and to
those still fighting for life and health.                  We owe a duty to
these passionate supporters of football to examine urgently
and thoroughly the causes and background, and to do all in
our power to prevent such a thing happening again.                      We have
to set our sights high and find a better way for British
footbal1.
THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975


DESIGNATION


How does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act work?


The principle mechanism for achieving spectator safety is by the
issue of a safety certificate for a sports ground designated by
the Secretary of State.


How is designation done?


Designation is by Order, subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.    The individual ground is named in the
Order.


Are there limits in designation?


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act provides for the designation of
sports grounds which have accommodation for over 10,000
spectators.


Is there provision to change the 10,000 limit?


Yes; the Secretary of State has power to vary the limit, either
up or down, by Order - subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.


How many grounds are designated?


91 out of the 92 football league grounds are designated.    The
exception is the ground used by Torquay Utd which holds less than
10.000 spectators.


What is the designation policy?


All sports grounds identified as having accommodation for over
10.000 spectators and used for either association football, rugby
union,   rugby league, cricket are designated.   (This follows HMG's
^           acceptance of the Popplewell Inquiry recommendation).


            SAFETY CERTIFICATES


 ~1.        Issue of the Safety Certificate


            The issue of the safety certificate is the responsibility of the
            local authority, who is under a duty to     issue one.


 (Z .       Contents of a safety certificate


            A safety certificate will contain terms and conditions "necessary
            of expedient" to secure "reasonable" safety.     For example, it
            includes conditions on authorised numbers of spectators to a
            ground, or any part of a ground; the exits/entrances to the
            ground; size, location,    strength of the crush barriers.


            Effects of the Popplewell Inquiry on the 1975 Act


            The 1975 Act was amended as from 1 January 1988 by Part II of the
            Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 which
            reflected HMG's response to the Popplewell Inquiry.


 \ 0    -   Has Hillsborough a safety certificate?


            YES


11 -        Is the ground inspected?


            There is a duty on the local authority to arrange for an annual
            inspection of the ground.     Inspections are carried out in
            accordance with guidelines from the Home Office.     These are in
            addition to any test/inspection requirements set by the safety
            certificate.


\2_         SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR GROUND OPERATORS


            The Home Office/Scottish Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
            Grounds" is intended to provide advice to both ground operators
and "certificating" local authorities on spectator safety.


Status of the Guide


The Guide is a voluntary code but may be called up in terms and
conditions in safety certificates.



Adequacy of the Guide


The Guide was revised in October 1986 in the light of
recommendations from the Popplewell Inquiry.


Does the Guide contain advice about the ingress to sports
grounds?


Yes.   The Guide specifically highlights the dangers of crowd
pressure and over crowding and includes advice on crowd
dispersal, crush barrier specification stewarding and controlled
egress.


What is the purpose of crush barriers on a standing terrace?


Barriers control the movement, density and pressure build up on a
terrace.   It is necessary to comply with the strength and spacing
requirements,   of the guide or reduce the capacity of the terrace.


Any additional studies on adequacy of crush barriers?


Home Office engineers have attended tests on crush barriers with
engineers carrying out the test procedures advocated on the Guide
to Safety at Sports Grounds.    There have been no indications that
the procedure recommended in the Guide were inadequate.


Is the advice in the Guide adequate?


This is something which the Inquiry will wish to examine.
Does the Guide contain advice on First Aid?


The Guide reminds ground management of their responsibility to
provide adequate first aid provision and first aid staff.


[Note: St John's Ambulance have recently pressed for compulsory
minimum first aid provision to be the subject of regulations.       We
have said we believe this to be a wrong approach.     Safety
certificates are the main safety mechanism and their
terms/conditions can be tailored to individual needs.     It is also
doubtful whether the provisions of the Act are wide enough to
make such regulations.   We have told St John's that we will
include expanded advice on the subject when updating the Guide
this year.]


RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFETY


Who is responsible for safety?


Prime responsibility lies with the ground operators to ensure the
safety of their customers.


Who is in charge: the club or the police?


It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine the
arrangements made by the club and the police for the stewarding
and policing of spectators at the match.      There is invariably
close consultation between the police and clubs over such
arrangements.


IF PRESSED:


The police have responsibility for the preservation of the peace
and the maintenance of public order.    If they perceive a threat
to public order or public safety, they have a duty to take action
to counter it.    This is an operational Judgement for the senior
police officer.
What part of the Popplewell Inquiry were not implemented?


The Government did not accept the need for the issue of "annual"
safety certificates;   (b) power to revoke safety certificates.


The 1975 Act works in a way that revocation is unnecessary.       A
safety certificate can however be amended if circumstances change
so as to justify such a course.    (designated grounds are
inspected by local authorities annually).
Does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 make specific
requirements as to the provision of pitch perimeter fencing to be
contained in safety certificates?


No.    The 1975 Act provides that terms and conditions in safety
certificates should be necessary or expedient to secure
"reasonable" safety.


Has the 1975 Act been changed as to the contents of a safety
certificate?


Yes.    It was changed following the Popplewell Inquiry and how
makes no stipulation as to the contents of a safety certificate.


What were the previous provisions?


The 1975 Act previously required a safety certificate to include
terms and conditions:


(a)    specifying the maximum number of spectators to be admitted;


(b)    as to the number, size and situation of entrances and exits
       (including means of escape) and means of access to them;


(c)    requiring those entrances and exits and means of access to
       be properly maintained and kept free from obstruction;


(d)    as to size, strength, number and location of any cr^sh
       barriers.


Whv the change?


The reason was that the Popplewell Inquiry recommended
application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds not simply
sports "stadia".    By widening the scope of the Act it was
necessary to be less specific as to the contents of safety
   certificates.


   Does this mean safety certificates no longer have conditions as
   described above?


   No.      It merely makes discretionary what was previously mandatory
   and ensures that the issuing        authority are not restricted inwhat
^^ th e y   can include in a safety certificate.


   What advice is contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
   on access through Pitch Perimeter Fences?


   The Guide recommends that:


            "Gate's or Other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres)
            should be ...   provided   for use in an emergency and, at
            those grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the
            exit system for the departure of spectators at the end of
            the event.   Provision of such gates or access points is
            particularly important to allow full access to the playing
            area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place of
            safety in an emergency ..."
Should there be a Home Office inspectorate to check that safety
measures at grounds are up to standard?


A sports ground requiring a safety certificate is so designated

by the Secretary of State by Order under the 1975 Safety at

Sports Ground Act.   ThJfe issue of the safety certificate is the

responsibility of the local authority.    Responsibility for safety

at the sports ground rests with the operators of the ground.

There is therefore no direct Home Office monitoring of individual

grounds; but the Home Office guide to safety at sports ground

provides advice to both ground operators and "certificating"

authorities on spectator safety.   Before issuing a certificate

the authority is required to consult the police, and either the

fire brigade or the building authority.    The Home Office would be

likely to hear if a certificate were issued when the police or

fire brigade were dissatisfied.
Dry Moats


Dry moats were considered when the issue of Pitch Perimeter

Fences was originally raised in 1973/4.    The reasons for their

exclusion are still valid:



     i.     spectactors trying to gain access to the pitch

     could be injuried falling into the moat;



     ii.     players in the pitch could be injuried falling

     into the moat;



     iii.     the construction of a moat at most grounds would

     be impractical in that it would reduce the size of the

     pitch, would require major construction work, and would

     tend to undermine the pitch and the spectator terrace.
Background note



History of Pitch Perimeter Fences



1.   Pitch perimeter fences, preventing crowd access to the pitch,

did not form a part of the original concept of crowd control.

The recollections of the Home Office structural engineer is that

they were introduced fcat the drafting stage of the Guide in 1974

after the change of Government at the request of the Minister of

Sport (Mr Dennis Howell) as a crowd control measure.



The issue of perimeter fences was first raised in 197 3 during

seminars, arranged by the Home Office to advise police,   fire

brigade and local authorities on the application of the Guide.

Discussion of such fences was introduced into the seminar as a

crowd control measure.



It has always been essential that access to the pitch, via gates

in the fence, should be provided.         This is clearly stated in

all editions of the Guide, and was reviewed and «TK3U«sed in

Popplewell   (Page 81, Rec 3 4 and 35).
APPEAL FUND



Can further details be given about the appeal fund


As I announced in my statement, an appeal fund has been set up by
the civic authorities of Liverpool, Nottingham and Sheffield.
The Government will be contributing £500,000 immediately toward
this fund.    I understand that an appeal fund has also been
established by Liverpool Football Club and I am advised that
discussions are taking place about the two funds being merged.


BACKGROUND


The three cities appeal is entitled "The Hillsborough Disaster
Appeal".     Its terms of reference are "An appeal fund for
assistance to those who have suffered injury or loss as a result
of the Hillsborough disaster".     The appeal is based at the Co­
operative Bank, West Street, Sheffield.
AMBULANCE SERVICE

What was the response of the ambulance service to the incident


I understand that before the match began 2 ambulances were
located at the ground together with an attendance from the
St John Ambulance Service.     The first call for additional
ambulances was received     by the ambulance service at 8 minutes
past three.     Within 17 minutes a total of 10 additional
ambulances had attended.


BACKGROUND


There is criticism of a slow and badly coordinated response by
the ambulance service in today's "Times" and elsewhere.        These
criticisms will be matters for the inquiry to consider.


FIRE 'BRIGADE


What was the response of the fire brigade to the incident


The brigade received the first call about the incident at 14
minutes past three.     The first appliance reached the scene some
six minutes later and was quickly joined by five other appliances
together with support vehicles.     A further four appliances were
called for and, in total, 65 fire brigades staff attended.


BACKGROUND


When the brigade arrived at the scene all rescues had taken
place.   Brigade staff used resuscitation equipment to treat
casualties - one set of resuscitation equipment is carried on
each appliance.     Other brigade staff gave mouth to mouth
resuscitation and gave general assistance.
HOSPITAL SERVICE

What was the role of the hospital service, can further
information be given about the number of injuries


As I said in my statement, 94 people died in this tragic incident
and 174 people were injured.   The injured were taken to the
Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.     Of
these 94 people were treated and discharged on the day.     80 were
admitted.   The latest information I have is that 44 people are
                                             »

still in hospital of whom 18 are in intensive care units.
                                                         V>*JbUv»wj<A




How many police on duty?


773 police officers were on duty in connection with the match of
whom 22 5 were inside the ground.   Outside the ground there were
548 officers including 30 mounted police and 26 dog handlers.


Casualty bureaux


Both South Yorkshire Police and Merseyside Police ran large scale
casualty bureaux to handle calls from members of the public
anxious about friends or relatives who had attended the match.
STATEMENT ON SHEFFIELD: NOTES FOR SUPPLEMENTALES



Procedure in the event of a complaint by a member of the public


If a member of the public makes a complaint against an officer or
officers of the South Yorkshire Police it will fall to be dealt
with under the procedures set out in Part IX of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984.   In that event the material gathered
in the course of the public inquiry would be directly relevant to
the resolution of the complaint.
                         HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT

Supplementary on immunity

Will witnesses at the inquiry be given immunity from any criminal
or disciplinary proceedings?

1.      The question of whether any immunity should be offered to

witnesses in respect of possible criminal proceedings which might

be brought would be a matter for the Attorney General to consider.
                                    might be
2.   [The question of whether immunity    /offered from disciplinary

proceedings to any police witnesses     wou=ld be        a matter for

the Chief Constable of the force concerned in consultation with the

Police Complaints Authority.]

Background

1.      Any witness at the inquiry may refuse to answer questions which

may incriminate him.     It is not uncommon for the Attorney General to

offer a limited immunity from criminal proceedings to witness at

public inquiries in respect of any evidence which they may give at

the inquiry and this was done at, for example, the Red Lion Square

and Brixton Inquiries conducted by Lord Scarman under the Police Act

1964.     If Lord Justice Taylor considered tl^at the conduct of the

inquiry was or was likely to be prejudiced      if an offer of immunity

were not made it would be for him to approach the Attorney General

and request him to consider an offer of immunity.

2.      The question of disciplinary proceedings is more difficult,

particularly as, in certain circumstances, the Police Complaints

Authority may direct disciplinary charges to be preferred if the

Chief Constable does not prefer charges himself. But there is no

reason to suppose, at the present stage, that disciplinary offences

will have been committed, as opposed to errors of judgment.
3.   It is not possible for immunity from civil proceedings to be

offered, since any individual is free to bring civil proceedings if

he thinks he has a case.




                                                                      t




                                -   2   -
<. Who is in charge:   the club or the police?


  It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine the
  arrangements made by the club and the police for the
  stewariiing and policing of spectators at the match. There is
  invariably close consultation between the police and clubs
  over such arrangements.




   IF PRESSED:


  The police have responsibility for the preservation of the
  peace and,.the maintenance of public order. If they perceive
  a threat to public order or public safety, they have a duty
  to take action to counter it.        This is an operational
  Judgment for the senior police officer.
                         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                            Type of Inquiry


1.   The Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1921 provides a statutory

procedure for inquiring into an event of national importance.       The

Act enables witnesses to be subpoenaed, whereas a non-statutory

departmental inquiry does not.   The Salmon Report into Tribunals of

Inquiry 1966 set out criteria which should be satisfied before the

Act is invoked.   The Report stated that the Act should "always be

confined to matters of vital public importance concerning which

there is something in the nature of a nation-wide crisis of

confidence".   Serious and tragic as the Hillsborough disaster was,

the issues which it raises do not really satisfy the criteria in

the Salmon Report.

2.   It is not necessary for the 1921 Act procedure to be used,

whenever a disaster occurs which results in loss of life.     The

Popplewell Inquiry showed that a non-statutory inquiry is perfectly

capable of carrying out a thorough investigation of the facts of a

serious accident such as the Hillsborough tragedy and of making

recommendations to remedy deficiencies.   If there is serious doubt

whether witnesses who have relevant evidence to give will be

prepared to give that evidence without being required to do so

there may be a case for considering whether a statutory procedure,

such as that provided for under the 1921 Act, which enables witnesses

to be compelled to give evidence, should be invoked.   But there is

no reason, at present, to suppose that that will be the case.
Experience has shown that 1921 Act inquiries tend to be extemely

lengthy and not necessarily -more effective at eliciting the truth

than extra-statutory inquiries.     What is required, in the present

circumstances, is a speedy investigation, which can ascertain the

facts and recommend measures to prevent such a disaster happening

again.   The inquiry which has been set up is the most appropriate

means of securing that objective.




                                  -2-
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL



A - General Note


Part I of the Football Spectators Bill deals specifically
with    excluding       football        hooligans     from     grounds.         It   has
always been the case that new admission procedures required
when the national football membership scheme comes into force
will have to qualify for a safety certificate in the normal
way.         Safety    must      always     be      paramount,     but         excluding
troublemakers must in principle be a contribution to safety.


B - Hill the scheme cause crowd problems?


It is clearly necessary to design and implement the system of
membership          checking     such     that     disorder     does     not     result.
This will be a major consideration for the Government, the
police        and      the      football         authorities.          Saturday      has
demonstrated          only     too   tragically       that     there     is     alreadya
problem       about     last     minute     crowds     at matches.             Potential
suppliers of membership and eaiupment have said that it is
possible for cards to be checked in no extra time than it
now takes for people to pass through the turnstiles.


If     the    computer       equipment      should     fail,     the     scheme      will
provide for orderly procedures for coping.
       «
                                                2.



                                                                                      4



           C - Where next for the Bill?


           The   Bill    is     an   enabling   framework.         The   Government   has
           already      given    a    full   commitment      not    to    implement   the
           membership scheme within that framework until arrangements
           have satisfactorily been worked out.                That commitment still
   9       stands and obviously now embraces the lessons to be learned
           from these tragic events.


/_{S       D - Popplewell


           I would remind the House that it was a recommendation of the
           Popplewell Inquiry in 1986 that consideration should be given
           to some form of membership scheme for Football League clubs
           in England and Wales.




                                                                         i
    #

        FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

        Should future semi finals be held at Wembley?
        Should this season's FA C u d competition be abandoned?

        These are matters for the Football Association.


    , What were the first aid arrangements at the match?

a       As is normal    practice at Football League and FA Cup matches#
        the St John's ambulance were in attendance.     Iam sure this
        is something the Inquiry will wish to examine.


        How were the tickets to the match allocated?

<       This ^   will be investigated during the Inquiry.




        Background

        The Football Association allocated 27,783 tickets to
        Nottingham Forest Football Club and 23,5*»2 to Liverpool. The
        discrepancy is a reflection of the fact that ticket
        allocations are determined by crowd segregation arrangements
        at the ground. In this case the police advised, for traffic
        flow reasons outside the ground,         that the Liverpool
        supporters should be accommodated in the Leppings Lane end of
        the ground.   The same arrangement was made when the same
        teams met in last season's FA Cup semi final.
                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                              Type of Inquiry


1.   The Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1921 provides a statutory

procedure for inquiring into an event of national importance.       The

Act enables witnesses to be subpoenaed, whereas a non-statutory

departmental inquiry does not.    The Salmon Report into Tribunals of

Inquiry 1966 set out criteria which should be satisfied before the

Act is invoked.    The Report stated that the Act should "always be

confined to matters of vital public importance concerning which

there is something in the nature of a nation-wide crisis of

confidence".-   Serious and tragic as the Hillsborough disaster was,

the issues which it raises do not really satisfy the criteria in

the Salmon Report.

2.   It is not necessary for the 1921 Act procedure to be used,

whenever a disaster occurs which results in loss of life.     The

Popplewell Inquiry showed that a non-statutory inquiry is perfectly

capable of carrying out a thorough investigation of the facts of a

serious accident such as the Hillsborough tragedy and of making

recommendations to remedy deficiencies.    If there is serious doubt

whether witnesses who have relevant evidence to give will be

prepared to give that evidence without being required to do so

there may be a case for considering whether a statutory procedure,

such as that provided for under the 1921 Act, which enables witnesses

to be compelled to give evidence, should be invoked.    But there is

no reason, at present, to suppose that that will be the case.
Experience has shown that 1921 Act inquiries tend to be extemely

lengthy and not necessarily more effective at eliciting the truth

than extra-statutory inquiries.     What is required, in the present

circumstances, is a speedy investigation, which can ascertain the

facts and recommend measures to prevent such a disaster happening

again.   The inquiry which has been set up is the most appropriate

means of securing that objective.
                                                                                *-v U




             fcixL.
              iu                            10 DOWNING STREET
              V^-V^^r
              Ht E *
                                             «•; p - \ r * p ’t •;> er*** »"•*■*! -   ,
                                            W h i•“           t■ A- J »" I' -
                                            •s .':. ; ■ > _>■ ■=v -~ ,.■••■■■
                                                            i.    ‘v.




               »b-WSk
                                 R E S T R IC T E D    D IS T R IB U T IO N                R E Q U IR E D
               Jt-fcwr



s W ^ J b t f e ^ vJL    wt&aT

W c i J k~Vs.
            A/>&ve
                                      SEE     IN S T R U C T IO N S          IN           LETTER
                                       CONFIDENTIAL




                               lO DOWNING STREET
                                   LONDON SW1A 2AA
From the Private Secretary
                                                            17 April 1989




                             HILLSBOROUGH GROUND DISASTER

     The Prime Minister held a meeting with Ministerial
colleagues this morning to discuss the Government's response
to the disaster at Hillsborough ground on 15 April. Present
were the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for the
Environment, the Lord President, the Chief Whip and the
Minister for Sport.

     I should be grateful if recipients of this letter
would restrict circulation to those officials with a strict
operational need to know.

     The Home Secretary said that in the atmosphere of
general shock and sorrow after the disaster there was,
temporarily, a time when attitudes would be more flexible
and the possibilities of securing support from other
political parties and the footballing authorities for new
steps might be greater than for some time past. The first
element in a new initiative would need to be the move away
from terraces in games. There needed to be better
leadership in the football world.  It was also for
consideration whether there were implications for the
Football Spectators Bill. One possible way forward would be
to hold a meeting of the Football Association and League and
set a programme, working with Government and money from the
Football Trust to carry through the abolition of terraces.
The Football Spectators Bill should carry on but it should
be made clear that implementation would follow, and take
account of, Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.   In
discussion the following points were made:

   - It was important that Lord Justice Taylor should have
     the broadest terms of reference to enable him to
     consider the circumstances of the disaster, enquire
     into the events at Sheffield and to draw such
     conclusions as he saw fit. Lord Justice Taylor would
     however need to be asked to produce his report
     briskly.

   - The argument would be advanced that Part I of the
     Football Spectators Bill might pre-judge the
     conclusions of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry. These
     arguments were misguided since Part I flowed from the


                                      CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL
                              - 2 -

     recommendations, in Justice Popplewell's earlier
     report, for a membership scheme. Others who were
     already opposed to the Bill would seek to make capital
     out of the Hillsborough disaster by asserting that the
     disaster had been caused by crowd problems outside the
     ground and that there was the risk that a National
     Membership Scheme might make things worse. There would
     be the desire, from some Government supporters for a
     delay in the passage of the Bill until Lord Justice
     Taylor had reported, or at least had been prepared to
     offer a view, on the public safety aspects of the
     membership scheme. Against that, the Hillsborough
     disaster had taken place under existing arrangements;
     it would be unfair to ask Lord Justice Taylor to give
     an off the cuff reaction - he would want quite
     reasonably to take all the evidence before coming to
     his own conclusions.   A delay of that length would
     jeopardise both Part I of the Bill and Part II, which
     appeared to command all-party support but which it
   ( would be impractical to separate at the current stage
     of the Bill's passage.

   - There was in any case no need to defer the Bill on
     account of the Inquiry. Any recommendations on the
     Membership Scheme could be taken fully into account
     because the Bill contained an "Appointed Day" Clause.
     It was therefore open to the Government to press ahead
     and pass the Bill but not to implement the provisions
   [ which the enabling powers gave until Lord Justice
     Taylor's recommendations had been made and digested.
     It should still be possible on this basis to stick to
     the target of implementation of the Bill's provisions
     from Spring 1990.

   - It might however be unseemly to press ahead with Third
     Reading in the Lords of a contentious Bill on football
     at a time when grief and passions aroused by the
     Hillsborough disaster ran so high. There was a strong
   I case for deferring, for a week or two, the Third
   ' Reading debate.

   - In view of the very strong arguments from all quarters
     about the self-evident dangers of football terraces
     there was a very strong case for going ahead now, ahead
     of Lord Justice Taylor's report, with moves to secure
     their abolition in major grounds.

     Summing up the meeting the Prime Minister said that
Ministers were agreed that the Home Secretary's statement to
the House should make clear that the Government remained
firmly of the view that the future of football remained with
an all-membership scheme at designated grounds.  It should
also make clear that, in the light of Hillsborough, it now
seemed necessary to move to an all-seat game within the
major grounds.  The Government would need to hold up further
consideration of the Bill briefly while it considered how
the Bill might be strengthened to that end or whether some
other route, such as a Motion by both Houses, would be the
best means of signalling Parliament's determination to see


                          CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL
                              - 3 -

the abolition of terraces at major grounds. The Home
Secretary and the Secretary of State for the Environment
were invited to examine urgently with legal advisers the
appropriate route for licensing powers to deal with
terraces.  It was also right that Third Reading in the Lords
should be deferred for a week or two while the nation marked
its shared concern at the Hillsborough disaster.

     I am copying this letter to Roger Bright (Department of
the Environment), Steven Catling (Lord President's Office),
Murdo Maclean (Chief Whip's Office), Philip Stamp (Office of
the Minister for Sport), Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal's
Office) and Trevor Woolley (Cabinet Office).




                               (DOMINIC MORRIS)




Philip Mawer, Esq.,
Home Office.




                       CONFIDENTIAL
RDB 8
REPROGRAPHIC ORDER                                                   CLASSIFIED MATERIAL

File No.                                                      Classification
i___
Description of document



FJumber of copies                    i                        Number of pages
required     ______                   ’                       to be copied________
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS




Signature                                .....................................     d ate....'..^!..''1
                                                                                                     . .. . .
                                            Si (\^. c j                                             'V
Name ( b lo c k c a p i t a l s ) - . . . . . . . ^ ...........................Rank....................
     . .                                            —   >                                       X            CN
Division                .................................................. Tel N o.........................

Room
              ^       ^ r.......................                   .              O        ^ 'V
                                                            Building........7 ^ .................

Notes
1. This form should be:
(a) used for material classified as Confidential or above;
(b) signed by an officer of HEO rank or above;
(c) submitted in duplicate.
2. The duplicate RDB 8 will be returned to the Division, which
should indicate on the reverse of the docket to whom copy docu­
ments are sent; the duplicate RDB 8 must then be placed on the
appropriate file.

FOR USE BY REPROGRAPHIC BRANCH
                              Q o                   H \              \
Machine/Unit                                 ..................................... ..................................
Signature & date              ........   <!±2 .............. s..ib......
S 527                                                                35566 9/85 XBD
                                                                              ADO.
                                                                              DO. .
                                                                              Rivilin-I         J ia r n o ll'l
                                             HoJdinq area            \        RifKjinqlow-l D a r r w u ll- 2
                                             f o r fo T o lih ftS             Low*Jew S - I      Canhri.il - S
                                                                              M a n a m Id     1 Stuckribriduvi. •
                                                                              Slacks bridge - 2        Barnsliiy - £

                                   Inifial casuall"y
                                   rac&iving araa

                                                                    m w / i i       iiilSW




                                                  Feol’ball




                            m
                    m




                r m i s t ona.




SCALE       DRAWN       TRACED     CHECKED
 i:l2 5 0   Mr,B.          h .d.                                     S it e     Pla n

S h e ffie ld Wednesday FC. Hillsborough,
                                                                                                   1
Pem stone R oad,
S h e f f ie l d ,
S o u th Yo r k s h ir e . 5 6 I5W

   SOUTH YORKSHIRE                             COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                             C. 2 0 8 8
