From: J L Goddard                       cc: Ms   Rex
      F8 Division                           Ms   Adams
      Ext 3314                              Mr   Yates
      16 May 1989                           Mr   Chilcot
                                            Mr   Moriarty
                                            Mr   Boys Smith
                                            Mr   Turney
                                            Mr   Mower
                                            Mr   Watts
                                            Mr   Whalley
                                            Mr   Godfrey
                                            Mr   Lidington

Mr Storr                              / 4

WEEKEND FOOTBALL VIOLENCE


The Home Secretary may wish to see the text of a statement issued
on 15 May by Mr Moynihan about the weekend's football violence.

2. Also attached is a schedule of information about the 8
incidents which led to 220 arrests.

3. At the end of the football season a final upsurge of violence
has become almost traditional as promotion/relegation is
confirmed. It is also a time when supporters tend to travel
longer distances and make an overnight stop en route or at a
seaside resort. The violence on Saturday reflects these factors.

4. We are in touch with the forces concerned about the
arrangements they will be making for policing the few matches
remaining to be played this season that may attract disorder.
The police are well aware of the need to keep up their guard and
remain especially vigilant at this time.




                                                   J L GODDARD
DEPARTMENT




                 N E W S                  R E L E A S E
                                                             15 May 1989


             ^            COLIN MOYNIHAN CONDEMNS FOOTBALL VIOLENCE


                     Colin Moynihan, Minister for Sport, today condemned the
              incidents of football violence which took place over the weekend.

                    Commenting on the events which led to over 200 arrests and
             a number of people ‘injured, some seriously, M:r Moynihan said:

                    "I deplore the ugly incidents of violence both inside and
             outside football grounds which took place on Saturday.     Sadly
             this gives the lie to those who argue that the present anti-
             hooligan measures have the problem under control.


                    "Football hooligans both inside and outside grounds must
             be prevented from going to matches; the Football Spectators Bill
             will do that.   These incidents make it abundantly clear that it
             would be irresponsible of the Government not to proceed with the
             Bill this session."



                            Press Enquiries:        01 276 0920
                            (Out of Hours:          01 276 4120)
                            Public Enquiries:       01 276 3000
                            (Ask for Public Enquiries Unit)




             2 MARSHAM STREET • LONDON SW1P 3EB • TELEPHONE 01-276 30 00
FOOTBALL DISTURBANCES, SATURDAY 13 MAY 1998


The following 8 incidents were reported in the media, totalling
220 arrests. The information below is based on reports from the
police forces concerned.


Crystal Palace v Birmingham Citv

1. Selhurst Park. SE London. In previous years about 400
Birmingham City supporters have attended this fixture, though
given advance indications of trouble and of large numbers (in
part to witness their team's final match before relegation to
Division 3) the police expected 3,000 Birmingham supporters.  In
fact up to 6,000 may have attended, putting considerable pressure
on the space allocated to them. Other factors which may have
contributed to the disorder include coaches dropping their
passengers short of the ground, giving them an opportunity to
visit local pubs; the irregularity of trains given the Southern
Region work to rule; a number of fans may have entered the ground
unlawfully; and there may have been defective counters on some of
the turnstiles.


2. The most notable incident was when many spectators poured
onto the pitch, halting play for some 30 minutes. Whatever their
original intention (to escape excessive pressure or to cause
disorder), once on the pitch several ran in front of the home
supporters and fighting took place. 6 police were slightly
injured and 16 members of the public were injured. The most
serious injury was a stabbed arm. In total 26 people were
arrested (10 inside the ground) and 11 were ejected - mostly
visiting supporters.


3. Although there has been some lowering of perimeter fences at
Selhurst Park since Hillsborough it is far from clear that this
was a material influence on the disorder. Provisionally, it
seems there have never been high (eg 8') fences there; part of
the fencing was lowered from about 4' 6" to 3' but this may not
be at the part of the ground where the trouble took place. The
local authority inspectors (Croydon) will be visiting the ground
urgently to look into this further.


4. Toddinaton Services. Ml (Bedfordshire). Birmingham City fans
returning by coach from Crystal Palace took part in a disturbance
at motorway services in the early hours of Sunday morning.
Crockery was thrown about and other customers were intimidated.
They left prior to the police's arrival but were detained in
their coach and taken to Dunstable Police Station. Forty-four
persons were arrested; they were held and will be released today
(Monday 15 May). Three will definitely be charged, but charges
against other persons depend on the outcome of forensic and
witness evidence. There are no reports of any injuries.

Leeds United


5. Alsaaer. Cheshire. At 11.15 pm on Saturday evening fighting
broke out at a public house between Leeds fans returning by coach
from their game at Shrewsbury, and local youths.  (Contrary to
some media reports, the police have no evidence this was a clash
with Macclesfield Town supporters). The violence occurred inside
and outside the pub, and missiles were reportedly thrown. One
Leeds supporter was taken to North Staffordshire Royal Infirmary
with serious head injuries; his condition is stable.  3 others
are reported to have received treatment to minor injuries. The
coach was escorted to Congleton police station where 41 were
arrested on suspicion of violent disorder and assault. All have
been given police bail pending further enquiries. One Cheshire
man has been charged with wounding and remanded until 18 May.
Charges and further arrests may follow.


Bristol City v Sheffield United


6. Aston Gate ground. Bristol. Approximately 130 officers were
on duty to police the 10,500 crowd, of whom 4,000 were from
Sheffield. There were sporadic outbreaks of trouble between
rival factions before and after the game outside the ground (one
Sheffield fan was slashed down his back with a craft knife 2
hours before the match). The most serious incident occurred 5
minutes before the end of the game when rival fans clashed on an
empty terrace below the main seated stand which they   had just
left. Fighting spilled over onto the pitch, holding    the game up
for 6 minutes. There were 14 arrests before, during    and after
the match. Nine were charged with specific offences    (8 public
order and 1 alcohol) and 5 were ejected.


Weston-Super-Mare

7. On Saturday evening and early Sunday morning local police,
supported by outside reinforcements, were called to a large
number of incidents at this seaside resort, where many Sheffied
United supporters were staying for the weekend. Most incidents
involved groups of youths fighting. 27 persons were arrested and
26 of these charged, mostly on public order charges. Damage was
caused. Up to 200 Sheffield fans are estimated to have been
involved, along with local youths.


Burv v Bristol Rovers

8. Tewksbury. At about 11.30 pm on Saturday evening a group of
25-30 drunken Bristol Rovers fans returning from the game at Bury
entered a private wedding reception and dance at a hall in
Tewksbury. When asked to leave 2 persons were assaulted and 2
windows smashed. The police arrived before the coach departed
but the group refused to release an alleged offender from the
coach for questioning. As a result all 55-60 occupants were
taken in their coach under   escort to Chelthenam police station.
3 persons were arrested in   connection with the assaults and
criminal damage. A police    officer was assaulted as supporters
attempted to negotiate the   release of those arrested.

Portsmouth v Chelsea


9. In their largest operation this football season Hampshire
Constabulary deployed 530 officers to police this 13,050 crowd,
about 5,000 of whom were Chelsea fans. Trouble was anticipated
and the game made all-ticket. The police operation contained the
situation.  56 persons were detained, of whom 31 were charged, 21
for alcohol offences, 8 for public order offences and 2 for
criminal damage.  15 persons were ejected. There were very few
violent incidents. The worst incident occurred at Hayling Island
on Friday evening when a fight involving 20 Chelsea fans and
local youths led to the arrest of 3 fans for violent disorder and
serious head and facial injuries to another.


Plymouth Aravle


10.   11 supporters were   arrested by   Hampshire Police at
Southhampton while travelling by train to a match at Bournemouth.
Alleged offences involve disorderly behaviour and obscene
language. Those involved are being reported for summons by
British Transport Police, and were released.
        oN
 f\J
ry
     <£■>




             i
