                                                         27th May 1998


Mr. M.J. Pyne,
Home Office,
Operational Policing Policy Unit,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
London,
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mr. Pyne,

                          HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Thank you for your reminder letter of 7th May 1998 which I found on my return from
holiday on 17* May. I hope the delay in replying to your letter of 27th February has
not caused too much inconvenience.

I was puzzled by your selection of correspondence as you seem in your list to have
omitted a number of letters which contain corrections but in view of my decision this
is an academic point.

I have given this matter some thought and whilst I do not wish to cause the Home
Secretary any problems I have concluded that I do not wish my correspondence or the
transcript of my meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith be placed in the House of
Commons Library or indeed otherwise released for publication.

Reasons for my decision include the following.

1. I was at no time told that either the meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith or
   correspondence with him would be made public. On the contrary I was under the
   impression that the Scrutiny was not a public inquiry but a private one. I did of
   course understand that information given to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might be
   used by him in the preparation of his report.

2. I am anxious to bring my involvement with Hillsborough to an end. In view of the
   lapse of time since the event and my age I think that it is time to draw a line. I do
   not think that publication of my discussions or correspondence with Lord Justice
   Stuart-Smith would be conducive to achieving this objective.

3. The correspondence in particular contains extracts from Coronal records. As you
   know these are usually kept confidential for many years (unless the right is waived
   by the Coroner). I am doubtful whether I have the capacity to consent to such
   release.

4. At the request of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith I supplied him with copy letters from
   various relatives dealing with matters which they wanted raised or explored. It is
   one thing to provide these at the request of a senior judge acting in a quasi legal
   capacity and quite another to release them for general publication.

5. The point made in 4 above is reinforced by the fact that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
   himself has chosen not to publish his responses to individuals in Appendix 9 of his
   report.

There may well be other reasons which could be adduced but this will suffice.

I am sorry that this letter may disappoint but I hope that the Home Secretary will see
the reasons for my refusal.



Yours faithfulM




cc. Christopher P. Dorries Coroner South Yorkshire(West)
    Michael J.C. Burgess Hon Secretary Coroner’ Society of England & Wales
