                                                                                               &
               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
               Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Peter Whitehurst                                              Your reference:
Treasury Solicitors
28 Broadway                                                   Our reference:
LONDON SW1
                                                              Date:             October 1997




LORD TAYLOR’S INQUIRY


We spoke, and I am writing to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would be grateful for
advice on two aspects o f Lord Taylor’s Inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster in 1989.

2.      First, there is a so-called ‘compilation video’ which shows the main events o f the day.
Representatives o f some of the families affected by the disaster claim that there is or was
telling video evidence from police CCTV cameras showing crowded conditions in the fatal
pens (3 and 4) at the point just before and after police took the decision to open the exit gate
C allowing large numbers o f extra people into them. They query the absence o f such
material from the compilation video. (I expect you recall the sequence o f events on the day,
but I will be happy to reacquaint you with them if you wish!).

3.      I have to say that we have found no evidence that video material o f this sort ever did
exist. But I understand from what you said the other day that the West Midlands police, who
put the compilation video together, did so with the guidance o f one o f Lord Taylor’s legal
team from the Treasury Solicitors. It would be helpful to have whatever insights you can
give us into the way in which the compilation video was made up.

4.      Second, you gave me over the telephone an interesting account o f how witness
statements were collected and selected for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. As I understand this it
was the Treasury Solicitors who, in effect, advised Lord Taylor whom to call as a witness on
the strength o f these statements. It would be helpful to have your guidance about the criteria
which were used in giving that advice to Lord Taylor and deciding who should and should
not be called.

 5.      One witness who was not called to give evidence to Lord Taylor was Roger
 Houldsworth, a video engineer working for Sheffield Wednesday, who had worked on the
 police and club video systems at the ground and was in the club control box under the South
 Stand, watching his CCTV screens, on the day. It would be helpful to have whatever
 confirmation you might be able to give that the Treasury Solicitors, and hence Lord Taylor’s

 G; | H IL L S B O R | M A IN \ T R Y SO L S. 1 2 2
Inquiry, were aware o f Mr Houldsworth’s existence and that he had made statements to the
West Midlands police. Could you advise us why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give
evidence to Lord Taylor?

6.      I look forward to hearing from you when you are back from your holiday. You
suggested that you might come in to discuss the Taylor Inquiry with Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith direct. He would welcome a discussion o f that sort, but it would nevertheless be a
help if you could arrange for us to have a written response to this letter.

7.        We look forward to hearing from you.


        M
C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G: | H IL L S B O R | MA1N\ T R Y SO L S. 1 2 2
