                                                                                                                                                                                Qjb^r



            47-6.JS
                                                                                                  0-*- c*~
                                                                                                                                                                      tr~
            From: J L Goddard                                                               cc               Mr Boys Smith
                  F8 Division                                                                                     G oo s e f
                                                                                                           *--------------       '* ^'«^aieu*A % feii;A -»
                  Ext. 3314                                                                                  Miss Saunders, CPS
                                                                                                             Mr Zimmerman, LCD
                        26 June 1990                                                                         Mr Rhodes
                                                                                                             Mr Mennell
                                                                                                             Ms Jago
            /frey-ee-
                                                                                                                                                                 {? C'V-tSv V -
                                                                                                                                  ^            <v^
                                                                                                                                                             *0 jcr              H-s /

                                                                             *   »   *      c        * -         •




            PART IV OF THE PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1 9 8 6 : EXCLUSION ORDERS
                          - tC C . <X a ^   tz^   -   cI   -r3                            ^ -v z fc i-o                      _                               •    j         .
                   stub,    >w < in         pca                  «?   -f^e ^ *>**■L**                                                            ^                                                .
                            e tx            P                    ; 6o ptn^-                               L ^ p lx ^ & ^ o                      a      x i^           C O ^
            The exclusion order scheme introduced in 1987 empowers the                                                                                                           }*a .   k /1t    ax*r^ z‘
            courts to impose orders on convicted football hooligans to                                                                                                           f\
            prohibit their attendance at matches in England and Wales.
            Following consideration of Lord Justice Taylor's final report
                                                                                                                                                                                      fi4 ~ c 3 ^ '
            the Government decided against proceeding with the national                                                                                                                       ^
            football membership scheme provided in Part I of the Football
            Spectators Act 1989.                                  As a result exclusion orders remain the
            primary mechanism for keeping convicted hooligans out of                                                                                                                     sp °         r

            football grounds in this country.                                               (Part II of the 1989 Act,
                                                                                                                                                                                         £ 0 -
            which is in operation, provides for restriction orders to be                                                                                                                              v^
            imposed on convicted hooligans.                                              Restriction Orders are
            intended to prevent attendance at key matches abroad.)


            2.     We are looking for ways to enhance the enforcement of
            exclusion orders.                              The National Football Intelligence Unit
            certainly has a key role to play here in liaison with local
            police forces.                    We are also considering Lord Justice Taylor's
            proposals to use attendance centres and tagging as a back up
            to exclusion orders.                                  However, we are also concerned to
            encourage the effective use by the courts of exclusion orders.


            3.     After the exclusion order provisions had been in force
            for 12 months, F8 conducted some simple analysis which showed
            that a disturbingly high number of orders had been made for




6 JUti 90
3A4
periods which fell mainly within football's "close season".
Charts of the analysis were circulated to the courts under
cover of HO Circular 74/1988 (issued 31 August).     No further
analysis has been carried out to cast light on whether or not
the situation may have improved.     However, the police tell us
that in certain areas exclusion orders are not used at a l l .
We are intending to do some further fact finding into the
general use of orders.


4.   In the meantime, following the demise of the national
football membership scheme and with the new football season
only a few weeks away, it seems timely to remind courts of the
existing provisions.


5.   I attach a draft HO Circular which subject to your
comments, I propose to send out in mid-August at the beginning
of the next season. I would also be grateful for any
suggestions you and copy recipients may have on other ways in
which the courts might usefully be reminded of the
availability of these powers.     Are there occasions when
Ministers or officials could insert a reference, in speeches
or discussions,   to the continued existence and need for the
proper use of exclusion orders?     And from your knowledge of
the sensibilities of the magistracy can you suggest any forms
of words which might encourage a wider and more effective use
of exclusion orders?


6.   May I ask for comments on the attached circular by
Wednesday 4 July please?




                           j. L. GODDARD

                           J L GODDARD
            48-6.JS                                                         D R A F T




            To The Chief Officer of Police (England and Wales)
               The Chief Clerk to the Crown court
               The Clerk to the Justices
                 (with a copy for the Chairman of the Bench for the
                 information of the Justices)

                 The   Clerk to the Police Authority
                 The   Circuit Administrator
                 The   Clerk to the Magistrates Courts Committee
                 The   Courts Administrator
                 The   Chief Crown Prosecutor




            Dear Sir



            HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO             /1990
            FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS



            This Circular reminds those concerned of the provisions of Part IV
            of the Public Order Act 1986 which came into force on 1 August
            1987 under which the courts have power to make exclusion orders,
            prohibiting those convicted of football hooliganism offences from
            attending prescribed football matches in England and Wales.


            2.     It had been intended that the exclusion order provisions
S g '       should be repealed after the introduction of the proposed national
            football membership scheme.      Following the publication of
&
            Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the Hillsborough stadium
            disaster, the Government has decided not to proceed with the
            scheme. Consequently the exclusion order provisions remain in
            force, as a complementary measure to the new restriction order
        \   provisions: exclusion orders prohibit attendance at prescribed
                         'T'
            matches in England and Wales ; restriction orders are designed to
            prevent attendance at key matches outside England and W a l e s .
3.     Home Office Circular No.39/1987 explains fully the provisions
of the exclusion order scheme.              A court may make an order where a
person is convicted of the type of offence set out in section 31
of the 1986 Act and when the court is satisfied that an order
would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection
with prescribed football matches.


Duration of Exclusion Orders


4.     An exclusion order must last for a minimum of three months.
There is no maximum time limit set; this is at the discretion of
the courts.        In determining the duration of the order courts frill
have regard to the nature of the offence that gave rise to the
order, the age of the offender and what is known of his general
background, character and past record; the courts will)artso wish
ft ■fcalfta trafco^ew a L w t    the football "close season"   (generally late
May to late A u g u s t w h e n making orders of a short duration would
have little practical effect.


Enforcement


5.     Home Office Circular 39/1987 advised police forces on the
procedures to obtain photographs of those on whom exclusion orders
are imposed.        To increase the effectiveness with which exclusion
orders can be enforced, and the likelihood of detecting those who
enter a football ground in breach of an order,             forces should
forward details of all exclusion orders made (and terminated),
including a photograph of the offender, to the National Football
Intelligence Unit.              These details will be compiled to form a
national index for issue to and use by football liaison officers
in local police forces.              Whilst it will not be possible for the
police to check every person entering a football ground,
experienced closed circuit television operators who are aware of
likely trouble spots in grounds will be able check photographs of
those subject to order when scanning the crowd during the game.
Checks against those photographs should also be made when viewing
videos of any disorder after the event.
6.   Any enquiries about this circular should be addressed to
Sue Jago (071-273 2850).


                           Yours faithfully



                            J L GODDARD
                            F8 Division
                                                       cc Mr Boys-Smith
                                                          Mr Head
                                                          Miss Goose
                                                          Mr Grant
                                                          Mrs Saunders    CPS
                                                          Mr Zimmerman    LCD
                                                          Mr Rhodes
                                                          Mr Mennel
                                                          Ms Jago

            Mr Goddard


            PART IV. PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1986: EXCLUSION ORDERS


            Thank you for your note of 26 June to Mr Grant enclosing a draft
            circular to the courts and police.

            I am content with what you propose for the circular but I think
            that paragraph 3 might be expanded   to remind courts of their
            powers under Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 as
            outlined in HOC 31/1990.

            I suggest the following be added
                    " Home Office Circular 31/1990 explains the provisions
                      of the restriction order scheme under Part II of the
                      Football Spectators ACT 1989."

            Turnling to what other help can be given to promote the use of
            exclusion orders I agree that whenever possible we should include
            a suitable passage in Ministerial speeches during the next 3
            months or so especially when they are addressing Magistrates'
            Associations.      In addition I will insert a short article in
            the quarterly C2 Newsletter to magistrates' courts the next issue
            of which is due to be published in September.     If you agree I
            will circulate the proposed article in due course.




            C2 Division                                      Patricia Almond
               June 1990




            paagodd.boz




■1% M g o
