;H X *KU»1              i ui/zy vw b a t                                                    OO' 0 3 ' 30
      i>3               S !IS : t'ti   ?AI iiiT29   54»3C2          TP.EVOK H I C K S                        ,■                   @03
  *
                                                                                                   P^ V /
                                                                                                                  v*. J                            $w £

                                                                                                    lasy^i        h^-vi                  t i i t-v*
                                                                                                                    <* ■^ u               *w
                                                                                                                   ?a-h #>4                *v-\*
                                               HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE •:.&»,May 19W-                                 / ’* <   » V l# w £ 'V c # £ .

                                                                                            * C^»»
                                :& QUESTIONS TO JACK STRAW <HOME O FFIO kfRO M THE " » - l - l'v ’~ ‘-                                               **
                                       HTLLSBOROUGH FAMILY S1T P 0R T G f t O P P i           « T 7 f-i                                             0°~
                                                                                  IsVKX*. Ow. J


                            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith glosses over tbs theft of two video tapts from the Sheffield
                    i       Wednesday Control Room on the night of the disaster because the tapes showed
                            “nothing relevant”. The key issue is the theft and its motive. The tapes were taken
                            from a locked cupboard, in a locked and alarmed room on a major incident/scene of
                            crime site guarded by South Yorkshire Police.
                            How on earth can the Home Secretary accept Lord Justice Stuart-Sraith’s               f               Xt>
                            dismissal of this a ct

                            The Coroner advised PC Bichard in the presence of the Jury that police video tapes
                            from score board camera 5 were missing Lord Justice Stuart Smith states that the
                            same footage was never missing.
                            Can the Home Secretary explain this clear contradiction antfwhat he intends to
                            do about it?

        3. ,                Why did Lord Justice Stuart Smith completely ignore the variety of excuses from ^           ^
                i           South Yorkshire Police in relation to the performance of camera 5?                      rtw /
                                                                                         M                              f   V>W
                |           At the inquest h was stated to be faulty and therefore not used. This was confirmed in'
                            a South Yorkshire Police press statement in January 1997 which stated “although the ^       ^
                            camera was operating, interference from live TV broadcast equipment rendered it         T**'® '
                            useless”. This was the first ever reference to Outside Broadcast Unit interference, and
                            the families cannot find anyone who believes let alone accepts this spurious technical
                            argument.

                            When actual foot3 ge from camera 5 was retrieved by the families and it proved that
                            camera 5 was working perfectly, South Yorkshire Police changed their stance yet
                            again. In a press release dated 1“ April 1997, South Yorkshire Police stated that they
                            had never claimed that camera was faulty, the fault lay with the monitor in the police
                            control room. Copies of both press releases were submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-
                            Smith who did not even see fit to comment on them.               -

                            Does the Home Secretary accept that this is hardly the action of a fair and even
            I               handed judge?
            I
        4                   Why did Lord Justice Stuart-Smrth fail to address the Group’s submission re late/non              ^            ^
                            implementation of major disaster plan as per Wardrope’s article in the British Medical                             -*2-
                            Journal published subsequent to the inquest.
                            Wardrobe categorically states that the hocpital never received notification of a major
                            incident taking place at Hillsborough. This failure meant that there was only a small
                            number o f staff to deal with the exceptionally large workload.
  Why didn't Lord Justice Stuart-Smith interview any ambulancemen? Surely this is
  indicative of his closed rei-nri and that he v/as firmiy behind the <£sudden death” theory
  which conveaienilv renders irrelevant any evidence of ambulancemen and or other
  rescuers

 Why did Ambulanceman Tony Edwards have to literally beg Stuart- Smith for an
 interview? He was then told he wotud have to pay bis own expenses u he was not
 mending the meeting at tr.e invitation of the Jucgei Was this an attempt to dissuade
 lum from attending77

 Lord Justice Stuarc-Smith dismisses the importance of Reger Houidsworth’s evidence
 on the grounds that the Jury had been to the ground and had viewed the scene for
 themselves. The jury of course visited the ground when it was empty and would have
 had a different perspective to f-oat ou the cay of the disaster. In any event Dr, Popper
 himself made it clear that visits to the ground were not pan of the court proceedings.

   The Judge makes no comment on why Houldsworth was not called as a witness to the
  inquest other than to say in any event his evidence wa3 the same as PC Guest Sadly
£ ? C Guestjdied before the inquest took place leaving Houldsworth as the only non­
   police witness as to the capability and extent of the police CCTV system.

  Can the Home Secretary defend this-ridiculous analysis or will be accept it is yet
  another example of bias in the scrutiny.

  Why does Stuart-Smith make no reference to Ed Walker’s allegation that Sgt. Julie
  Appleton was not present when he made his statement and simply added her signature
  as a witnessing officer ax a later stage. Instead, in response to allegations that
  Appleton pressurised SPC Debra Martin he states he found her a very impressive
  witness.

  Lord Justice Stuart-Smirh has commented on the editing of police statements. The
  families understand that some form of undertaking was given by Mervyn Jones, the
  then Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands to Peter Wright, the then Chief
  Constable, South Yorkshire in respect of this tampering with evidence.

  Can the Home Secretary comment on the covert nature of this undertaking and
  is he prepared to place a copy of it, along with any relevant correspondence, in
  the public domain

  The Home Secretary undertook to place in the House of Commons library all
  supporting documentation Why are the key police statements not yet in the House of
  Commons library and why were they not in the document bundles recently supplied to
  the family group, despite them being on the index?

  Does the Home Secretary agree that families are entitled to believe they have
  been removed deliberately?
Lord Justice Taylors terms of reference were r o •m- ure into the events at Sheffield
Wednesday football ground on the 15.4 89 and ro rruxe recommendations for the
needs of crowd control <md safsty at sports events.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has taken it upon himself to re-write those terms ot
reference and states that the first pan of the Taylor enquiry was to find out what
happened and why ami to consider me response of the emergency services.

Stuart Smith however, accepts the criticisms contained in the statement of
Ambulanceman Peter Howes which was net made unta_aft££ the Taylor Inquiry.
Howes wsls not cmififl <is &witness &£ th.£ incjucst.

Does the Home Secretary really fed confident that sufficient enquiry has taken
pU ce into the implementation of the disaster plan and the emergency response.

South Yorkshire Police have admitted that they had been givena^copy of the scrutiny
report some days in advance of its presentation to the House of Commons. Surely this
is a breach of parliamentary privilege and is indicative of police bias at the Home
Office.

 Is the Home Secretary prepared to name those responsible for this breach of
 privilege and to denounce the reports use by South Yorkshire officers in press
 interviews, both prior and immediately after the announcement ia the House.


 Is the Home Secretary prepared to give access to all witness transcripts,
 submissions and other s u p p o r t i n g documentation to the Family Group’s legal
 representative?


 Why was the Hillsborough Family Support Group told in March that they could have
 no information from South Yorkshire Police while PC Greenway was away on holiday.

 Resources were however 'found” to enable South Yorkshire Police to o ffe r ‘briefings
 to Mersey side MP’s, to throw down the gauntlet to ITV and for Assistant Cniet
 Constable Dames to write a series of articles for the media.


  In earlier statements to the house, Mr. Straw made public his disapproval of failures by-
  police forces to properly implement easting police disciplinary rules.

  Can he confirm his approval or otherwise of Chief Constable Richard W ells
  decision to allow Duckenfieid to retire on ill health grounds while facing
  disciplinary charges for neglect of duty and could he further confirm whether
  that decision was in accord with the disciplinary code in place at that time.
The Police Complaints Authority placed cc record that they had 'oad to use their
statutory powers” to initiate :sn.eglect of diny charges” against Messrs Duckenfieid and
Murray.

Can the Home Secretary comment on this quite dear example of South
Yorkshire's failure to take action within ihe aiscipiinary codes?


When addressing the families at the Commons and Southport, Mr Straw three times
used the term “gross negligence'’ in reiaticn to the execution by the police of their
duties.

Can the Home Secretary offer an explanation of the fact that despite his
assessment that there had been grass negligence* no-one has been charged with
unlawful killing or indeed anything.


The Horae Secretary has operiy stated hs is prepared to meet the families and'or their
representatives again. He is also on the record as not being prepared to alter his
position of supporting Stuart-Smith’s report.

Can he indicate what purpose a further meeting would serve and/or is he
prepared to receive further representation with an open mind. If not what is the
purpose o f this debate?


Following the Hillsborough Disaster, major changes have been made in football ground
licensing legislation, there are proposals to strengthen up the police disciplinary code
and its implementation, and the Home Office Working Party has recommended a major
overhaul of the current relationship between the Inquest and any Public Inquiry.

Can the Home Secretary comment on how an “accidental death” verdict can be
acceptable when almost everything associated with Hillsborough has been found
grossly wanting.



Can the Home Secretary confirm whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smuh and others
associated with the scrutiny are Freemasons?


When the West Midlands police serious crime squad was disbanded following
investigations into its conduct, the officers were supposedly transferred to menial tasks.

Could the Home Secretary comment on how Superintendent Beechy of that
discredited squad came to be a key player in the collating o f Hillsborough
evidence for Lord Taylor, the Inquests, the DPP and the police internal
investigations!!
