 CB    -   opening the session



 Good morning.



 My name is Chris Bone, Secretary to the Scrutiny. Grateful to
 you all for coming - especially since we know many people have
 missed work to be here.


) The purpose of this session is to allow people to put their
 concerns directly to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in person. We
 want to know what you think.


 We want an exact record of what you say. That is why we have
 our shorthand writers, who are sitting at that table there.


 We are planning to continue till lunchtime without a break. If
 you want to go out while our session is going on, you can of
 course but please leave quietly and take your invitation letter
 with you so that the door people let you back in.


 This isn’t a court of law and we want people to speak freely.
 You don't need to be invited to speak by me or anybody else,




 G:\HILLSBOR\MISC\CBSPEECH.DOC
 and we want everybody who wants to say something to have the
 chaance to say it.


 But it is important that we only have one person speaking at a
 time and that you use the radio mike which (Mike/Sarah) will be
 bringing round. Please raise your hand before you speak, and
 say who you are. These things will help us and the shorthand
 writers.


) Before we start, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will say a few words
 about the scrutiny. Then it’s over to you.


 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith —




 G:\HILLSBOR\MISC\CBSPEECH.DOC
                                       OPENING




I thought it would help if I started by outlining the task that the Home

Secretary has given me to do and how I see the way in which this meeting

here today fits into it.



It Urns   o f reference



I expect that all of you will have seen a copy of the terms of reference

which I have been given by the Home Secretary. They are perhaps a little

complicated.           But they boil down to two things.



First, I must look at all the information that people are now coming

forward with to see whether it is fresh evidence about the disaster.

Second, I must decide whether to recommend that any fresh evidence I



                                            1

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
find justifies a new public inquiry, new inquests, or any other kind of legal

proceedings or action by the authorities.



This is a very important and serious task. Nobody coming to this issue

for the first time - as I have done since my appointment at the end of June

- can fail to be impressed by the dignified and dedicated way in which the

families of those who died on that dreadful day have conducted

tiLmselves.




I know that you will accept that I have to look rigorously at all the

information which is presented to me to see whether it is fresh evidence or

not.     I will be looking just as rigorously at what I am told by official

agencies such as the police, the Coroners office, and the emergency

services.



Fresh evidence



                                         2

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
Of course I have come to no conclusions as yet. I do not expect to do so

for some time. But I think it is important that we should all understand at

the outset exactly what is meant by fresh evidence in this context.



As we all know there have been a lot of legal and other proceedings

already. We have had Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There have been inquests

cL Everybody who died. There has been a judicial review of some of

those Inquests in the Divisional Court and the Attorney-General has

considered applications for fresh Inquests from some families. The

prosecuting authorities and the police disciplinary authorities have

considered prosecution and disciplinary proceedings against police

officers.




                                      3

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
Any fresh evidence must be evidence which was not available or not

presented to these various inquiries, courts or prosecuting authorities.

But it is not just evidence from people who have not come forward before.

It has to lead somewhere and to show that the outcome of the legal

procedures that have taken place might have been different, or that those

responsible for instituting criminal or disciplinary proceedings might have

taken different decisions.

 o
More than 50,000 people were present at Hillsborough. Many others

were in and around the area. Most witnessed some part of what happened.

The police took 3,776 statements, and 174 people gave evidence at Lord

Taylor’s Inquiry. No two people would necessarily see or recollect

exactly the same thing, but Lord Taylor had no difficulty in establishing

what had happened.




                                      4

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
Evidence which is broadly in line with what has already been said, even if

it tends to support one view or the other on controversial questions, will

not be of help to me.



Taylor Inquiry




I think it might help to recap the broad conclusions that the legal and other

pV^ceedings have reached over the years.



First there was the Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor. That was a very

thorough and wide ranging inquiry designed to find out what had

happened at Hillsborough and why. It was not difficult to discern what

happened.



By about 2.50 the central pens of the Leppings Lane Terraces were full or

nearly full. At 2.52 Gate C was opened to relieve the dangerous pressure



                                      5

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
outside the turnstiles. The result was that some 2000 supporters came

through the gate in a relatively short time. Most went through the tunnel

to pens 3 & 4. The result was a crush of people substantially exceeding

the safe capacity of those pens, with the terrible consequences that we

know.



The question of why the disaster occurred was more complex. The first

q Jstion was why the police lost control of the crowd outside the

turnstiles. This was controversial. The police said it was due to the

unexpected late arrival of very large numbers of supporters, many of

whom were determined to get into the ground on time come what may.

They said that there was a larger number than usual affected by drink, that

there were a considerable number of instances of bad behaviour and that

many people did not have tickets. The position was exacerbated by

people not knowing where to go through poor signposting.




                                     6

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
The police said they could not stop those at the back pushing forward and

crushing those at the front. They said they could not have anticipated such

a large unco-operative crowd in the last half hour before the game.



The other side of the picture was given by the supporters, and 50 or so

gave evidence to Lord Taylor. Many of them criticised the policing,

particularly compared with the similar operation in 1988.

 o
Lord Taylor rejected the view advanced by the police. He accepted that

there was a small minority of supporters who were affected by drink or

determined to get in at all costs and not co-operate. But he concluded that

the police should have foreseen that substantial numbers would arrive after

2.30 and should have taken more effective steps to prevent a crushing

build up in the restricted area by the Leppings Lane turnstiles.




                                      7

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
But the critical question was what happened inside the ground. Lord

Taylor concluded that the influx of supporters going through Gate C after

2.52 should not have been allowed to go down the tunnel. The police

should have blocked the tunnel off and diverted people to the wing pens.

He described their failure to do this as a blunder of the first magnitude. It

involved a failure by the police to appreciate that the pens 3 and 4 were

already full and that the great majority of those going through Gate C

w Jild go to them. People could not find their own level - they could not

move to the side pens.



So Lord Taylor was highly critical of the police operation. But he was

also critical of the City Council in relation to the Safety Certificate, which

was thoroughly unsatisfactory so far as the capacity of the West Terraces

once the radial fences had been installed, was concerned.




                                       8

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
He was also critical of the club and their engineers. The layout at

Leppings Lane of the forecourt and turnstiles was quite inadequate to cope

with so many people. There was no satisfactory method of monitoring

how many people went into the individual pens except by a visual check.

The signposting information on the tickets and stewarding was inadequate

so that many people didn’t know where to go or that there was any

alternative to going down the tunnel.       Barrier 124 that collapsed was of

L Jufficient strength, the crush barriers were poorly placed, and the gates

in the perimeter fence were too small.



Lord Taylor also considered the response of the emergency services. He

criticised the police for not appreciating earlier than they did what was

happening and not summoning the emergency services earlier. But there

was no criticism of the services themselves, except by two doctors, and

Lord Taylor specifically refuted their criticism.




                                        9

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
The Inquests




The Inquests took far longer than the Taylor Inquiry. But their scope was

more limited.           As in all other Inquests the Coroner was concerned with

the questions of who the deceased were, and when, where and how they

died.



V i law on Inquests allows Coroners and their juries only a limited choice

of verdict. In practice the Hillsborough inquests could have only two

possible verdicts: unlawful killing and accidental death. Unlawful killing

is equivalent to manslaughter, not just negligence or even negligence

sufficient to give rise to civil liability. As we all know, the verdict in

respect of everybody who died at Hillsborough was accidental death.



As the Coroner pointed out, a verdict of accidental death is in no way

inconsistent with the deaths having been caused by negligence or breach



                                            10

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
of duty. The Chief Constable has paid compensation to those who were

injured and the families of those who were killed on a basis of full

liability.



I have not seen any formal admission of liability by the police. On the

other hand they have never contested that they are liable.



IvJny of the criticisms of the Hillsborough Inquests were considered in the

judicial review by the Divisional Court in November 1993 and were not

accepted by that Court. I cannot act as Court of Appeal against that

decision.



But I know that many of you were disappointed with the inquest verdicts

and were critical of a number of aspects of the inquests, both in the

manner in which they were conducted and the decisions of the Coroner.

What I will be looking for in connection with the inquest verdicts is



                                      11

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
whether there is any fresh evidence which might show that some or all of

the verdicts of accidental death should be quashed, and a fresh inquest

ordered.



Prosecution & discipline




I will also be looking at the decisions which were made by the prosecuting

LA disciplinary authorities -   namely the Director of Public Prosecutions

and the Police Complaints Authority. I must consider whether there is

fresh evidence which - if they had they known of it - might have caused

them to reach different decisions. If there is I will invite them, through

my report, to reconsider their decisions. I will also consider whether the

fresh evidence discloses any other possible offences which might merit

prosecution.



Concluding



                                      12

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
Finally I must tell you that, since my appointment I have read the evidence

given to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and watched the video tapes recording

events of the day. I have seen both the Cook Report television programme

and that made by Granada Television. I have also read Lord Taylor’s

reports and much else besides.



LJs impossible for anyone who has done that not to be profoundly moved

by the appalling tragedy that occurred and not to have the greatest

sympathy with all of you who have been bereaved. I wanted to come to

Liverpool, not only to tell you that, but to try and explain what I can and

cannot do and to give you an opportunity to tell me of any evidence that

you may think will assist.




                                      13

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
I have had written and oral representations from the Family Support Group

and their counsel, and I am arranging to see the witnesses they have

referred me to including Mr Houldsworth and Dr Walker.



I have arranged to meet a number of you individually and in families who

have asked for an opportunity to speak to me yourselves. But if any of

you here who have not arranged such a meeting, want to tell me anything,

L Ay is your opportunity.




                                    14

C:\HILLSBOR\S-S\INTR0.017
