5




a



                           Now that the inquiry is moving on to consider more

    general issues,including the proposed statutory identity card,I y|duld

    respectfully like to offer some views as an ordinary spectator and rank and
    file member of the FSA.

                              As you know there are serious doubts on many aspects

    of the identity card and some of these have intensified since Hillsborough.

    The vast majority of people who go to football matches reject the i.d.scheme,

    and      in itself is a bad omen for the scheme.     Football yearns for effective

    action against the hooligans,and especially for. measures which would be seen

    as both tough and fair,and which would thereby attract overwhelming support.

                            As you will also know the Home Office is experimenting

    with electronic tagging as a cost effective alternative to prison and other

    forms of punishment such as attendance orders.     Electronic tagging has been in

    operation in the USA since 1984 and a number of UK companies such as Marconi

    ^^d Chubb are active in the field.    Electronic tagging could be used to ensure

    that known football hooligans were at home on football match days.

                              In contrast to the i.d.card,electronic tagging would

    give effective and economical targetting against offenders without discriminati

    against the law abiding population.    There would be no need to issue and

    operate perhaps a million identity cards with all the expanse and potential for

    breakdown involved.   Moreover offenders would be detained at home on match days

    and not just excluded from grounds.

                               I do respectfully urge you to consider the contributio

    which electronic tagging could make to the removal of the convicted football

    hooligan from all public places on days when football matches are played,
                                                                           \'V W




Mrs-Wither
    i-With
Room 448
Hillsborough Enquiry


ELECTRONIC MONITORING


Mrs Nicholls has passed me your note of 27 September, in which you sought our views
on electronic monitoring for football hooligan’s before you replied to I        letter
which raises this in the context of identity cards.       ---------
                                                                                              P'
The idea of electronic monitoring to enforce a court order requiring an offender to stay   COl*»«YVi.
at home during certain periods was first raised in the Government’s Green Paper
‘Punishment, Custody and the Community’ in July last year. The Green Paper invited
comments on the usefulness of electronic monitoring for this kind of purpose and has
stimulated considerable public interest and debate.

    present the courts do not have the power to order an offender to undergo electronic
monitoring - this would require legislation. As you are aware, it was decided that it
would be sensible to make a start by testing the use of electronic monitoring under the
present law, as a condition ofbail. The current pressure on the remandpopulation
underlies an important aim of these trials which is toestablishwhether there  are
defendants remanded in custody who might be released on bail subject to electronic
monitoring.

Consideration of widening the scope of electronic monitoring can only be taken when the
trials have been completed and evaluated.
I hope this will be of help to   you in yourreply.



                                                     A ;r !   j>
                                                      i
                                                     MOYA LENAGHAN     ^
                                                     C2 Division
     October 1989
G14
Queen Anne’s Gate
X 3321
58-9.AH


Mrs Wither


ELECTRONIC MONITORING

You asked for F 8 's views on the points made by j                 in his
letter of 19 September.


The concept of electronic monitoring as an alternative to custody
was raised in the Government's Green Paper "Punishment, Custody
and the Community".     An experiment is being conducted at the
moment into the use of electronic monitoring as a condition of
bail.     HO is considering the responses to the Green Paper and
will review the situation in the light of the experience gained
from the current experiment.


We do not see electronic monitoring as an alternative to the
national football membership scheme.     The main purpose of the
scheme is to enable the football authorities to prevent known
troublemakers from attending football matches.        Electronic
monitoring would impose too wide a restriction, not only
preventing the offender from attending football matches but also
imposing the penalty of preventing him from leaving his home for
any other reason when football matches are being played.


An additional point is that electronic monitoring could only be
imposed on conviction.    The scheme proposed in the Football
Spectators Bill not only automatically disqualifies from
membership those convicted of a football-related offence but also
enables the membership authority to consider the disqualification
of anyone behaving offensively at football matches.




                                           SUE JAGO
                                           F8 Division


25 September 1989
                        Now that the inquiry is moving on to consider more

general issues/including the proposed statutory identity card,I Vfould

respectfully like to offer some views as an ordinary spectator and rank and

file member of the FSA.

                          As you know there are serious doubts on many aspects

of the identity card and some of these have intensified since Hillsborough.

The vast majority of people who go to football matches reject the i.d.scheme,

and t^j| in itself is a bad omen for the scheme.        Football yearns for effective

action against the h o ol i g a n s ,and especially for measures which would be seen

as both tough and fair,and which would thereby attract overwhelming support.

                          As you will also know the Home Office is experimenting

with electronic tagging as a cost effective alternative to prison and other

forms of punishment such as attendance orders.       Electronic tagging has been in

operation in the USA since 19 84 and a number of UK companies such as Marconi

and Chubb are active in the field.     Electronic tagging could be used to ensure

that known football hooligans were at home on football match days.

                           In contrast to the i.d.card,electronic tagging would

give effective and economical targetting against offenders without discriminating

against the law abiding population.     There would be no need to issue and

operate perhaps a million identity cards with all the expanse and potential for

breakdown involved.    Moreover offenders would be detained at home on match days

and not just excluded from grounds.

                            I do respectfully urge you to consider the contribution

which electronic tagging could make to the removal of the convicted football

hooligan from all public places on days when football matches are played,


                                                     S-vvv
