                            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                               Type of Inquiry


 1.   The Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1921 provides a statutory

 procedure for inquiring into an event of national importance.      The

 Act enables witnesses to be subpoenaed, whereas a non-statutory

 departmental inquiry does not.    The Salmon Report into Tribunals of

 Inquiry 1 9 6 6 set out criteria which should be satisfied before the

 Act is invoked.   The Report stated that the Act should "always be

 confined to matters of vital public importance concerning which

 there is something in the nature of a nation-wide crisis of

 confidence".   Serious and tragic as the Hillsborough disaster was,

 the issues which it raises do not really satisfy the criteria in
the Salmon Report.

2.    It is not necessary for the 1921 Act procedure to be used,

whenever a disaster occurs which results in loss of life.     The

Popplewell Inquiry showed that a-non-statutory inquiry is perfectly

capable of carrying out a thorough investigation of the facts of a

serious accident such as the Hillsborough tragedy and of making

recommendations to remedy deficiencies.    If there is serious doubt

whether witnesses who have relevant evidence to give will be

prepared to give that evidence without being required to do so

there may be a case for considering whether a statutory procedure,

such as that provided for under the 1921 Act, which enables witnesses

to be compelled to give evidence, should be invoked.    But there is

no reason, at present,   to suppose that that will be the case.
    Experience has shown that 1921 Act inquiries tend to be extemely

    lengthy and not necessarily -more effective at eliciting the truth

    than extra-statutory inquiries.          What is required, in the present

    circumstances,   is a speedy investigation, which can ascertain the

    facts and recommend measures to prevent such a disaster happening

£   again.   The inquiry which has been set up is the most appropriate

    means of securing that objective.




                                    -   2-
