                                                         fl 0 AUG 1989
                              (XKFLLMEITAT,




MMR298
                                      cc      Mr Starr
                                              Hiss Adams
                                              Mr Yates
                                              HMCie—
                                              Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
                                              Mr Norris
                                              Mr Addison
                                              Mr Soden



MOTE TOR THE RECORD




HILLSBOROUGH - S0D3H TCEKSHIRE FOIICE ADTBDRITY



The Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority, Mr Robert Johnston,
telephoned me yesterday to ask whether the Home Office might wish to be
represented at the special meeting of the Police Authority to be held
in 10 days' time to consider the resignation offer from the Chief
Constable following publication of the Hillsborough Report.    He had
not, at that stage, sounded his Chairman but wished to be clear in his
mind as to what the arguments were.


2. I reserved my position, and discussed the matter with HMCIC.     We
concluded that:-


     (i)     the Home Secretary, having decided that his
             responsibilities under the Police Act did not need to be
             engaged and having taken a neutral position as to whether
             the Chief Constable should stay or go, would not want the
            Home Office as such to be represented or involved in the
             Police Authority's decision;


     (ii)    if the Home Office was present or known to be involved, it
            would very likely feed speculation either that the Home
                             ocHFmmnaL                                    i
                              COMFTEBErraL

              Secretary was trying to oust the Chief Constable, or
              alternatively (depending which way the decision eventually
              went) to protect him;


      (iii   the Police Authority would face the comparable
              difficulties if it chose to associate the Home Office with
              its deliberations;


      (iv)   there were no substantial national considerations which
              the South Yorkshire Police Authority needed to take into
              account (though the Presidency of ACPO and the position of
              other chief constables in a similar situation would no
              doubt be in their minds);


      (v)    the Police Authority were entitled to the independent
              professional advice of HM Inspectorate as to what the best
              interests of the force required in the immediate future
              (eg as between the Chief Constable's immediate departure
              from office, or his staying on. whether M s resignation is
              accepted or not, to see the force through the next
             difficult weeks and months before any successor could
             conceivably came into place - and the position of the
             deputy and his ability to contribute would be part of
             that).


3.   Accordingly I spoke to Mr Johnston again and said that the Home
Office would not feel it right to be associated with the Police
Authority's deliberations for the foregoing reasons, but that if the
Authority felt the need of independent professional advice on what was
in the best interests of the leadership of the force over the immediate
future, HM Inspectorate of Constabulary would be ready to give such
advice but would not wish to be present during the Police Authority's
special meeting and their deliberations.     In effect, a briefing to the
Chairman or Vice Chairman before or after the Committee's meeting would
be more proper.



                              OOMFIDBfnAIi
                               OCMFlUtKnAL
                                                                                                  •       .       V

                                                    “ '' ' ^                     V-i- ■-;-irv'v\
                                                           .
                                                                 •
                                                                     ;v;":          .•'
                                                                                   .■**   .   ,
                                                                                                          '   .

                                                                      ; • ; :-                        :



4.   Mr Johnston noted the views X expressed, and said he would dcnsult
his Vice Chairman in the Chairman's absence.    I later told HMCXC how
matters stood.   We wait to hear from Mr Johnston whether any asa-igt-arvo
from HMIC is to be sought by the Committee.




                                              J A CHHP3T
                                              8 A u gu st 1989




                              OCMKEEBWIM,
