 W K                                                  u                /


E.R.                                                  U     M
   NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 9 OCTOBER 1989
                                                          JVCl U/+ 4   Va ^




   MEETING WITH THE POLICE FEDERATION, METROPOLITAN POLICE
                                                                 Itx
   Present:    Home Secretary                Mr Exworth
               Mr Hill                       Mr Bennett
               Mr Storr



       The meeting had been arranged to enable the Home Secretary
   to discuss with representatives of the Federated ranks of the
   Metropolitan Police any issues of mutual concern before the
   AGM of the Metropolitan Police Federation.

   2. The discussion initially centred on the speech to be given
   by the Metropolitan Police Federation Chairman. The following
   main points were raised:

         (i)   the Home Secretary said that he might respond to
               the public order passages in Mr Bennett1s speech by
               simply commenting that after any police operation
               there were claims either that too many or too few
               officers had been used.  It was better, in his view,
               to use too many police officers;

        (ii)   Mr Bennett said that the Federation were right
               behind the Commissioner's "plus programme".  But
               they felt that progress was suffering because of
               the absence of support from middle management in
               the Metropolitan Police, some of whom were rather
               cynical about its aims;

       (iii)   Mr Bennett was likely to refer to an improved
               relationship with the Crown Prosecution Service in
               his speech. But he mentioned to the Home Secretary
               that he had very good evidence that, in considering
               cases for prosecution, the CPS were routinely
               disregarding finger print evidence;

        (iv)   the Federation representatives thought that the
               delay by ACPO in putting forward their views on
               administrative discharge was because they were
               finding it difficult to support their contention
               that there was a problem which needed resolving.
               The Metropolitan Police Federation view was that
               any administrative discharge scheme would be limited
               in effect to constables; chief officers of police
               would be most reluctant in practice to take action
               against senior officers in whose appointment they
               had had a hand. They felt that any such system
               would need an appeals procedure to avoid officers


                                                  /being dismissed
E.R.
                                  2.



                being dismissed due to personality clashes. It
                would also need to provide opportunities for an
                officer under threat of dismissal to mend his ways.
                The Home Secretary accepted that there was merit
                in this latter point, although he had reservations
                about a formal appeals procedure;

          (v)   Mr Bennett said that he would be attempting to put
                crime screening into a proper perspective in his
                speech. The Home Secretary would include a message
                to similar effect in his own speech;

         (vi)   Mr Exworth reported that he had been surprised at
                the number of calls received by the Federation
                following Mr Eastwood's public call for a return of
                capital punishment. Many officers, particularly
                young officers, seemed to be against the return of
                capital punishment and felt instead that the
                Federation should concentrate on sentencing policy.
                It was Mr Exworth's view that very few officers
                thought that capital punishment would ever return.
                The impact of the Home Secretary's statement that
                since 1965 no person who had murdered a police
                officer had ever been released from prison had been
                considerable.  Both Mr Bennett and Mr Exworth
                thought that the Federation would now need to
                consider whether its official policy should remain
                one of advocating the return of capital punishment.
                He hinted at his own preference for writing into
                statute a policy of never releasing from prison
                those who had murdered police officers;

        (vii)   the Home Secretary repeated to the Metropolitan
                Police Federation representatives the coded warning
                which he had given National Federation
                representatives at Torquay about the mechanic** for
                determining rent allowance and other allowances.
                The point was acknowledged but did not seem to have
                been fully understood, despite its being made in
                fairly straightforward terms;

       (viii)   Mr Exworth raised the question of insurance
                companies who were seeking to attract business from
                police officers who chose to opt out of the police
                pension scheme.  Police Federation representatives
                were convinced that one company in particular was
                indulging in sharp practice. The Federation had
                been threatened with legal proceedings for saying as
                much.

  3. After the meeting, the Home Secretary set out the points
  which he wished his own speech to cover

                                                   / (i)
E.R.
                                 3.


               the policing of London in the last year - public
               order policing involved a judgment by the senior
               officer on the number of police officers deployed;
               there would always be accusations that too many or
               too few were involved. The Home Secretary's view
               was that it was always better to have officers in
               reserve;

        (ii)   crime figures were deceptive. Cite the influence on
               national crime figures of the increased reporting of
               domestic incidents. Crime figures were not a
               suitable measure of police effectiveness;

       (iii)   the number of assaults on police officers and
               serious attacks by groups of people resisting arrest
               were both sources of concern.  The shooting of
               Inspector Codling had reminded everyone of the debt
               society owed to the individual police officer. The
               abhorrence which people felt for this sort of crime
               was reflected in the fact that since 1965, when
               capital punishment was abolished, no one who had
               murdered a police officer had been released from
               prison;

       (iv)    much of what had been written by the media about
               crime screening was inaccurate.  In particular, it
               was wrong to suggest that some crimes were screened
               out entirely. All crimes reported were subject to
               an initial investigation.  It was sensible to devote
               resources to those crimes which the initial evidence
               suggested might repay further investigation.  But
               some crimes were so serious in nature that they
               would be investigated whatever the quality of
               evidence;

        (v)    the speech should emphasise that resources for
               manpower, police budgets, police vehicles and police
               buildings came out of the same pot as resources for
               pay and allowances. The demands on the resources
               available must affect how the Government looked at
               pay and allowances. There was no desire to
               prejudice the position of serving officers as far as
               allowances were concerned, but the Home Secretary
               had to be mindful of the future;

       (vi)    the speech should include a truncated passage,
               following that in the Home Secretary's recent
               speech to the ACPO conference, on the future of
               policing.



                                                  Follow- UP
Follow-up Action

4.     (i ) I should be grateful for a draft speech
            which covers the points set out above by
            noon on Friday 13 October. (Mr Townsend:
            for draft speech please);

      (ii)   the Home Secretary would be grateful for a
             note on Mr Bennett's allegation that the
             CPS in London were ignoring finger print
             evidence in cases submitted for possible
             prosecution.  (Mr Townsend: for advice
             please.)




Private Office                                    P R C STORR
10 October 1989                                Private Secretary


cc.    Ms Snow
       Mr Chilcot
       HMCIC
       Mr Boys Smith
       Mr Norris
       Mr Wasserman
       Mr Mower
       Mr Addison
       Mr Soden
       Mr Heal
       Mr Warne
       Mrs Catto
       Mr Cane
       Mr Goddard
       Mrs Lee
      —Mr Whalloy— *
       Mr Nagler

      Mr Hid .
\\




     »
