                                   6 March 1990

Mrs M S
Cl Division
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT


Dear Mrs Sadler

FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS - USE OF SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES

Thank you for your letter ref CHN 90 401/11/3 dated 7 February 1990.

I see no problems at all in implementing the aims laid down.   Most
certainly I see no snags in having the centre open each Saturday and
I have already sounded out staff at the centre and the Polytechnic
authorities to this end.  Frankly, and in my case, I would not
envisage having to engage any further sta f f .

If powers were to be made enabling persons over the age of 21 years
to receive an attendance centre order I feel that and, again in my
case, this would present no problem.  May I point out that within the
present age structure of persons eligible for attendance centre
orders reference to previous convictions will show that some of these
young persons are far more hardened and vicious than perhaps many of
today's football hooligans over the age of twenty one years.

Reference is made regarding people who, having been to prison, become
ineligible for an attendance order.   (Para 329).  It is my experience
when returning people to court for failing to comply with an
attendance order, to find that the incidence of a magistrate
remanding an offender in prison for three weeks for preparation of
probation reports is quite common.  On his re-appearance before the
Bench it is also quite common to have the original order revoked and
a greater attendance order implemented.   It is amazing how in many
cases the experience of having been to prison acts as a spur to
complete the attendance centre order.

N.B. The three weeks spent in prison would be equal to a six weeks
sentence in a young offenders' institution, less remission.

I trust that I have been able to help you in your deliberations and
if I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact
me.
                                        Yours faithfully


                                        J
                              i/c Manchester Senior Attendance Centre
