          F A X              m e s s a g e                  :




From ,    ....................T S H l H W . . . M ..............
           ...........
                                  P M . M t'SL... ..iwav*-



To   :                            fJtyf.... .L..                                      ........ ............. .
                                             ••-.Of         fV lC• >lM4 N
           • • • • • • • • • • ' i Tf • _ ' • • • » • • • • • • •          IW
                                                                        • «v « • -•      l^lklvM£6CHAlCr
                                                                                      • • • •  • • • • • • • • V   • • • • • • • •   •

                                 Mwv                  .. .of. .N^WJ&tf\& r. yifo.Nr.TW. ___



Date :                                   K it VI



No of Pages :                       io




A dditional Info :



                                    | • • • • • M« • • • • • • • # • • * » i • •                • • ••   •         V > « • i • I • •

                                    k i.fo to M tk . m . .%<. M y . M M to M .
                                    W!*. J i .   . t o m .. iw>..«..,. tw A . Mffc
                                    ..$ ..^ ..W ...W ^ » ..* ...w ll..4K ..t!..
                        TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY
                          SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES


Introduction

In its review of the technical aspects of safety, the Technical
Working Party considered the contents and the presentation of the
Green Guide in detail. The principal conclusions of the review
and the consequent recommendations are contained in the main
Report to the Inquiry. But in view of the extent of the material
covered, it seemed best to assemble the detailed suggestions for
change in this separate document.       It is put forward as a
contribution to a new edition of the Green Guide.

Chapters 1-4    (Introduction, Management Responsibility, General
                Fabric and Structural Matters, Inspections and
                Tests)

The Technical Working Party considers that a greater degree of
standardisation in the definition and implementation of safety
requirements should be reflected in the opening chapters.    The
role of the Football Licensing Authority, or an equivalent body,
and its relationship to certifying authorities in matters of
safety should be spelt out.

Consideration should be given to a re-ordering of management
responsibilities (para 29) so as to group related aspects such as
planning of events, operational procedure, training, inspection
and tests.

There is a rather unpdnny overlap to material in Chapter 3
(General Fabric and Structural Matters), Chapter 4 (Inspections
and Tests) and later Chapters such as Chapter 9 (Crush Barriers
and Handrails) and Annex C (Testing of Crush Barriers and
Handrails.   Interpretation would be improved by a more systematic
classification of requirement.     In particular, a comprehensive
listing of recommended inspections and tests, which could be
grouped    according to technical content,      would be helpful
(example?).

Chapter 5. 6 (Ingress and Egress)

NB's working papers (amended as required).

Chapter 7 (Stairways and Ramps)

N B 1s working paper.
                                  ■ y z r.                                                                                                   v.:,'        '■'■■ ■ V,
                                                                                                                            •: v ,- - - .
                                                                                                                                            ‘-                 ''
              ■    ■■-.-

I P               :
                                                                                                                                                 WP 89 (M)5
                                                                                   --                 -
                                                                          ; •■■;                          '’
. V ; 7. :                                                                                    -’A '



mm^                                           » D im r
                           TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY  ' •• -         :.,V                 .v.           - v , . . ' . , . .

                                                        __
r :. v> ;•.   ■•                                                                                                                                          *S
                                      WEDNESDAY 13
■Vi-y-.
• :.;r -


                           Present:          Professor L Maunder                   (Chairman)
                                             Mr N Bush
                                             Mr W Carter
                                             Mr M Dickson
                                             Dr C Nicholson
                                             Mr B Stickley:
                                             Mr J Sweet

                                                                                                                                                 Action
V:r                        Agenda Item 1 - Minutes of Previous Meeting


                           1.    The minutes of the meeting on Tuesday 28 November
                           were agreed, subject to Mr Dickson’s dissatisfaction
                           with the worsting of para 35 (ii).                      He would write to
                           the Secretary.                                                                                                        Dickson


                                    Item 2 - Matters Arising
                           Alternative Designs Submitted to the Inguirv


                           2.    It was agreed that Working Party members would
                           give consideration to the letters and designs
                           circulated by the Secretary, to whom any follow-up
                           comments were to be addressed.                                                                                   ! All Mejnbers


                           Guide to Fire Precautions In Existing Places of



                           3.    Mr Sweet confirmed that this document had not yet
                           been published by the Home Office/Scottish Office.                                                         It
                           had been the subject of considerable comment and
                           revision, but a final draft had now been prepared and
                                Home Office hoped to publish shortly.
a




                                               vy
                                                             Action

Agenda Item 3 - Visit to Milan/Rome


4.   This had been an instructive visit which had
reinforced awareness of the different approach adopted
by other European countries towards the organisation
and administration of football.    In Italy, as, in France
and Holland, it was clear that central and local
government contributed both directly and indirectly to
the financing of the game.


5.   A substantial number of police (up to 1200) were
on duty for each 'high-risk1 game, paid for by central
government, and they exercised total control over
security and crowd control matters.     Similarly,
redevelopment costs - at San Siro Stadium, Milan, a
third tier of seating was being constructed to raise
capacity from 66,000 to 87,000 - were met from
government funds.    Government funding was also being
made available to upgrade stadia in readiness for the
1990 World Gup.


6.   On a number of technical aspects, however, there
seemed some uncertainty as to the impact of central
regulation.   Conflicting views were heard as to whether
or not provision for emergency access onto the pitch
was mandatory, and there appeared to be no consistent
figure for crowd density.    Residual standing at San
Siro was believed to be in the region of 20 persons per
10 sq metres;     a more generally expressed figure in
Rome both for standing and seating fell within the 35r
40 persons per 10 sq metres range.


7.   It was clear that, particularly under the auspices
of the Olympic organisation, CONI, much useful work was
now being done to improve standardisation;     a number of
CONI documents were circulated and any others
subsequently obtained would be passed on to Working
Party members.                                               Sweet
Agenda Item 4 -W or k i ng Party Submission to the Inquiry


8.    Professor Maunder explained the background to the
draft Report.   Since the Working Party Report was
likely to be included in Lord Justice Taylor's Final
Report, the intention was to produce a fairly concise
document, summarising the work carried out, the topics
studied and the main recommendations reached.      More
detailed supplementary notes, perhaps based on the
minutes and working papers, could also be supplied but
would not be for publication.


9.    Since preparing the draft, Professor Maunder had.
given further thought to the establishment of a central
body (perhaps an Advisory Design Council) to draw on
available expertise and professional skills and to
provide an authoritative source of knowledge for
utilisation by all those involved in the design and
construction of stadia.   It would operate independently
of any inspectorate body, which would probably fall
under the aegis of the Football Licensing Authority,
and would accumulate data applicable to a wide range of
multi-use stadia.


10.   The idea found widespread support among Working
Party members who recognised that the absence of such a
body had retarded efforts to improve stadia design and
to disseminate information, which, in turn, had led to
ad-hoc, piecemeal advances and a lack of common
standards.   Such a Design Council could operate on a
modest, permanent level, commissioning expert advice
when necessary, and would provide the professional
continuity currently lacking.   It was agreed to
recommend such a body to the Inquiry in the Working
Party Report, and to suggest the Football Association
as the likely 'parent body'.


11.   It was clear, on reflection, that the draft of the
                                                                 Action
Report suffered from a number of omissions and needed
to incorporate elements on   i)     stairways, ramps and
gradients (including tunnels);      ii)   provision for the
disabled and handicapped; iii)      gangways;   and more
detail on iv)   the crush barrier testing procedure;
and v)   emergency access/perimeter gates to the pitch.
The Working Party's terms of reference emphasised the
technical nature of the groups ambit, and it was
yecognised that detailed comment on stewarding would be
for Lord Justice Taylor.   Nonetheless, the Working
Party Report could note its importance in the
introductory remarks.


12.   Consideration was given to the best means of
incorporating the elements outlined above (Paragraph
11) and after detailed discussion it was agreed that Mr
Bush would provide a draft section and (later, if                "Bush
necessary) supplementary notes on (i), Mr Sticklev on             Stlckley
(ii), and Dr Nicholson and Mr Dickson on (iv).         'Time     Nicholson/
                                                                 Dickson
was of the essence, and it was therefore agreed that
these would be forwarded to the Secretary by close of
play on Tuesday 19 December.      Other elements for
inclusion would be dealt with by Professor Maunder/Mr            Maunder/
                                                                 Sweet
Sweet direct.


13.   It was clear, too, that a number of drafting
revisions needed to be made to the existing text.          The
section on Inspection and Tests needed expansion,
alternations and some deletions needed to be made to
the section on capacities, there were minor amendments
elsewhere, and the Introduction needed to be re-written
to reflect the Report's applicability to a wide range
of sporting events and venues, and the severe time
constraints under which the Working Party had been
operating.   Again, it was agreed that these matters
would be dealt with by Professor Maunder/Mr Sweet.               Maunder/
                                                                 Sweet

14.   A revised draft would therefore be prepared for
circulation on Wednesday 20 December.      Any comments
would need to be made immediately to the Secretary
since it was hoped to present the Working Party Report
to Lord Justice Taylor before Christmas.     The
supplementary notes setting out in more detail the
Working Party's detailed deliberations could be dealt
with later if need be.


Agenda Item 5 - Any Other Business/
Agenda Item 6 - Date and Place of Next Meeting


15.   This was to be the last formal meeting of the
Technical Working Party.     Professor Maunder     therefore
expressed his gratitude to all its members for the
integrity, commitment and enthusiasm with which they
had approached their task.     He realised that the
timetable to which they had been working had imposed a
heavy burden;   the fact that so much had been achieved
was due in large part to the co-operative spirit which
they had all displayed.


16.   For the members, Mr Bush thanked Professor Maunder
for the professionalism and imperturbabi1ity with which
he had chaired the meetings.
