From: SueMcDougall                             cc      Permanent Secretary
Operational Policing Policy Unit                       Mr Boys Smith
Room 527                                               Mr Halliday
8 273 2621                                             Mr Morris
                                                       Miss Loudon
                                                       Mr Pugh
                                                       Miss Weston
                                                       Mr Clifford
                                                       Mr Granatt
                                                       Mr Rock
                                                    <• Miss Whetstone



Mr Maclean simultaneous
Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH


Issue
On 17 December you gave an undertaking in the House o f Commons to consider whether
there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. Richard Wells
Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire was asked to examine each o f the questions raised and
consider whether there was any new evidence. This submission reports on his findings, on the
representations made by members o f Hillsborough Family Support Group and considers
whether you should make and announce a decision.


Timing
2.       You have not indicated when you will come to a decision, other than to say it will be
as soon as possible, but the outcome is awaited with keen interest by those involved.


Summary and Recommendation
3.       In his letter attached at A, Richard Wells concludes:
         It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary “Hillsborough “provided no
         new evidence upon which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Taylor’s
         originalfindings.
Having examined the transcripts o f the evidence supplied by South Yorkshire Police, watched
the video film which Granada suggested might be new evidence, and examined the video tapes
produced by the Hillsborough Family Support Group, we agree with Richard Wells’
assessment. The material has also been considered by officials in the CPS, and by the
Attorney General’s Office. None o f those who have examined it consider that there is the
evidence to justify a public inquiry, a reopening o f the inquest, or the prosecution of
individuals. But we recognise that a decision not to reopen the inquiry is unlikely to satisfy the
Hillsborough Family Support Group, who have managed to generate a certain political
momentum and who claim, and have media support for the view, that they have been the
victims o f a miscarriage o f justice. You may therefore wish to consider whether the evidence
should be further considered by officials or independently examined. This is further discussed
in paragraphs 22 and 23.


Consideration
4.     The programme Hillsborough was a drama documentary which followed three families
through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme claimed that it uncovered new
evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The programme makers, the bereaved
families, Mr Peter Kilfoyle, the member for Liverpool Walton, David Sheppard, the Bishop of
Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror have been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened.
The issue has generated 47 Ministers’ cases and 114 letters from the public all but one of
which have been in favour o f a fresh inquiry.


5.     In the Commons you said that you would only reopen the inquiry if you were
convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so, in coming to that decision you would
“ consider whether there is any new evidence and if so, whether that evidence is o f such
significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or before the Coroner, either the outcome
o f Taylor inquiry or the verdict o f the jury would have been different.” A further reason for
reopening the inquiry might be if there were evidence to suggest that there had been some kind
o f police conspiracy or cover up. Factors which would weigh against re-opening the inquiry
would include the difficulty in establishing the truth eight years after the event took place, the
implied criticism that the Taylor inquiry had not been thorough, the cost, the pain which such




smd-0077                                         2
a fresh inquiry might bring to those involved in the disaster, and finally the possibility that after
an inquiry the bereaved would still feel dissatisfied.


6.       Any decision on whether or not to reopen the inquiry must take account o f what it
might achieve. Unlike some inquiries which might be criticised for changing nothing, Lord
Taylor’s recommendations have been far reaching. They have included the introduction o f all
seater stadia and have been instrumental in ensuring that there have been no major incidents at
football grounds over the last eight years. Lord Taylor was robust in his criticism o f the police.
He found that the disaster was caused by a number o f factors o f which the police lack o f
control had played a major part. The Granada programme, Hillsborough, though it contained
some references to the inquiry appeared almost wilfully to ignore its thoroughness. It is highly
likely therefore that many people who saw the programme would not have realised the extent
to which the questions raised had been examined by the inquiry nor the severity with which the
police were criticised.


7.       Since the programme there have been three separate categories o f questions raised.
These are:
• the ten supposedly unresolved questions which Granada identified.
• other questions which are implied by the Granada press release;
• the specific allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
     opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, attached at C, that in his view “
     these new pieces o f evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


8.       The ten unresolved questions were the most easy to consider. Richard Wells has
provided us with answers to each, and pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in
respect o f each o f the questions. This is at Annex B - we have not included the supporting
transcripts but these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to
consider whether the inquiry reached the right conclusion - that would have been impossible
without undertaking an investigation on the scale o f the original inquiry which itself lasted six
months and generated 107 files - nor have we pursued every possible point o f detail arising
from the recent allegations. Rather, we have sought to establish, first whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised and secondly whether the evidence put forward in



smd-0077                                           3
recent months was available at the time o f the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that none o f the
evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the time o f the Taylor
inquiry. We were impressed by the feet that in eight cases not only did the Taylor Inquiry
consider the questions but made specific recommendations as a result o f their deliberations.


9.      Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press release they
took the form o f loosely connected questions which suggested, though did not overtly assert,
that there had been a police cover up. We also met members o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it became clear that whilst their allegations
were similar to those implied by Granada they took a more extreme form. The families firmly
believe that there was a conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midland Police, who
conducted the investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role o f the
police in the disaster. The families feel that, as a result o f this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case o f the
inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict o f accidental death when, they consider, a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.


10.     There does not appear to be anything o f substance in the claims, though in view o f the
police response in the immediate aftermath o f the disaster and perhaps a continuing degree of
defensiveness from some South Yorkshire officers which we have observed, it is possible to
see why the families have come to the view that they have. We found that the families put a
sinister twist to events or omissions which do not appear to be significant to more
dispassionate observers. A good example o f this is their complaint about the appointment o f
West Midlands Police as the investigating force at a time when its credibility had been
damaged by the activities o f the serious crime squad; at first sight this decision appears
unfortunate in such a sensitive case, but in fact it was not until August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad.


11.     Detailed consideration o f the points raised by Granada and by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group and by Alun Jones QC is at Annex D but there are two main strands which are
central to their case: first the questions surrounding the video tapes and secondly the questions




smd-0077                                          4
surrounding Dr Ed Walker’s testimony though in fact the latter are more directly relevant to
calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry.




The “missing” video tapes


12.    Many o f the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by South
Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number o f misunderstandings and whilst the
police have acted correctly in supplying all material which has been specifically requested it is
perhaps a matter o f regret that they have not been more proactive in seeking to allay the
families’ concerns. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in their entirety;
if these had been made available at the outset some o f the concerns which are now being
expressed might have not have arisen.


13.    Briefly, there is confusion about two events. One set o f tapes was stolen on the night
o f the disaster; Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police control centre
within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility in a
separate recording suite; this was under the supervision o f the Club and the police had no
control in its operation. During the night o f the disaster two video tapes went missing from
that particular room; the discovery o f the theft was recorded as a crime and West Midlands
police made enquiries to trace the person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are
still missing. O ne o f the tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown

the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground. Neither would have given a view o f the
terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were probably stolen
by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police erroneously believed to
be damaging. South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a key to the room and
that they considered one motive for the theft could have been that the tapes could have shown
irregularities in the way that admissions were handled at the turnstiles that could have
implicated club employees. These missing tapes have been confused by some commentators,
though not the families, with the video tapes held by South Yorkshire




smd-0077                                         5
The police videos.
14.     Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South Yorkshire Police
might represent new material which had not been seen by the Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire
have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that for the most part they are o f no
consequence showing general views o f the stadium and surroundings. In the final half hour
before the disaster occurred the recording is almost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside
the turnstiles. It does not show the gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove
therefore that the police knew the extent o f the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot
be said to represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability o f the police, by showing
the extent o f the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate how it was
that Duckenfield came to lose sight o f what was happening elsewhere.


15.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that it was withheld because it showed that one o f
the police cameras - no 5 - was working when the police asserted in evidence to Taylor and to
the inquest it was not. The significance o f this camera was that it might have been used to
zoom in on the central pens to show the extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is
clear that the video evidence, including a detailed transcript o f its contents, was made available
to Taylor. The inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself has
given rise to allegations which are discussed in the annex C.


16.     The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a matter of
interpretation. The families believe that PC Bichard misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our
reading o f the transcripts suggest that he claimed the camera was not working very well: this
continues to be the police view. This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward by the police; we do not see any evidence that pictures from camera 5 were any less
clear than those from any o f the other cameras. But we do not believe that this divergence of
view is significant.




smd-0077                                         6
Calls for a new inquest


17.    The families have also appealed to the Attorney General to recommend a new inquest,
proffering the testimony o f Dr Ed Walker. He claimed in an article in Hospital Doctor that he
tended Philip Hammond whom he says was alive after 3.15. If true, this would not appear to
be a strong enough reason for the Attorney to recommend a new inquest. Dr Walker’s
testimony is not in any case conclusive. It transpires that he did give a statement at the time of
the disaster. In it, Dr Walker said o f a boy whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:
        “Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He was of
       a similar age (around 12- 14 years) with blond hair. He was also in Cardiopulmonary
       /arrest. I intubated him and noticed evidence of gross inhalation o f stomach contents.
       He also had marked gaseous abdominal distension possibly indicating that he had
       has mouth to mouth resuscitation at some time.


       I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was also
       established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and dilated
       throughout, and I believe he has since died. ”


The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear whether
there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty did not appear at the time to
contradict the findings o f the Home Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead
by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence because the consultant in charge James
Wardrobe presented a composite picture.


18.    Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new inquest, as
I pointed out in my submission o f 26 February, evidence that some o f the deceased may have
survived beyond 3.15 has not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the
past and this view was upheld by Lord Justice McCowan in the Judicial Review o f the
Coroner’s decision in November 1993. He found that in respect o f one o f the victims there
was “a realistic probability” he was alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:




smd-0077                                        7
        " I have discovered no good reason fo r ordering a new inquest or fo r merely
       quashing the existing verdict.


       If I hadfound such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following matters
       would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose o f a fresh inquest? To get a
        verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already beenfirm ly levelled by the
        Taylor Report. The police have admittedfault and paid compensation. To get a
        verdict criticising the emergency services? I see no evidence to justify such criticism,
       and in any event it would be irrelevant if all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To
        obtain further examination o f the last minutes o f their lives. I doubt that anything
        more would be learned, but the process would be a very harrowing one involving
        large numbers o f witnesses and lasting if notfo r 96 days, fo r notfa r short. Moreover,
        irrespective ofwhose fa u lt, if anyone’s, it is , the fact is thatfour and a halfyears
        have already passed since the tragedy occurred As to the alternative suggestion o f a
        mere quashing o f the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would regard
        that as absolutely valueless.


19.    A further complication with the demands for a new inquest is that whilst the families
speak o f the inquest as though it were one event with a single verdict it was in law 90 separate
inquests held together. For a verdict o f “lack o f care” to be brought forward, the evidence
would have to be considered to support that view in the circumstances that each individual
died rather than as a view o f the total disaster.




Other possible reasons to reopen the inquiry


20.    Whilst we concluded that there was no new evidence which would justify reopening
the inquiry we also considered whether, despite this, it would be in the families’ interests to
reopen the inquiry. It is perhaps useful first to consider what the families hope might be
achieved by such a course. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr
Philip Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster; they agreed with my
suggestion that Taylor had done a good job, though they maintained that there were aspects of




smd-0077                                             8
the inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
inquest verdict to be a gross miscarriage o f justice which they equated to the Bridgewater
case. They strongly criticised the coroner’s selection o f witnesses as well as the cut off time of
3.15 after which he would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce
a finding o f death through “lack o f care” or “unlawful killing”, “ rather than accidental death”.
It appears therefore that the calls for a fresh inquiry are not so much an end in itself but a
means by which they hope that the Attorney would come to reopen the inquest, or failing that,
a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there were to be a
change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure from the families on the
Director o f Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges. A point which has been repeatedly
emphasised by the media in this case is that no policeman was ever prosecuted and that no
policeman was ever disciplined. However as is shown below, in the absence o f anything far
more substantive coming to light, this is not a possibility.


Criminal charges


21.    The question o f prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he announced in
September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute anyone in respect o f the
disaster. The CPS Code o f Practice sets out the circumstances when decisions to prosecute
can be reconsidered. This includes cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that
there needs to be a high threshold in such cases because o f the principle o f finality - that
people should be able to rely on their decisions. Hillsborough has been thoroughly considered
on several occasions and although new evidence could trigger a prosecution, the CPS
recognise that this would be a popular decision, they have found no evidence o f any
wrongdoing that would justify criminal charges. The most they believe that they have found is
that Mr Bichard regarded the quality o f the recordings less favourably than Mr Houldsworth.
The CPS lawyer who investigated this point commented “ I cannot prosecute somebody for
their assessment o f the standard o f videos.”




smd-0077                                          9
Police disciplinary charges


22.     A further cause for bitterness among the families o f the victims is the fact that no
disciplinary charges were upheld against any members o f the police. After the DPP’s decision
not to prosecute, the Police Complaints Authority decided that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges, but these did not
reach a conclusion because Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired because o f ill health
before the disciplinary tribunal’s ruling on whether or not he was guilty. The Police
Complaints Authority announced subsequently that disciplinary proceedings would be
withdrawn against Mr Murray explaining that what in effect was joint allegation o f neglect of
duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior officer. Superintendent Murray
has also left the force. South Yorkshire Police inform us that all other officers involved in the
case have left with the exception o f Mr Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it
might be argued that Mr Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the
police position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short o f being involved in a cover-up o f the
kind suggested by the families. It would appear a very odd decision if he were to be pursued
for his involvement, eight years after the event, when the officers in charge o f policing were
not.


Next steps


22.     If a desire for a change in the inquest verdict, prosecutions or, at a minimum,
disciplinary action against former officers is a motivation behind the calls for an inquiry, it also
follows that a decision to reopen the inquiry would not in itself bring finality. The families
would still feel disappointed: we understand that they are examining whether it might be
possible to take the case to the European Court o f Human Rights. There is no likelihood
therefore that the families will accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence
but will see such a decision as a further indication o f the establishment sticking up for its own.
You may therefore wish to consider whether there could be merit in asking a respected
barrister or member o f the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment o f the evidence
that has been compiled as is suggested in Alun Jones’ opinion. This could be a limited




smd-0077                                          10
exercise; we would not suggest that the person chosen should hear testimony as that would
effectively be a reopening o f the inquiry itself but he or she could look once more at the
evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider written representations. Though
this in itself is unlikely to satisfy the families, other than temporarily, it might help convince the
wider public that there was no conspiracy. The disadvantage o f such a course would be that
there could still be dissatisfaction both at the procedure and at the outcome if, as seems
inevitable, the recommendation was finally that no further actions should be taken. It would
also set a precedent which would be cited when the public were dissatisfied with the outcomes
o f other inquiries. It would remove the finality that inquiries are supposed to create. We do
not therefore recommend this course.


Handling
23.     If you decide that there should be a limited independent review o f the evidence the
announcement could be made quickly and would be welcomed by the media. If you decide that
this would only defer rather solve the problem then we need to prepare carefully for the
handling o f an announcement that there is to be no further action so that we are in a position
to satisfy the press that the questions raised have been properly examined. We suggest that
we should put up a further submission discussing the handling in detail. We understand that
the Attorney would not want to make any announcement about the inquest at the same time as
this would confuse his legal role with his role as part o f the Government, but at the same time
it is important that the Home Office and the Attorney’s Office are not played off against each
other. We will also need to consider who wall need to be informed and how this might best be
done; there are a number o f separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning o f the announcement
and the families who have made direct representations. One possible was o f handling this
might be for letters to be hand delivered to those most involved. We will supply drafts. The
timing o f the announcement is also important; it should not be too close to the anniversary of
the disaster 14 April.




                                         Sue McDougall




smd-0077                                          11
            South Yorkshire                                                         fVrvr^ex. ^

            POLICE                                              Richard Wells qpm. moxonx cm#.
                                                                Chief Constable
            JUSTICE     with   COURAGE




Police Policy Directorate                         Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)
Home Office                                       Our Ref:    D&C/JML/SW GSF 15/97
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                            Date:       3 February 1997
SW 1H 9AT




HILLSBOROUGH

Following the screening of the drama documentary "Hillsborough" on Thursday 5 December 1996
and your letter dated 20 December, I have now had the opportunity to study in some detail the
contents of the programme and to conduct further research.

As a result of the research into the material collected by W est Midlands Police for the Lord Justice
Taylor Inquiry and the transcripts of evidence given at that inquiry, two volumes of documents
have been compiled which cover the matters raised in your letter. It would serve no useful
purpose for me to transcribe certain parts of the evidence into this letter and it seems appropriate
to provide the documents to you in their present form.

Volume One deals with video evidence, together with comments from the coroner, Doctor Popper,
Home Office Pathologist, Professor Usher, Doctor Gumpet, a consultant neurologist, and
Doctor Slater. Also in these documents are comments from Police Constable Bichard concerning
the operation of the video cameras in question.

Let me say at the outset that no new evidence has emerged and the issues raised in the television
programme have all previously been aired in Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest.

Perhaps I can address specifically the concerns mentioned in your letter dated 20 December. First
of all I must emphasise once again that there is no new evidence. Secondly, you seek clarification
on whether film from a video camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor
Inquiry. Such a video film was made available to the Taylor Inquiry and a copy is enclosed for your
information, together with another video film, completing the video record available from police
sources, that day. The second video, like the first, was made available to Lord Justice Taylor. You
will see that they did not provide any useful information to the match commanders on the day of
the disaster and the programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
                                                    -2 -


  Police Policy Directorate                                          3 Febfua(y 1997



  Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the worKinas

                                              and hiS eVlde" “    ra n »   Z    ' h         “


 rv ^ b te °f? o m bthoBiChard -0ld th e .Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
 workfng                     3 ,n questl0n they were of P °or          although the camera was in fact


 There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
 nro T * i f V,dt nCe 9lven by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
 fo r n ^ H o ?h9 ^’ a s -' ha)'e previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
   cused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the taDe
 enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
 ont/Uw h l * “ " f 01 r? °m Personne' t0 scan ^ e ground and its environs but these record footage
 only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclosed
         5         s? fr0m Several cameras had been recorded on the day in question Where the
             ?  'S   P00f qUahty 1,160 that is      camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
 MiHiinHc D °I- y°fUr '"fo™ atlon 1 have also included a video schedule (prepared by the W est
 t a      ^     ' ^     t    y'° f ‘" T 1^ and inc,uded here in their original form) of these particular
 tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
 Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.


h i ^ h l i n y° Ur l6tter ° f 2 0 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes it
h-^ into          ISSUf “ US,n9 some confusion- W e clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean for
his intended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience I
             r c,anflcatl0n here- The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
                  Canl erascr we[e work'ng. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
re S ™             T?-ay      f ? lub alS0 had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
[®f°nrd|!l9shult®- Th,s    ent,re|y under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
              3 «n° ^ * 10 ltS °P eration- During the night following the disaster two video tapes
                 T       particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
             a I t r f a iThSet H - T h 0 they re!umed the next moming the room was still locked with the
alarm still amied. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
S o l ! ! 88     nC\ USe whatSQever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
     ?f     a Was trai']Ied on a brick walL The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
c ^ h f S 3 3[ea and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and W est Midlands police officers
made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

           po'nt raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
remaining alive after the initial crush.      That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
call a clearly defined cut off time.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.

A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.

Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.
                           QUESTION                 ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.



OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself



Lord Justice Taylor • Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training fo r such functions should be the subject
o f a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                          QUESTION                 TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience. Intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control,
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.



OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 7 - 1 5 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                         QUESTION                 THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?


Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 6 - 4 1 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not, however
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
control room.

227. The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
                                                                  G ^ v a j *vVVcm 3




Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
                            QUESTION                  FOUR

  Why didn t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
  terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
  Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

 No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
 overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4   Chief
 fnrt ?h      h?Pt Duck®"field saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
 and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him It would be fair to
 say ^ a t the view from the elevated position of football c o m J Z o u T h n Mwson !°
 the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
 let t ! n l COnCef ° f thH situation' and the fact that Ch*ef Superintendent Duckenfield's
 attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings




 OBSERVATIONS

 Please see pages 42-52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
fiSd           !h°m aP el®1!'ated Position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
°        per]meter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place fans
c o n T r o ! s,gnallin9 distress         None of this was seen or recognised in the


thJt' I I 2 ! offic®rs detailed t0 ‘he Perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so
S S r iS ?          7 W6re 31 the W6St 6nd Their written instructions made no
             J  avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
                     S?       Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.


   f h o ^ ? ? eratS na* ° rd6r f0r 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)”. At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a m inoTp^h
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowdina
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
 unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
 consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

 247. "Senior officer" meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in
 charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
 players' tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said.

 "I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
 were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
 to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I’m wrong, I’m going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed.     They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding interim
recommendation 5. That provided:-

  *    5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
\                                                                              C^VAA s YSu V*



    need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
    spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
    not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
    whichever is the lower.



    Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 11,12 and 16

    11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
    police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in
    particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
    monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
    Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
    writing in advance.

    12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
    pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring
    that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
    crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
    addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
    police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
    Recommendation 20 below.

     16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
    especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
    and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
    signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
    the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
    different crowd densities.
                         QUESTION                FIVE

Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?

The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.

The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel.
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

9.    Arrangements should be made:-

(a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
otherwise, and

 (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is
 about to be reached.
                           QUESTION                  SI X

Why did Chief Superintendent Ouckenfield mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
he believed correct in a crisis moment.

Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.


OBSERVATIONS

This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 80 -1 0 3 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
control room for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
that's been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans'
account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
their way in.

99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
emergency operations.
                        QUESTION                  SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.

Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, rightly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authonty and they decided that the gates should
be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.

Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
been at ground very very quickly.

Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson’s statement "that anyone who had
considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don’t think I am going to require a
lot of persuasion about that".

When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
equipment.
                                                                                  I (-rvv *~7


Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kit' on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement'. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.



OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 104 -1 3 7 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
                                                                           XAJ?i, K cxv "7


Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i O pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success.
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

 104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report


Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open w herever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
                                                                           'W c m      ^



Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipm ent should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 17 and 21

17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fencing to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
W hoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W hether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made • either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help • until 3.30 pm?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in Lhe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.



OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 138 -1 4 8 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutes ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

Fans

97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
                                                                        (ji^vAj2 s V crv\



the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop.
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end.
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.



Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                                  q u e s t i o n                                       n i n e


                                                                               thA around, did more not get on

r     r       s                                                                " » ■ «               •* ■» *        —         »
need of trained medical help?




    ^             »           1           2           tS r                      3                    SS«aJ s
    egress to the playing area.                                                                 rt^ ble ,o       t a k e   ambulances onto

    Mr Higgins SYMAS t                o           o       k            g       o        i       n        g       o n tt» |J . *


             The evacuation of the ,n,u relan d dead toth e                                                  ^    |( he|pe(J ^       opera„on
                                                                                                 -           dealt with in is o .,o n out




               ^
     and preparing
                          ^
                          ym
                                  s           s       s            s       s        -— ”—
                                                                                    s       s        r
                                                                                        a ving access and egress to the playing

     r r sa jss                                           m                w \iS! - - - s s a s
      ^ o w        " b !S n P
                            cesy onto me playing area was correct.



       OBSERVATIONS
          Please see pages 149 -1 5 6 , Volume 2


          Lord Justice Taylor-interim Report
          LOiQ                                                                                                                                  .
          296 I say at the outset of this c h a fe r that no vaU d ai W .m                                                        M ja j^
          296. I say at in        AmBulance Bngade. by s>y m k = o »                                                               The on|y attack
           ? Sr f n d e e d   no r e p " e d                      party ventured any




            i r S i n “?vU“ «P,r                              i
                                                                                   ssr -a ssr
                                                                       attempt to use a d e f l a t o r on the ptch vMh
\
                                                                              VA.P      UVV 1 0



                                QUESTION                 TEN

    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


    Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
    gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
    were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
    them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
    This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
    gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
    conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
    many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

    Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
    parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

    In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
    saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
    would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
    cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

    Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
    Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
    valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
    recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.



    OBSERVATIONS

    This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
    gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
    considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

    Please see pages 157 -1 59, Volume 2.



    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
    response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
    15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
    attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
    did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
    He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
    on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
    equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
    of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
    whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
    The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
    overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
                                                                     <2>           (jYV



milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
MAR-B3-B7 17:B2 FKONi BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                            *u ‘
                                                                                                   VxV^VAVtk.


                                 The Hillsborough Disaster; April 1988.


                                                  Opinion



       Introduction

       t     I am asked to give on opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
              appropriate legal courte to follow in the light o f three areas o f fresh evidence that
              have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
              Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
              cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, hold in April and May 1990,
              and later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts o f accidental death
              were recorded on the victim s.

       2     A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
             bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest. The main
             complaints o f these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
             presented in the Divisional Court hearings on their behal I",attached a* AnflCX A- In
             summary form, those main complaints were,

              2.1     The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-oJTpoint in time of 3.15, which had the
                      effect o f excluding relevant evidence as to tho failure to implement the “Mjtfor
                      Disaster Plan" promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                      emergency services promptly.

              2.2     The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                      o f the 95; he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                      of the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                      medical attention (paragraphs S.5 to 5.12, and 7)

              2.3     The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages o f his
                      summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many o f the
                      Liverpool supporters were under the influence o f drink. The report by Lord
                      Taylor, which was several? critical o f the police, had ruled out the
                      consumption o f alcohol as a cause o f the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

              2.4     The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in bis
                      sclcction o f evidence and treatment o f witnesses (paragraphs 10 ami 11).

              2.5     The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                      directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                      and unlawful killing.




                                                       1
MAR-B3-87 17.B2 FROM * BRUCC CAHPBBLL CO                            ID*                                    PACE   a



       3     The inquest verdicts wore not qusshod. The judgment of the Court is at Annex b .
             The Court whs strongly influenced by die fact that the lawyers originally instructed
             for the families hod acquiesced in many o f the Coroner’* decisions (eg page 7), that
             the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have nude it difference, or had
             been properly excluded (pages 14- 36); that the direction o f the Coroner to the jury
             wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
             40).

       4     Since 1993, as Tam keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
             Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
             that the legal xystem failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
             circumstances o f death. After the 1993judicial review it seemed to me that the
             disaster would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
             has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
             professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals policc officers
             at the inquest, and suppression o f evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
             ccursc o f justice at the inquest. None o f the following matters were made known at
             the inquest.

       5    The evidence o f Roger Houldsworth. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
             duted 25,h November 1996, attaching a statement o f May 1989 and supporting
             documents, and commenting on evidence given at the Inquest (Annex CH. Contrary to
             the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures o f the
             I.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
             tapes and Mr Houldsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number o f
             officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at large in
             Dcccmber 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
            disaster. (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex TYi

       6    The new videotape evidence. Very recently, a member o f the Family Support group
             Has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies o f
            those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies am enclosed. I am
             told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
             South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
             inquest. 1 have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
            Group in the presence o f Mr Uouldswoith, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Family
            Support Group, Mid Ann Adlington o f my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
            that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures o f all relevant areas o f the ground
            were dear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
            Mr Houidsworth in his evidence o f November 19%. Events is the relevant area may
            not, for various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm, but
            they wens clearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

       7    I have also been shown a copy o f what was, I am told, proaantod to the jury. I t » a
            very badly duplicated and blurred picture o f Individuals escaping from the stricken
            pens shortly after 3 pm, in which it is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The

                                                     2
MAR-B3-8? 17. »a F K o m    o k




                tape has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                the videotape o f which the new evidence is a much better copy, but il presents only
                events after 3 pm.

         &    The importance o f the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
               notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
               page 125, the Coroner directed the juiy (Annex Hi:

               “The assexxment o f the terraces” is a “very important factor” and "maybe the single
               most important factor in the whole inquest1’. "The total turn o f ovidence from the
               Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichaid was
               that nunc o f them noticcd any problems with the pens until      3 o-clock”.

         9    None o f this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
               case in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time, I
               believe (hat the existence o f this evidence would have been o f crucial significance to
               the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

         10   :rhc evidence of Dr Ed Walker In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
                light; sec AlUlCX F- • The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
               appear* at AflPCxQ- H ie new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
               “sinus rhythm and cardiac output* after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
               Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
               criticisms o f the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
               points out in his letter o f 7thFebruary 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
               Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3"*May 1989 by Dr Waidiope, who was
               dosely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15** June 1989 to
               stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police, Dr Walker was not called
               at the inquest.

         11   It is difficult to exaggerate the significance o f the concealment o f Dr Walker's
               evidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court's judgment o f November 1993 the
               Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In ail         it was said,
               tho evidence disclosod the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness loading to rapid
               death. Or Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
               revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter o f 3rdMay 1989 “Almost
               immediately die department was flooded with large numbers o f acutely ill patients
               requiring urgent resuscitation". The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
               structured by the Corona on an utterly different factual assumption.

         2    JDifi previous itmsaligatiop. One o f the most striking aspects of this history is the way
              in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
              exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police torn blame. Very serious
              questions urine as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
              Midlands Policc who assisted the Coroner.


                                                       3
MAK~~U*J ~ » Y    1 Y i KM   KKUN •   tfK U U b          u u




             12        Conclusion. In my viow these new pieces o f evidence cill for a full policc enquiry or
                       public inquiry. Exhibits such ss the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
                       analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                       productum o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
                       this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
                       Public Prosecutions for het consideration, with a full copy to the Home Secrvtaiy,
                       who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

             13        I hope that the Director might fccl able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
                       two or three o f the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
                       advicc.




            3 Raymond Buildings
            Cray’s Inn
            London WC1


            3rd March IW7.                                                          Alun Jones QC




                                                               4
                                                       A nnex©



Q uestions raised bv G ranada and th e fam ilies




T he police suggested th at one o f th e cam eras w as not w orking ( presum ably to dissuade
th e inquiry from w atching th e tape)w hile M r H ouldsw orth testified th at he had

repaired th e fau lt on th e cam era trained on the L eppings L ane end o f th e pitch and it

w as w orking perfectly.



This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an affidavit to this
effect, which is attached at Appendix 1. On the day o f the match there were five cameras
scanning the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording machines,
which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the officer controlling the
video made a decision to record. PC Bitchard who controlled the videoing procedure
explained in his testimony that one o f the cameras had not been working well but added “ the
quality has been improved. It was not up to the mark but it was a lot better than it had been.
We were getting pictures that is the best way o f describing it. ” Therefore it is not true to say
that the Taylor inquiry was led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective
that they were not worth viewing.


In cross examination during the inquest Mr Bitchard also sticks to his view that the camera
was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to distinguish facial
expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and cannot distinguish any material
difference in the quality o f the recording which came from camera 5 to that coming from the
other cameras. This does not prove that there was not a quality difference discernible to the
police in the control box on the day. It could be argued though that Mr Bitchard was putting a
gloss on the evidence in a way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In this he
was not alone. Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and evasive.




smd-0077
T he inquest ju ry and the inquiry only had th e police account o f w hat could be seen from

th e police control box on th at day and th e capabilities o f the video system . T he faulty
cam era w as never challenged.



South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product o f their recording as
explained above. For most o f the tape the recorded material shows a sequence o f 25 second
shots from each o f the five cameras. PC Bitchard who was controlling the monitors testified to
the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Superintendent Duckenfield to record the activity
at the turnstiles which is where Superintendent Duckenfield considered at the time that the
trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is mainly o f this
area. Later parts o f the footage cover what was happening inside the ground. A full transcript
o f the video footage is attached at Appendix 2; this and the tapes were available to the Taylor
inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers representing the families at the
time o f the inquest.


South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at these
tapes The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by West Midlands
Police and contained the most relevant footage o f the disaster taken from a variety o f sources,
including material from the BBC, from the underwater search team who had hand held
camcorders as well as from the police monitoring equipment.


Thecompilation tape, which was seen bv Tavlor inquiry, showed the overcrowding in the
central pens. The question o f whether the camera could have zoomed in on the crowd is a
detail which does not appear to have been an issue in the Taylor inquiry. The line o f
questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the police claimed they had or
had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem o f overcrowding. This is shown in the
transcripts. Lord Justice Taylor is questioning Superintendent Duckenfield:


           Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen videos and
       it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain; is not that by 2.50 the two wing




smd-0077
        account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be expected o f their
        rank.


Video tape shown to the inquest ju iy was badly duplicated and blurred so that it
wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.


This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family Support
Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy o f the material from camera 5 which was
shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy o f the tape that was provided. This was
indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police say that the copy which was
supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly duplicated and blurred. Because o f the
degree o f mistrust the families feel, they did not question whether the poor quality o f the
video was for their copy alone but assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South
Yorkshire are sending us a fresh copy o f the version o f the video which was seen by the
inquest jury.


The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor material from
camera no 5.


This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to explain
the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely effectively. It does not
appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape covers the run-up to the disaster; the
situation looks dangerous; there is evidence o f overcrowding. The most likely reason that
material from camera 5 was not used is that the BBC material was so much better. We do not
see any evidence that particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation
tape.




Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.


One o f the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for an inquiry
was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor inquiry. His statement




smd-0077
would have been available to the Treasury Council who was acting on behalf o f Lord Taylor.
The interim reports explains:


        The witnesses called were only a smallfraction o f thosefrom whom statements were
        or could have been taken. Nevertheless, la m satisfied that they were sufficient in
        number and in reliability to enable me to make the necessary conclusions. To have
        called more would have prevented mefrom presenting an interim report in the
        required time and would not have added significantly to the relevant evidence.




The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up


The central implication o f the Granada programme is that the police were, and continue to be,
involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent o f the negligence. This allegation is
forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in
which he says:
       One o f the most striking aspects o f this history is the way in which evidence presented
       to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities
       and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise as to the process by which
       evidence was selected by the West Midlands Police who assisted the coroner.


This ignores the crucial point that the purpose o f an inquest is not to apportion blame but to
meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three limited questions - who the
deceased was and when and where he met his death.


It is certainly true that Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the extent o f his
responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly unsuccessful in these
attempts: criticism was not averted either about his involvement or that o f South Yorkshire
Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord Justice Taylor wrote:
       It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
       Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in
       what occurred Mr Duckenfield under pressure o f cross examination apologised for



smd-0077
         blaming the Liverpoolfansfo r causing the deaths. But that apart the police case was
         to blame the fansfo r being late and drunk and to blame the Clubfo r failing to
        monitor the pens. It was argued that thefata l crush was not cause by the influx
        through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being defective. Such an unrealistic
        approach gives cause fo r anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would
        have been more seemly and encouragingfor the future if responsibility had been
        faced.


H ouldsw orth’s evidence contradicts th at o f the police in other respects.



Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording o f the CCTV cameras was inadvertently
changed to time lapse mode (producing a series o f pictures rather than continual motion)
probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving positions within the control
box. Houldsworth indicates that it is impossible to switch recording modes when the machine
is already running and that the relevant buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught
accidentally. It is hard, though, to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the
mode was changed before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the
relevant images.


Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were ‘greatly
enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day. Houldsworth indicates that
the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the 12 inches claimed by Bichard and
that the monitors were capable o f showing the same information as shown on the larger
screens used at the inquest. Again, despite Houldsworth’s contradiction o f Bichard’s
evidence, it is impossible to attach any significance to what amounts to a difference o f opinion.


W est M idlands P olice w ere invited to conduct the in vestigation despite the fact that
force w as sub ject to serious allegations involving the Serious C rim e Squad and

Superintendent B eechey, said to be D eputy H ead o f the Serious C rim e Squad, w as
appointed as one o f the investigation team .




smd-0077
The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable o f South
Yorkshire Police, with the approval o f the Police Complaints Authority and Lord Justice
Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:


        It was therefore decided that the investigation o f the disaster and the gathering of
        evidence fo r this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent police force. Mr
        Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable o f West Midlands Constabulary, undertook this
        task He was made responsible directly to me; he appointed Assistant Chief Constable
       Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge o f the investigation. Iam deeply indebted to
        both o f them.


There is no information on why West Midlands was chosen, but clearly it was necessary to
select a force with no connection, however tenuous, with the incident or those involved. The
PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction with the
conduct o f the investigation.


The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team is likely to have
rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr Beechey never, in
fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position may have meant that he had
certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the Squad. At the time o f the Hillsborough
tragedy, allegations had been publicised about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14
August 1989 that the Chief Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police
to investigate the allegations against it.


O ther allegations raised by the H illsborough Fam ily Support G roup included:



        • allegations that the coroner im properly relied on guidance from

           Superintendent B eechey o f the W est M idlands P olice in his conduct o f the

           inquest;



        • th at th e coroner chose to hear discredited evidence o f drunken L iverpool

           supporters; and




smd-0077
           • th»t there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the                     Th<!
              Taylor in ,„ io r considered the cause, of the diauter and the Inquest deal, with
              events up to the 3.1S cut-off point. The action, and decision, taken beyond
              that point, it is argued therefore, have not been publicly examined.


  An inquest is M ta v ^ g a fcn o f the t a s by the coroner, and he is infonned as to the inquiries he
        d make by the infoimation he obtains from relevant persons, including the police. It is entirely
  a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and witnesses should be heard.


  Although the focus o f the Taylor inquity was on the causes o f the disaster, its terms o f
  reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
  1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports
  events'. As such i t «   able to M y consider the actions o f the police and other eme^ency
 semces at the ground throughout the relevant period.




smd-0077
