                                                         A




with is this; you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with; who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.
     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.   My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

     MR. KING:   Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.    All
that was done when   one looks at those Inquests   was to
identify the time of a first sighting, that is     to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.    In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give   one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people who are brought off at 1522      and itis
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to the global
organisation of what happened immediately after they were
brought off the terraces. Certainly I have been through
the individual transcripts and there does not seem to be
any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
   ' THE CORONER:    Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a liovus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

     MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and putting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.    They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.
     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brougnt off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.   A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.   It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces'*.  I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

     MR. KING:   Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?
     THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of me.   I would
not want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:   Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of     the Jonesfamily,
Richard Jones, I do not knowwhether you have been given one
or two documents.   I have two documents in relation to M r .
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:     No. 11, did you say?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.    I beg your pardon, sir, it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look --
     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.    That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.    You will no doubt be familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.    If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at this
stage.   You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, of
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?
     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any document
but it is just to help you is one headed to myself,"Dear Mr.
King".
     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel" dated 22nd October.

     MR. KING:      Sir, this   is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:   I have not got it I am afraid.       It is
not in front of me.
     MR. KING:   I apologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that the
report into the death of their loved one, Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must be
                                                           7

A


    entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
    clear as having already occurred.

         Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
B   by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
    it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
    sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
    recall:
         "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
         is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
         pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be so
         difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
         electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
         stopped or not."

         Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
    certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
    to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
    evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:

D                                     /"For an extremely long...




£




F




G
       "For an extremely long time we were without an/ form
       of medical equipment of any description.  I still
       cannot understand why the local health authority's
       major medical disaster team were not called upon.  I
       understand that all health authorities in this
       country have a major disaster policy.  It is
       impossible accurately to estimate the difference this
       would have made in saving life.  I do, however,
       believe that the Liverpool fans should have been
       given tne chance".

 And the question raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
 sir:  there was a major incident vehicle.  Why was it not
 called? Lack of equipment undoubtedly resulted in deaths.

       Sir, I pause there.  Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
  were not there and of course they are not experts, but you
  will see, sir, from the basis of that evidence they are
  firmly of the belief that one cannot just ignore an
  inquiry, an inquest, into that aspect.

        Sir, number 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones comes
   from the statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
   from Dr. Glynn Phillips, particularly where he says that
   after 3.15 p.m. he gave mouth to mout resuscitation to a
!« man for 15 minutes, and just as he w ; g i v i n g up the heart
| sprang.to life, and after that the man started breathing
II on his own.  We know that this does not prove this man
1 lived, or if he did he may have been brain damaged, but
 | the point we are trying to put across to the coroner is
 I that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
ii|certified dead were necessarily dead.

      Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jones direct your attention
 to the long statement which I am sure you have seen, sir,
 of Dr. John Asnton in which there is a series of reasoned
 critical comments on the disorganisation of the medical
 and the rescue attempts, honest and in good faith though
 they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.

      Sir, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in those comments and
 in the short letter, sir, which you have, which you have
 already referred me to, sir, they emphasise an issue as to
 the failure to implement triage after the disaster
 happened, again, concentrating on what Dr. Gumpert has
 said as to the fact that without an electro-cardiogram it
 is not possible to know wnether a heart has stoppped.

      Sir, can I move on from Mr. and Mrs. Jones' comments
 and just give you one or two more examples - I appreciate
 that in many ways it is repetitious but it is making the
 point - to number 14, sir, which is in the case of William
 Roy Pemberton.

       THE CORONER:     And this one is addressed to you.
                                                            9




     MR. KING:   Sir, it is not often that instructions to
Counsel are given in advance to the Tribunal, and I
suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.

    THE CORONER:    You are probably right.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it was an effort in the relatively
short time since we were before you to put before you the
various matters which the families wished to place before
you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
sir.

     Sir, if I can then turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
see that he makes the following points:  the report into
the death of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
was pronounced extinct at 16.00 hours hours, and again in
the absence of medical evidence to the contrary, the
family can only assume that their loved one was alive
until that hour, and sir, if you then go to paragraph 3 of
that document you will see there is a reference to tae
statement of Mr. Saxton of the St. John's Ambulance
Service, because he refers to the resuscitation of a young
man at 15.50 hours, indicating in the heart-felt view of
Mr. Pemberton, as with all the other families, that death
must have occurred after 3.15 p.m.

     Again he refers you, sir, in paragraph 4, to the
statement of Dr. Byrne wiien he quotes that he was
approacned by a senior Police Officer and asked to start
certifying the dead as there may be some still alive, and
sir, again, the point has been made that as we only know
for certain that death was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
concerns as to the adequacy of the attentions and the
rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investigate what could
well have been a major reason for why somebody died and
did not survive.

     The final point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
7, is the question he asks:  why was it that the very
seriously ill and dying, and those who appeared to be
dead, were not taken to the hospital in the very first
available ambulance, and he raises himself the issue as to
why the serious accident response vehicle was not called
out to the stadium, as he understands to be the case.

     Sir, if I can then deal withperhaps one example of
minutiae, of detail, if one turns to the cases of the
Hicks sisters, of Victoria and Sarah Hicks, sir, wnich is
at numbers 7 and 8 in your list, sir, you will notice the
case of Victoria, that on the face of the summary wnich
was   produced at the Inquest prior to today, there was a
gap   in time. Thereis a gap in timebetween 15.21, which
was the time when Police Constable McGuinness rescued
Victoria from a pile of those who unfortunately had
fallen, and 15.28 when Mr. Turner was seen helping
Victoria out onto the pitch.
     Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
has drawn to the attention of this Inquest the evidence of
a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, whose evidence is that he was
on the very terrace where Victoria was after she had been
 rescued by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
minutes he did not, in fact, resuscitate because the poor
man did not know what to do, and one can understand that,
but as Mr. Hicks says, those six minutes could have been
vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
received the proper attention.

     Sir, that is just an example of matters which, in Mr.
Hicks s submission to you, through me, ought to be
investigated.

     Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at number 8, again
if one looks at the timings we know that at 5-minutes-
past-3 a Miss McCaffery sees Sarah, who clearly has
fallen, and we know at 21-minutes-past-3, helps the fallen
Sarah through onto the pitch.  Again, the time gap there
between S-minutes-past-3 and 21-minutes-past-3.  We know
it was not until 20-past-4 that Dr. Bull examined Sarah
and certified ner death, and we know from the summary that
it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
unidentified member of the medical team stated in his view
that Sarah was at that time beyond help.

     All those times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
illustrate the need in the submission of the families for
tae times after 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.

     Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
read the papers which I understand and I am sure you have
they express the flavour of all the other submissions
that, in fact, we cannot know that a cut off point at this
stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
premature, sir, so to do, in my submission to you.  That
is how I put it.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed, Mr. King.
I think what we will now do is to give the rest of you an
opportunity to make points.   I think we ought to start
with Mrs. McBrien.   I think you would probably support
what has been said, but is there anything in addition to
what Mr. King has said that you feel you would like to
tell me.   Mrs. McBrien can I say if you are more
comfortable sitting down - indeed, that goes for all of
you - if you are more comfortable sitting down, sit down.
I don't mind - it does not make any difference.   I know
some of your legal colleagues sitting around you are used
to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
comfortable.   Mrs. McBrien, is there anything you want to
add r,o what Mr. King has told me?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I go along with everything that
Mr. King has said, thank you.
That is a matter which my learned friend will, I am sure, fully
understand.  I merely mention it now so it is not said that it is
mentioned with hindsight afterwards.  There may, indeed, be a
great deal of difference between the responsibility or lack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be required
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another. Again, I give as an example, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come at the very last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to the
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients. So that is really
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you. It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors,
and, of course, primarily for the parties themselves.

     Perhaps I should say one other thing. You have mentioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that.  I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going to
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as far as it has
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.  I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements. I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement. So I have made it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence.  I say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody.  I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously, I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.  I can't do more than that.   I
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, with regard to the .submissions by Mr.
King, the position of the Chief Constable is that he is neutral.
I have got no submissions to make about what Mr. King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position of the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he can to
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly does not
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstruction
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relatives
of the people who died. Sir, that is the position.
    , As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus actus. i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which caused
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
came about.   I only make that comment in an endeavour to be
helpful, but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
no submissions one way or the other.

     May I just say while I am on my feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence.   It is well known and has



(
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured and
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.



     THE CORONER:
                                Also there has been a civil action
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.

                    Thank you very much, indeed.  I accept
entirely what you say and in a sense I accept what M r . Manning
says as well. It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted.     It
is neither here nor there. So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.

     MR. ISAACS:   I think, sir, in fact, that is Mr. Hale.     Mr.
Manning sits to my left.

     THE CORONER:     I beg your pardon.   Forgive me, please, both
of you.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have no submissions.  It is entirely a
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
as my client is concerned.

     MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that. The matter is entirely for
you. You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
investigation into the earlier Inquests.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
application is some surprise to me. All I think I should, sir,
is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
into the activities of the Ambulance Service and the Emergency
Services, and it is not appropriate to bring such a matter into
 the arena as a sort of   side   wind. Beyond that, sir, it is
 obviously a matter for   you.

      MISS ADDELMANN:    Sir,   I    have no observations or submiss
 about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
 made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

      MR. RUSSELL:   I too endorse those remarks. None of us,
 other than my learned friend, Mr. King, has seen the original
 statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
 the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
 material he now seeks to rely upon.  I recognise it is a matter
 for you, and if you decide I don't take a stance one way or the
 other.

      THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
 anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?

      MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
 wind which I am embarking on. I am seeking to address causes,
 contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
 that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
 beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the point
 of view of possibilities of novus actus, yes, I accept that.

      THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, and
 perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.
 I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
 it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
 far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
 making entirely fairly. There is nothing extra in the letter, so
 to speak, except connecting words, basically. That is for your
 reassurance, if I can put it like that.

       Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go" on the
  15th April, 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
  of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
  how to set about dealing with the Inquests was to as far as
  possible treat   the Inquestsas if they were completely
  standard, if Ican put it like that - it is a horrible word -
  ^ut completely normal Inquests. The fact that it was national
  news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
  amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
  because of the   numbers, but each individual death I dealt with
  families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
  think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
  if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
  opposed to an incident in a football stadium.    I have thought
  back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
  somebody might have suffered a serious head injury. That
  person may well have been at the road side for X number of
  minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
I attend.   They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
* hospital.   They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
  They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
  into hospital and they may have then died two, three days, may
  be longer after the incident. Or alternatively, you could have
                                                            16




 a situation where by chance the road traffic incident occurs <?n
 the xoad and a doctor happens to be. He walks up to the
 patient, looks and says, "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
 that this person is dead” . Or you could have a situation where
 the person has this road traffic incident and is taken into
 hospital and is certified dead on arrival.

         In none of those instances would I as a matter of routine
| call evidence of what happened after the incident ;itself was
I concerned, and indeed, the pathologists in the example which i
< have used would have given as cause of death serious head injury,
  for instance, or multiple injuries with fracture of the skull, or
  something of that nature.    It seems to me that the fact that the



( person may survive an injury for a number of minutes or hours or ■
  even days, is not the question which I as Coroner have to
  consider. My task is to establish who the person was - I am
  If sorry to repeat this - where he died, when he died and how he
  j died.   It is from my understanding of the pathological evidence,
j the overwhelming pathological evidence is and was that the people
|died as a result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia. Different
 |words were used, but the sense was always the same. The
 Sunderlying problem which these poor men and women were subjected
 1to was an inability to breathe.

      That does not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
;respire for a period of time or even have a heart beat
 thereafter, but the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
;Gumpert, Dr. Slater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question in
 an overall point of view, all in fact said, as I understand their
1evidence, exactly the same.

      One of the points, Mr. King, which you have made is that
 because ;a person has not been certified dead until a particular
 point in time, one must therefore assume that he is alive. With
 the greatest respect I don’t accept that as a reasonable -
 "reasonable" is a very unkind word - as a proposition which I
 would take.  Indeed, if you think about it for a moment I am sure
 you would agree with me, if a body were to be found in a
 macerated state one would call a doctor who would
 certify death, but it would be a little bit illogical to
 assume that that particular body was actually alive
 until that point.

      The issue of death certification and the timing of it is
 important, because one wants to have if possible certainty. That
 is the first thing. Secondly, the conventional way of
 establishing a person is definite dead is that a medical man says
 so, but to draw the conclusion that until a medical man has said
 so a person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
 maintain.




                      /I do understand the anxiety.
                                                                             17




          I do understand the anxiety which a lot of the families                  J(
     have about this issue, but as I have already said the
_   overwhelming medical evidence, the pathological evidence,
B   and that is the crucial one I am interested in, is the
     damage that caused the death was done due to the crushing.                    ‘
                                                                                   ft
         Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance not
    because there is anything magical about that but because^
    when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it
    is a convenient marker, that is all.   If the first
    ambulance had arrived at 3.30 I would have picked that time.
    It is simply intended as a marker, but, and this is an
    important point, I considered the medical evidence. The^
    medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting verbatim -
    but the sense of what Professor Usher said, and, indeed, the T
    others as well, was that once the chest was fixed so that     j(
    respiration could no longer take place, then irrecoverable    |
    brain damage would occur between four and six minutes.
    That is the point.

         Now I felt that the evidence which I had heard and in
U   the light of what I had read that the latest time, the
    latest, when this permanent fixation could have arisen would
    have been a p p r o x imateTy==^t^rcmtinrtg^Gpss*=f ^ R i c H =T ¥ =when the
    match stopped.         It almost certainly was before, but let us
    assume six minutes past, add another six minutes to that,
    that is twelve minutes past and then as I say I went on to
    find a convenient marker beyond that point in time.                    In
    other words, what I am trying to say is I did not just pick
    the arrival of the first ambulance entirely out of the blue,
    I did try and consider in the light of the evidence which we
    had heard what could have been the latest time when the real
    damage was done.

         I have already indicated that at the - I will call them
    the interim inquests if I may just for the sake of a name -
    we did endeavour to give a great deal more information or
    evidence than we would ever do in a normal inquest and in    I
    that sense I broke my own rule straight away because I said \
    I wanted to treat this matter as if it were a completely
    standard normal road traffic incident, if you like.    I
    didn't, I gave a great deal of information for various
    reasons which I don't need to go into now.

         As an aside I can assure you that within the limits of
    our ability the summaries and the evidence which was given
    was an accurate reflection of what people said and if there
    was a gap, for instance, as has been suggested in some cases
    which is unexplained, the reason wasn't because there is
    some hidden evidence which we have put under the curtain,    |
    but because we didn't know of it or couldn't find it or it
    doesn't exist. The truth of the matter, of course, is that
    people weren't being watched individually continuously by




H
                                                                 18




    somebody else   recording what was happening.   It is entirely
    fortuitous as   to whether or not there is a witness or
    witnesses who   happens (a) to have been with a person, (b)
    who remembers   who he is and (c) has some idea of the timing.
B
         Some of you who were there will remember that in some
    cases we had a great deal of evidence with regard to what
    had happened post-crush, shall I say, and in others we had
    next to nothing because it is very sad particularly for
    those families where we have got so little to share with
    them, but we are living in the real world and in some cases
    there was overwhelming - for instance, there were dozens of
    photographs as you know - some of the people were all over
    the newspapers and in others we could not find any.     It
    can't be helped, it is just one of those things.

         Bearing in mind that I intend at this stage to deal
    with the question of how, and I do intend to deal with it
    reasonably comprehensively, I have to remember two things:
    that my powers are limited.   I don't have an open ended
    authority to carry out an investigation.   The Rules and the
    Act, indeed, are quite clear as to the limits of what the
D   coronal inquiry should be.   I admit that the word "how" j    is
    a little bit flexible and assuming we call all those
    witnesses on that preliminary list which I have circulated I
    hope you will agree that I have been reasonably flexible
    with that word, but nevertheless I do have to draw a l i n e .
    Indeed, this was done in other inquests.   If you think back
    to the Zeebrugge inquest, for instance. The learned Coroner
    there drew a line.   He was judicially reviewed on where he
    drew it and in that particular case the Divisional Court or
    the Court of Appeal, I can't remember now, clearly said that
    a line has to be drawn and in the Zeebrugge case they agreed
    it was right.   I am doing my best.   I am trying to draw a
    line as well.

          If you think of the other major disasters where
    inquests have already taken place, you will find that lines
    were drawn there as well and I think you will find that the
    line with regard to the question which we are now thinking
    about was very, very much tighter than what we have already
    done.

         In answer to your submission, I still consider that as
    a general proposition we are going to accept - I am going to
    take these inquests and deal with the question of how on the
    basis of what happened to about 3.15 or thereabouts. ^ I
    have explained it to you so I am not going to repeat it and
    I base it mainly upon the pathological medical evidence.

         Having said that, I think it is probably right to say
    because we will be calling witnesses it may be that some of
    the things which worry you may be dealt with to a minor




H
degree but it is certainly not my intention to allow us to
stray down that path.

     I have also got to say, it is only right, that what I
think you are really inviting me to do, Mr. King, is to hold
a further judicial inquiry into matters into which, as I
understand it, are outside my authority and scope.    I also
seem to recollect, although Lord Justice Taylor s Inquiry
isn't - as I have already said to you at the business
meeting, I don't really want to spend too much time on it -
but I do recollect that the emergency services were very
well represented at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
discussion, from my reading of the transcripts, did deal
with the issues of the medical response.

     Whether or not that was satisfactory, whether Lord
Justice Taylor should have done more, whether somebody else
should look into that when we have finished that is nothing
to do with me.   However, as far as I am concerned, my
intention is to stick with what I gave you as my initial
preliminary intention.

     I have, of course, already looked through the documents
which you sent me and insofar as in one or two instances
witnesses are mentioned, if I think, and, indeed, I have
thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
the moment, you have got a point.   It would perhaps be
advantageous to call those persons and we are making
appropriate arrangements.   Please don't think that I have
said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not dealing with that,"
I have already spent quite a bit of time thinking about it
and I will hopefully have another look.   If I were - which
is highly unlikely - in any particular instance to feel we
ought to go a little bit further down that line because
there is a specific point to be made in any particular
instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
However, I think it is unlikely from what I have seen and
what I have read and for the reasons which I have given you.




           MR. KING:   Sir, thank you for that.
