MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:      2 December 1997

To:      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




TONY EDWARDS, AMBULANCEMAN - PART 2


Does the attached statement by Mr Edwards seem familiar to you?


2.       The Support Group have just sent it to me, Mr Edwards having noticed that I did not
mention it in my recent letter to him (also attached). The Group say they had meant to send
it to us in response to point 6 of your letter to them of 13 October (in your folder).


3.     I really do not remember whether I have seen this Edwards statement before or not.
Some parts seem familiar, others don’t. But I don’t think that it should alter what I said to
him in my letter. It’s still not clear to me why you should need to see him and it is still up to
him to make a case for doing that.


4.       If you agree, I will write to him confirming that we now have this statement by him
(or that we had it all along) and would like to know a bit more about what he wants to say to
you before deciding whether you will see him.




C F BONE




G :\HILLSBO R\S-S\035.DO C
0 2 / 1 2 *97 1 4 : 5 7   01512361936               H F S G               — >01712732007                       Pg. 01



                     I ANTHONY JAMES EDWARDS will say:


                     I make this statement further to my statements o f7 lh May 1989 and 2501October 1989

                    appended hereto.



                    In my statement of 7* May 1989, at paragraph 7 ,1 describe how, when attempting to

                    enter onto the pitch at Hillsborough I was prevented from doing so by a police officer.

                    Both myself and the driver proceeded onto the pitch. We were obstructed from doing

                    so by a line of approximately ten policemen who had formed a cordon across the

                    entrance to the pitch. One of those police officers left the cordon and approached the

                    ambulance. He was not a senior officer he was a police constable. He stated ‘’You

                    can’t go on there, they’re still fighting”. The time then was approximately 3.25-3.30

                    pm.



                    My driver then shouted Alan Hopkins (the Assistant chief Ambulance Officer). I told

                    him that the police officer had said that we could not go on the pitch. Alan Hopkins

                    stated that he did not care who said we could not go on. He told us that he wanted us

                    to go to the top of the field and not to stop for anybody until we saw Paul Eason. This

                    surprised me because I thought Paul Eason was actually outside the ground.

                    He then told us to put our two tone horns on. He actually reached across and put the

                    horns on for us.

                    I was later informed that Alan Hopkins had seen the chaos at the Leppings Lane end

                    because he had been involved in getting the 10 year old victim into the first ambulance.



                    In order to reach the Leppings Lane end o f the ground we actually drove onto the




V
                01512361 936                 HF S G                 — >01712?5i:uu/




           grass. I was unable to see Paul Eason in the melee of people at the Leppings Lane end

           of the pitch One possible reason is that SYMAS officers wore police officer type

           uniforms (White shirt, black tunic and trousers and black tie). It was impossible to

           spot an ambulance man amongst a whole load of police officers who were at the scene.

           As I alighted from the vehicle just in front of the goal, I started to try to do some

           triage but it was clear that there were no other ambulances coming onto the field.



6.         In my previous statement dated 25 October 1989,1 also refer to somebody kicking

           me The West Midlands police had interviewed me and kept referring to this incident.


           They seemed to think that the person who had kicked me was Trevor Hicks and they

           were simply trying to help me to identify whoever it was. They kept referring back to

           this incident but on the scale o f things it was not important. It had shocked me at the

           time but it was only a minor incident. Ambulance staff regularly receive minor Assault

           in the course of their duty. They wanted me to prepare a statement and asked if I

           wanted to prosecute the person who had injured me. I cannot recall the names o f the

           West Midlands police officers. They also showed me some photographs and a video

           of my ambulance coming onto the pitch at 3.35 pm.



7.         In paragraph 8 of my statement of 7th May, I describe how my ambulance was loaded

     \C\w^vwith three casualties,          two policemen, two spectators, my driver and me. The

           two spectators were Trevor Hicks and the nurse. I would like to add that I had

           assumed that when we got to where the other ambulances were collecting ie the

           gymnasium entrance the bodies would be taken off and triage carried out. However,

           before I knew where we were, we were on Herries Road on our way to the hospital.

           At this stage I would add that we had no difficulty in negotiating the ramp either onto
              58   01512361936                 H F S G                -->01712732007                        Pg. 03



              the pitch or when we were exiting. This is contrary to a comment in the Taylor

              Report (See paragraph 302).                   jthe driver o f the ambulance can confirm

              that we had no difficulty in negotiating the ramp when entering or exiting the pitch.

              After unloading the casualties at the Northern General Hospital we returned to the

              ground. I have since discovered that an Ambulance did get stuck on the ramp. It was

              driven by                      from Langley Ambulance Station, however, this had

              taken place before any Ambulance was ordered onto the Pitch.




         8.   I recall that the scenes in the gymnasium were chaotic. It was foil o f police officers. I
'w   '

              can remember a young policewoman crying I did not see many Senior ambulance

              officers except for one a lead Ambulance man from Middlewood Ambulance Station

              who set Up a drip in the gymnasium at around about 4.00 pm. Police officers were

              laying bodies out in rows. Many of the bodies had shirts over their faces. I can

              remember row upon row of blue jeans and trainers sticking out. Whilst attempting to

              treat casualties I ran out of orofarangeal airways. We only had five or six o f these on

              our vehicle The vehicle was not classified as an emergency vehicle. We were just on

              routine duty that day. One of the things that occurred to me as I saw police officers

              laying bodies out in the gymnasium was how few bodies had airways in them.

              Inserting an airway into the mouth is one of the basic techniques one would expect to

              use if someone had suffered unconsciousness from crush injuries. I always wondered

              how many of those who died actually had resuscitation attempted on them by anyone

               with basic medical knowledge.



               At no time can I remember Hillsborough being declared as a major incident. I recall

               that a Senior Ambulance Officer,                    was sent to fetch the   nwjor incident
  ./   01512361936                 H F S G               — > 0 1 7 1 2 7 32 0 07



 vehicle. When he arrived at Hillsborough he did not know how to use it. Also, there

 were paramedic crews standing by on Upper Thorpe awaiting further instructions.

 These were never received.




I was not involved in any formal debriefing except an interview with a SYMAS

solicitor The only debriefing took place in the mesh room, where many questions

were raised by staff, many said they phoned SYMAS and offered their services as they

watched the disaster unfold on TV.



A question I repeatedly asked myself after the disaster was ‘why on earth the

ambulance staff were not sent to the epicentre of the disaster with their equipment?’.

The ambulance staff were either outside of Leppings Lane or at the other end of the

football pitch outside the gymnasium. In my opinion the Ambulance crews ought to

have been ordered onto the pitch with instructions to triage. It was wrong to send

only three vehicles onto the pitch. Even basic medical equipment was not available at

the epicentre o f the disaster, with injuries such as those suffered at Hillsborough, basic

but swift medical attention is required:

(a)    putting the injured into the recovery position;

(b)    clearing the airway so that the patient can breathe - often done by inserting a

        simple plastic tube of the kind carried by all ambulances.

        It was largely young football fans who carried the dying and injured the length

        of the football pitch on makeshift stretchers before they received any kind of

       qualified medical attention. Many o f the injured were carried on their backs

       rather than in the recovery position because of lack o f basic medical

       knowledge It would be unheard of in an equivalent disaster, on a train for
      j9 0 1 5 12 3 61 9 36              H F S G            ">01712732007                        Ps .



                example, for ambulance personnel to wait up on an embankment whilst the

                passengers carried bodies off the train.



      Only fourteen of the victims were taken to hospital and three of those were in my

      ambulance. I believe that more people would have survived had the ambulance

      personnel together with their equipment been directed to the Leppings Lane end of the

      pitch as soon as the disaster unfolded. I repeat my remark from my previous statement

      that prior to the disaster I was not aware of any Hillsborough plan or the role that the

      gymnasium was to play in it. I was not aware that the gym was the casualty clearing

      centre.




Dated the                day of October 1997



ANTHONY JAMES EDWARDS
 I filfe    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
            Room 1106
            50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
            Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007



A J Edwards Esq                                                Your reference:

                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:              November 1997




      'IDWr M "
Thank you for your letter of 10 November. I apologise for the delay in replying to it.

It might be helpful if I explain that the task which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has accepted
from the Home Secretary is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence about
the Hillsborough Stadium disaster which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is
significant evidence, he intends to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
proceedings. He hopes to report his findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has asked me to say that he is grateful to you for writing. He has
noted the points you have made in your letter and will take them into consideration. We
also have the statements you made to the police on 7 May and 25 October 1989.

You suggest a meeting with the Judge. Before deciding whether that would be useful, we
would like to know more exactly what it is you would like to say to him that you have not
said in your letter. Perhaps you could contact me to discuss this further.

I look forward to hearing from you.

            o   vjls)   o   f /v c e /g ^ - N




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny



G :\HlUSBO R\M AtN\EDW ARDS. 179
