       M   e / 9 7 /

iSS;


                                                                                                   If
   From: Peter Edmundson
                                                             Mr O’Brien / )        n ’
         Room 527                                            MrHowarth              I ™—
         Operational Policing Policy Unit                    Permanent Secretary v\ * ^ ^
         Queen Anne’s Gate                                   Ms Wheldon
         0171 273 2621                                       Mr Boys Smith             f\
                                                             Mr Granatt               //U/Vv^
            4 June 1997                                      Mr Pugh                    J   j
                                                             Mr Middleton LAB             y 'l C
                                                             Miss Loudon PPD, PTU
                                                             Mr R Evans ABCU
                                                             Mr Warner
  Mr Michael              )                                  Mr Owen
                          ) simultaneously
  Home Secretary          )




  HILLSBOROUGH



 Issue



 To seek colleagues agreement to the terms o f reference for the independent
 examination o f the “new” evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster.


 Timing


 2.        Urgent.




 Recommendation


 3.        That you write as in the attached draft.



 Consideration



4.     The proposed terms o f reference for an independent examination o f the “new’!
evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster has been revised following your
meeting with officials this morning and you are invited to write to the Attomey-


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA.DOC
 General as in the attached letter. We have kept officials in other departments with a
 main interest in Hillsborough informed, and the Lord Chancellor, Attorney-General
 and the DPP should be able to respond quickly to your letter.


 5.     The draft letter leaves open the question o f whether an announcement in the
 House should be by an oral statement or by reply to an arranged PQ.



Handling



6.     The draft letter will require amendment if the Lord Chancellor’s office replies
to Mr Harnett s letter o f 29 May about who might undertake the exercise before your
(Home Secretary’s) letter issues.




                                              PETER EDMUNDSON




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA.DOC
DRAFT LETTER TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR SIGNATURE BY THE
HOME SECRETARY




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been made
about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster was o f course
fully investigated by the late Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor, but concern has been
raised about a number o f features o f the case and material considered by some to
represent new evidence has been brought to our attention. These and related matters
were raised in the Granada Television documentary drama “Hillsborough” last
December.

 My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the allegations
 made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that there are no
 grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has also been considered
 by the Attorney General’s Office and the DPP’s Office. None of those who have
 examined the material consider that there is evidence to justify a new public enquiry,
 a re-opening o f the inquest, or the prosecution o f individuals. But I am certain that
 continuing public concern will not be allayed with a reassurance from the Home
 Office that there is no new evidence. I therefore propose that there should be an
independent examination of the alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a
respected judge (serving or recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be
important to ensure that whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and
respected to command public confidence. My personal preference would be for a
judge. The proposed terms of reference are:

“To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new evidence
relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which provides
sufficient grounds for:

       i.      the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a further
               public inquiry;

       ii.     the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
               Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

       iii.    The Director o f Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
               charges against any person;

       iv.     The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary action
               against any police officer.

Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.”


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PEOOQ7MA.DOC
There will need to be a public announcement o f the establishment of the independent
examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the announcement
will have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure that the ground is
properly prepared before the announcement is made with those outside G overnment
with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster including the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor’s advice on a suitable figure to lead the
independent examination, and for your comments and those o f copy recipients on the
proposed terms o f reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
Chancellor, the President o f the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the Secretary
o f State for National Heritage, the Director o f Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTSVLONGSUB\PE0007MA.DOC
                                               H r# I
                                                                           k^UlJUK. to^ -
                                 CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS

                                         ex. Kv            e<J              Hom e O ffic e
                                                    O                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                             jj-V                           LONDON SW1H9AT
                                             k ^ o l U/vX/|C«H^
                                             (V'Av X^i-                       2 9 MAY 399J
                                             K
 Ms Liz Hutchinson                           fLy          d.Ctj
 PS/The Lord Chancellor
 House of Lords                              fo i j O r^
 LONDON                                            FvvCVx^
 SWT A OPW                                   VM i-«M.olo ■'
                                             |>-V    Q uj^L,
                                             tv     (2 ■ fcvra**-/
                                                                     I
                                             fv U-(A^U<
                                             f-V CfSCK^~*~&
                                             f ^ u W e*jV<JL/
     ^                  L '2 .               ^Xj Q




The Home Secretary is currently considering proposals to have some form of
judicial examination of representations received over the past six months into the
disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium in 19 8 9 . The terms of reference of
such an examination could be on these lines:

          "To carry out an independent examination of whether there is new
          evidence relating to the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 1 5 April 1 9 8 9
          which provides sufficient grounds for:

                (i)     The Attorney General to apply to the High Court under
                        section 13 of the Coroners' Act 1 9 8 8 for another inquest;

                (ii)    The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing
                        criminal charges against any person;

                (iii)   The relevant Chief Police Officer to take disciplinary action
                        against any police officer.

          or which means that it would be in the public interest for the
          Home Secretary to establish a public inquiry."

I should emphasise that the Home Secretary is still considering whether to go
down this track. Nevertheless in looking at these issues, it has been suggested
that Mr Justice Collins who was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry into Hillsborough
and is now a High Court Judge would be a suitable person to undertake this
exercise. The Home Secretary considers that as Mr Collins has prior knowledge
of the issue, this would be advantageous. By the same token, however, it could
be disadvantageous because he would not be seen as being a fresh face.


12259CH


                            CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS
                        CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS




 Before taking this any further, the Home Secretary would be grateful to have the
 Lord Chancellor's personal advice, both in terms of Mr Collins' performance in
 the Taylor Inquiry and his general standing in the judiciary.

 A response to Ken Sutton by close on 3 June would be much appreciated.




                                COLIN HARNETT




12259CH


                      CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS
2 5 MAY 1991

                                                                                             o /ft    •


     From: Paul Pugh                                     cc:   Mr Michael                     t
           Head of Operational Policing                        Mr O’Brien
           Policy Unit                                         Lord Williams
           Room 529                                            Sir Richard Wilson
           Queen Anne’s Gate                                   Mr Boys Smith
           ® 273 3141                                          Mr Hallidav^
           23 May 1997                                         Ms Wh^Jdon
                                                               Miss Drew
                                                               Mr Fulton
                                                               Ms Loudon
                                                               Mr R Evans
                                                               Mr Edmundson^s—-
                                                               Mr Horlock
                                                               Mr Granatt
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen


     Home Secretary
                                                                         l              tr     r t iL v

                                                               C /V                                       -
     HILLSBOROUGH
                                                               J ,* ,'   -lpVw.1   *\    O s jv ^ ^ t .

     Issue
                                                                                             2A
                                                                                                     ¥\
     1.    To consider the possible scope of the judicial examination of the recent'
     representations.                                   U *w A \    ^            ^ J[a . <4
     Timing

     2.    We are to discuss this on 4 June. You asked for advice on the terms of
     reference as a basis for that discussion.

     Consideration

     3.        There are seven key issues to consider:

                (i)         the nature of the inquiry

                (ii)       its scope

                (iii)      its purpose

                (iv)        terms of reference

                (v)         timetable


     f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
           (vi)        who should do it?

           (vii)       handling.

4.      On the nature of the inquiry, it will not fit any of the conventional patterns for
inquiries - such as Royal Commission, tribunal of inquiry, inquiry under the Police
Act, or non-statutory judicial inquiry. (Those different forms of inquiry are considered
in detail in my submission of today’s date about an inquiry into policing of minority
ethnic communities.) This will be a judicial examination of the substance of
representations calling for a full public inquiry, inquest or prosecution - in effect to
determine whether a full-blown inquiry is warranted.

5.     You have indicated that the scope of the judicial examination should not
extend to a re-opening of all the matters dealt with by Taylor. No-one has
questioned Taylor’s conclusions and recommendations about safety at sports
grounds and the policing of football matches. The scope should be limited to
consideration of the recent representations made by the Hillsborough families and
others. Those representations fall under four broad headings:

           (i)         the ten allegedly ‘unresolved questions’ raised in the Granada
                       programme;

           (ii)         allegations about video evidence;

            (iii)       medical evidence about the time of death of the victims;

            (iv)        other allegations by the families about police conduct.

6.    I suggest the focus should be the evidence which has been put forward to us,
together with any other relevant material which those concerned want to submit. It
should be mainly a review of the written material, although you wanted to allow the
opportunity for representations. If the examination is, to be manageable, however,
we will need to avoid hearings or legal representation: there are (at this stage) no
parties or plaintiffs.

7.    The purpose of the examination will have to be several-fold, because - as my
submission of 8 May drew out - it is very difficult to separate matters potentially
relevant to an inquiry, or inquest, possible criminal proceedings or disciplinary
matters. In practice, the inquirer will have to form a view about whether there are
grounds for;

            public inquiry:

            consenting to a new inquest;

             new criminal investigations;



 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd. doc
            instigating disciplinary procedures;

           or any combination of those options.

That means that the inquirer must report not just to you as Home Secretary,
because only the first of those four issues is for you to determine. The inquirer must
report also to the Attorney General, the DPP, and - on the last point - to the relevant
chief officer of police.

8.         That suggests terms of reference something like:

           “To carry out an independent examination of whether there is new evidence
           relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough^ Stadium on 15 April 1989 which
           pmvirinn nnffi^;^"*              ^ -A A ^             4r

                                   the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court under section
                                   13 of the Coroners Act T988 for another inquest;

                       (ii)        the Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                                   charges against any person;

                       (iii)       the relevant Chief Police Officer to take disciplinary action
                                   against any police officer.         :

           Or which means that it would be in the public interest for the Home Secretary
           to establish a public inquiry”

9.     It is important that we should put an end to speculation with the minimum of
delay. A timetable of no more than 2 or 3 months is important. That will have a
Bearing on who should do the job. You have already said that it is essential to
appoint a judge. Anyone starting from scratch in considering these issues would
have a huge amount of background to assimilate - the Taylor inquiry alone produced
over 120 files of written material. One possible candidate for the job with a head
start would be Mr Justice Collins, now a High Court judge, but Counsel to the Taylor
inquiry in 1989. We have not approached LCD to see if he would be available, but
could do so if you wish. There would be some risk that he might be perceived -
although not, I think, by the Hillsborough families - as not totally impartial because of
his previous involvement with the inquiry,

10.   The scope and timetable will have implications for the costs to the
department. There is no provision for such costs at present.

11.     On handling the next step will be to secure the agreement of the Attorney and
the DPP. I have told their offices broadly what you have in mind and that you are
likely to approach them formally soon. The Heritage Secretary should also be kept
informed because of his responsibility for safety at sports grounds. The Lord
Chancellor will have to be approached to nominate a judge.



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
12.    Once you have colleagues’ agreement we will put forward advice on handling
an announcement and how to inform the main players. We see those as being the
Hillsborough families, the Merseyside MPs, and the South Yorkshire Police. Others,
however, also have a close interest and arrangements will have to be made to warn
them in advance - particularly former chief superintendent Duckenfield who will be a
focus of media attention.




                                     PAUL PUGH




  f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0212pd.doc
                                                                             Cf£ Mvu W      -




     From:           Colin Harnett                                    cc   Mr Michael
                     PS/Home Secretary                                     Mr Howarth
                     0171 273 4602                                         Mr O'Brien
                                                                           Permanent Secretary
                                                                           Mr Boys Smith
                     19 May 1997                                           Mr Halliday
                                                                           Miss Loudon, PPD, PTU
                                                                           Miss Weston, LAB
                                                                           Mr Evans, ABCU
                                                                           Mr P Edmundson, OPPU
                                                                           Mr Granatt
                                                                           Mr Warner
                                     |            L L -V        vwH        Mr Owen




9   Mr Pugh, OPPU                                          v .




    HILLSBOROUGH                                     v      "    J

    The Home Secretary and Mr Michael have seen your submission of 8 May. The
    Home Secretary has asked me to express his gratitude to officials for the very
    thorough way in which they have examined this matter.

    2.      The Home Secretary's view is that there w ill have to be some independent
    examination of the "new" evidence. Ministers consider that the matter simply
    w ill not be resolved otherwise. The Home Secretary adds that we will need a
    respected judge to conduct this examination rather than a senior member of the
    Bar.

    3.           The next steps are therefore as follows:

                 there w ill be a meeting between Ministers and officials to discuss the
                 terms of reference, handling w ith colleagues and presentation of the
                 jud icial examinat ion;

                 the Home Secretary is minded to meet Mr McBride, the producer of the
                 "Hillsborough" programme;

                 there will be a meeting w ith Merseyside MPs and the Hillsborough Family
                 Support Group;

                 the Home Secretary w ill make a statement to the House.



    1 2 0 9 1 -c h
/
/




                4.     We w ill be in touch to arrange the handling meeting. In the
                meantime, ! would be grateful if you could offer early advice on the terms
                of reference, etc for the examination as a basis for discussion at that
                meeting.




                                         COLIN HARNETT




    1 2 0 9 1 -c h
2 8 MAY 1997


          From:           Colin Harnett                                cc   Mr Michael
                          PS/Home Secretary                                 Mr Howarth
                          0171 273 4602                                     Mr O'Brien
                                                                            Permanent Secretary
                                                                            Mr Boys Smith
                          1$ May 1997                                       Mr Halliday
                                                                            Miss Loudon, PPD, PTU
                                                                            Miss Weston, LAB
                                                                            Mr Evans, ABCU
                                                                            Mr P Edmundson, OPPU
                                                                            Mr Granatt
                                                                            Mr Warner
                                                                            Mr Owen




         Mr Puah. OPPU



         HILLSBOROUGH

         The Home Secretary and Mr Michael have seen your submission of 8 May. The
         Home Secretary has asked me to express his gratitude to officials for the very
         thorough way in which they have examined this matter.

         2.      The Home Secretary's view is that there will have to be some independent
         examination of the "new" evidence. Ministers consider that the matter simply
         w ill not be resolved otherwise. The Home Secretary adds that we will need a
         respected judge to conduct this examination rather than a senior member of the
         Bar.

         3.           The next steps are therefore as follows:

                      there will be a meeting between Ministers and officials to discuss the
                      terms of reference, handling with colleagues and presentation of the
                      judicial examination:

                      the Home Secretary is minded to meet Mr McBride, the producer of the
                      "Hillsborough" programme;

                      there will be a meeting with Merseyside MPs and the Hillsborough Family
                      Support Group;

                      the Home Secretary will make a statement to the House.



         1 2 0 9 1 -c h
                4.     We w ill be in touch to arrange the handling meeting. In the
                meantime, I would be grateful if you could offer early advice on the terms
                of reference, etc for the examination as a basis for discussion at that
                meeting.




                                         COLIN HARNETT




1 2 0 9 1 -ch
                                                             IX.   X
                                                                   A*             ^
                                                                                     if f h i


From: Paul Pugh                               cc:    Sir Richard Wilson
      Head o f Operational                           Mr Boys Smith
      Policing Policy Unit                           Mr Halliday
      Room 529                                       Miss Loudon
      Queen Anne’s Gate                              Miss Weskrfi
      Tel: 0171-273-3141                             Mr R Evans
      8 May 1997                                     Mr Granatt
                                                     Mr P Edmundson
                                                     Mr Warner
                                                     Mr Owen




1. Mr Michael

2. Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue

In December a Granada television dramatisation of the Hillsborough disaster
claimed that there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the disaster. Since
then further claims have been made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
supported by local MPs and others. This submission assesses the case for a new
public inquiry; and considers whether you should make and announce a decision.

Timing

2.    There is no firm deadline for your decision, but the outcome is awaited with
keen interest by those involved.

Summary and Recommendation

3.    After the Granada programme we asked Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, to provide a full report on the claims made in the
programme. We have examined that report and the transcripts supplied by South
Yorkshire Police, watched the video film which Granada suggested might be new
evidence, and examined the video tapes produced by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group. Our assessment is that there are no grounds for establishing a new
public inquiry. The material has also been considered by the DPP, and by the
Attorney General’s Office. None of those who have examined it consider that there is
evidence to justify a new public inquiry, a reopening of the inquest, or the
prosecution of individuals. But a decision not to reopen the inquiry would be a
severe blow to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, who believe firmly that they
have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice. You may therefore wish to


f: oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
consider whether the recent representations should be further considered by officials
or independently examined. This is further discussed in paragraphs 28 and 29.



4.     The Hillsborough disaster happened on 15 April 1989; 95 people died as a
result of overcrowding and crushing. There have been four separate investigations
or reviews of what happened: a public inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor; the
coroner’s inquest into each of the deaths; an investigation into police conduct
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority; and a judicial review of the verdict of
the inquest.

5.     The Taylor Inquiry was set up by the then Home Secretary immediately after
the disaster. The terms of reference were to inquire into the events and to make
recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
The Inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and received some 71 hours of video evidence from different
sources. Lord Justice Taylor published an interim report in August 1989 which set
out the causes of the disaster. He found that there were a number of causes:

           (i)         The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut
                       off access to the central pens which were already too full.

           (ii)        They were already too full because no safe maximum capacities had
                       been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual
                       pens numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
                       crowd density.

           (iii)       When an influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers
                       there afforded less protection than they should have done and the
                       barrier collapsed.

           (iv)        Tfce need to open gate C was because of dangerous congestion at the
                       turnstiles. That occurred because, as both the club and police should
                       have realised, the turnstile area could not cope easily with the numbers
                       unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The police had
                       failed to draw up plans about how they would control large numbers
                       should they arrive in a short period.

            (v)         The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much
                        aggravated the problem, as did the Sheffield Wednesday football
                        club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.

6.     He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person, but put a significant
portion of the blame for the disaster at the door of the police: ‘... the main reason for
the disaster was the failure of police control.' (paragraph 278, interim report).




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                              2
7.     He made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January 1990
made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken place
since then in safety at sports grounds and in the policing of football matches have
been based largely on those recommendations.

8.      The second investigation was the inquest into the deaths conducted by the
coroner for the western district of South Yorkshire. The purpose of an inquest, as
determined by the Coroner’s Rules, is to establish the identity of the deceased; the
place of death; the time and date of death; and how the deceased came by their
deaths. The inquest jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for
the Hillsborough victims was accidental death.

9.      The third investigation was conducted by West Midlands Police, supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal proceedings. The investigation also considered whether any police officer
should be subject to disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking
of over 5000 statements, and scrutiny of all the material which had previously been
examined. The evidence was sent to the DPP, who concluded that no person
should be subject to criminal proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided
that the senior officers in charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health in advance of a disciplinary ruling. The
PCA later announced that disciplinary proceedings against Murray would be
withdrawn because the retirement of Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a
joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
senior officer. Murray later left the police service.

 10.    The fourth investigation was a judicial review o f the coroner’s
proceedings. An application was made on the grounds that the coroner wrongly
failed to direct the jury about the verdict of lack of care or accidental death due to or
aggravated by lack of care relating to the negligence of the police which caused the
disaster, that the coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care by the
emergency services, including the police, and wrongly insisted on a cut off point of
3.15pm for the evidence, given that there was evidence that at least one of the
victims was alive after 3.15pm; and that pressure has been put on two witnesses to
retract their evidence about those signs of life. Having considered the conduct of
the inquest, the divisional court ruled that none of the procedural or technical points
raised justified the court’s intervention. In particular, the divisional court found that
the cut off point of 3.15pm was reasonable, and that the coroner’s directions to the
jury were impeccable.

Recent allegations

11.    The programme “Hillsborough” was a drama documentary which followed
three families through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme
claimed that it uncovered new evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The
programme was followed by an adjournment debate, instigated by Peter Kilfoyle, on
 17 December. Mr Howard in response said that he would consider all the


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pAdoc                                                       3
representations and that        I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a
decision to re-open the inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the
public interest to do so. The charge has been made - it is one that I will consider
carefully - that there has been a cover up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
I shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that
evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or the
Coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would
have been different.’ (Hansard, cols. 861-2).The programme makers, the bereaved
families, local MPs, David Sheppard, the Bishop of Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror
have since been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened. The issue has
generated 48 Ministers’ cases and 125 letters from the public, all but one of which
have been in favour of a fresh inquiry, plus about 700 printed cards supporting the
request.

12.   There have been three broad categories of evidence put forward in recent
months:

• ten allegedly “unresolved questions" identified in the Granada programme;

• other issues arising from the programme;

• further allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
  opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, that in his view “these
  new pieces of evidence call for a full police or public inquiry".


The ten “unresolved questions”

13.    The chief constable has provided a detailed response to each question and
pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in respect of each of the
questions. This is at Annex A - we have not included the supporting transcripts but
these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to consider
whether the Taylor inquiry reached the “right” conclusion - nor have we pursued
every possible point of detail. We have sought to establish whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised; and whether the evidence put forward in
recent months was available at the time of the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that
none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases not only did the Taylor inquiry consider the
questions but made specific recommendations as a result.

Other allegations

14.    Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press
release they took the form of loosely connected questions which suggested, though
did not overtly assert, that there had been a police cover-up. We also met members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it
became clear that whilst their allegations were similar to those implied by Granada
they took a more extreme form. The families firmly believe that there was a


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                      4
conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midlands Police, who conducted the
investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role of the police in
the disaster. The families feel that, as a result of this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case of
the inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict of accidental death when a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.

15.     The police were reluctant to accept any blame in the months after the
disaster, and were criticised by Taylor for that, although they have since accepted
their responsibility. We have seen, however, a continuing degree of defensiveness
from some South Yorkshire officers. It is possible to understand why the families
have come to the view that they have.

16.    There are two main strands to the case put forward by the Hillsborough
families and by Granada: first questions surrounding the video tapes; and secondly
the questions surrounding medical testimony - although the latter are more directly
relevant to calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry. Detailed consideration
of specific points is at Annex B. The Chief Constable ‘s assessment is at Annex C.
The opinion obtained by the Family Support Group from Mr Alun Jones QC is at
Annex D.

The “missing” video tapes

17.    Many of the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by
South Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of
misunderstandings. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in
their entirety; if these had been made available at the outset some of the concerns
which are now being expressed might have not have arisen.

18.     There is confusion about two events. One set of tapes was stolen on the night
of the disaster, Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police
control centre within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had a video
recording facility in a separate recording suite; this was under the supervision of the
Club and thejiolice had no control of its operation. During the night of the disaster
two video tapes went missing from that particular room; the discovery of the theft
was recorded as a crime and West Midlands Police made enquiries to trace the
person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are still missing. One of the
tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown the turnstiles
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Neither would have given a view of the
terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were
 probably stolen by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police
 believed to be damaging. South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a
 key to the room and that they considered one motive for the theft could have been
that the tapes could have shown irregularities in the way that admissions were
 handled at the turnstiles that could have implicated club employees. These missing
tapes have been confused by some commentators, though not the families, with the
 video tapes held by South Yorkshire Police.



 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                    5
         The police videos



         Yorksh°:ap :^ e S^ ' : t e s e m : s^ S^ re,e,aS^ ,ha, ,he fcpss ^ , d by South
        Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire have s u ^ i^ th e M 'te D s f 7 bee" See" by the
        for the most part they are of no conseauenrp ch«                  We can confirm that
        and surroundings. In the final half hour before the             VI6WS ° f the stadium
        almost entirely taken up with the turmoil            ?       occurred the recording is
        gross overcrowding in                                           ft does not show the
        knew the extent of the overcrowding. In fhfs resMcfJhe6^             0™ th3' the POlice


       how it was that Duckenfield came J o s e sigh,o !


        concerning the v i d e o ^ S ^ T h e y ^ a im ^ h a fr6 & mor® sophlst'cated allegation
       that one of the police cameras numbe 5 w U W“ Wlthheld " « * « • * showed
       in evidence to Taylor and to the inauest th * T t          mg when the P0,'ce asserted
      camera was that /co u ld have been used o zoom T T              ^    Signlficance ° f
      extent of the distress experienced bv the W T             1     Central pens to show th®
      including a detailed transcT t o n ts c o n l ^         'S T th3t the video evidence,
     inquest jury saw an e           d           i t       e         d          to Ta^ - The
     to allegations which are discussed in Annex B              hand,ed has in itself given rise


     matter             in t e ^                                                   is partly a
    operator, misled the inquiry and the in a u ^ t hut       IC? rd* the police video
    suggests that he claimed the camera was not wnrki ° Ur rea 9 of the transcripts
    the police view.   This is a Doint nn «/h.-      J
                                                   orkm9 verY weH.' this continues to be
   forward by the police; we do not see any e v id e n c e 'th a S ^ T * * fr° m that put
   any less clear than those from anv of thp nth            Pictures from camera 5 were
   this divergence of view is significant.          cameras. But we do not believe that

   Medical evidence and fh? inauest vftrifiiyt


  Under the®Coroners" A ^g efth eA ttom ey's                  *he Att0mey General-
 the courts to order a fresh inquest The fa m fe hT 'S ^ qu'red for an application to
 General to recommend a new inquest nSSbi *                appealed to the Attorney
 claimed in an article in H o s p ita lo Z io rth a th !          Dr Ed Walker- He
 says was alive after 3.15. Dr Walker aavn a             f   p Hammond whom he
      ° r Wa'ker SaW ° ,a ^         wh°™ now he b elievesT te P h ^ H a ^ n d 6

             was of s im ila r age ^aroundTl                  eJ t>cond vi<*m arrived. He
            Cardiopulmonary /arrest I intuhatoH h-            blond hair. He was also in
            inhalation of Z m a T c o L Z ™ a£ hZ *           "        eVidenc° ° f
                                          ' He also had       ™ * e d gaseous abdominal

f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO I67pA<Joc


                                                                                          6
           distension possibly indicating that he had has mouth to mouth resuscitation at
           some time.

           I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was
           also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and
           dilated throughout, and I believe he has since died. ”

The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear
whether there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty, did not appear
at the time to contradict the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims
were effectively dead by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the
inquest because the consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a
composite picture.

23.     Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new
inquest, evidence that some of the deceased may have survived beyond 3.15 has
not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the past. In the
judicial review of the coroner’s decision in November 1993, Lord Justice McCowan
found that in respect of one of the victims there was “a realistic probability” he was
alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:

           “ I have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest or for merely
           quashing the existing verdict.

           If I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following
           matters would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose of a fresh
           inquest? To get a verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already
           been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault and
           paid compensation. To get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see
           no evidence to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
           all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination of the last
           minutes of their lives. I doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
           process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers of witnesses
           and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far short. Moreover, irrespective of
           whose" fa u lt, if anyone’s, it is , the fact is that four and a half years have
           already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion of
           a mere quashing of the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would
           regard that as absolutely valueless'’.

24.    We believe that overturning the inquest verdict is what the families most
desire. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr Philip
Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster. They agreed that
Taylor had done a good job, though they maintained that there were aspects of the
inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
inquest verdict to be a gross miscarriage of justice. They strongly criticised the
coroner’s selection of witnesses as well as the cut off time of 3.15 after which he
would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce a finding
of death through “lack of care” or “unlawful killing". It appears therefore that their call


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                          7
                                                                                             «




for a fresh inquiry is not so much an end in itself but a means by which they hope
that the Attorney would consent to an application to reopen the inquest, or failing
that, a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there
were to be a change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure
from the families on the Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges.

 Criminal charge?

25.     The question of prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he
announced in September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute
anyone in respect of the disaster. The CPS Code of Practice sets out the
circumstances when decisions to prosecute can be reconsidered. This includes
cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that there needs to be a
high threshold in such cases because of the principle of finality - that people should
be able to rely on their decisions. Although new evidence could trigger a
prosecution, the CPS have found no evidence in the recent representations of any
wrongdoing that would in their view justify criminal charges. The most they believe
that they have found is that PC Bichard regarded the quality of the video recordings
less favourably than the Sheffield Wednesday video technician, Mr Houldsworth. A
report is currently under consideration by the DPP herself; the firm recommendation
is that the criminal investigations should not be re-opened.

P-Qlice disciplinary charges

26.    A further cause for bitterness among the families is that no disciplinary
charges were upheld against any members of the police. In addition to Duckenfield
and Murray, all other officers involved in the case have left the force “with the
exception of PC Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it might be argued
that Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the police
position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short of being involved in a cover-up of the
kind suggested by the families.

Conclusion

27.    Our assessment is that there is no evidence to suggest that it would be in the
public interest to establish a new public inquiry.

28.    We recognise, however, that there is no likelihood that the families will
accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence; they would see
such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
We have considered how to demonstrate objectivity and fairness. One option would
be to secure an independent assessment of all the material which has been
submitted in recent months. You may wish to consider asking a respected barrister
or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
that has been compiled. This could be a limited exercise; but he or she could look
once more at the evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider
written representations. That would only go half way towards the full public re­



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                        8
examination of events which the families want, so would not fully meet their
concerns.

29.    A further disadvantage is that it would keep the families’ hopes alive without
real justification. I would feel happier about an independent external review if I felt
that there were anything in the representations which, if substantiated, might
suggest that it would be in the public interest to convene a further public inquiry or
that such an inquiry might achieve more than the previous investigations. But we
have seen no such evidence. On balance, I would advise you to announce a
decision now that you do not intend to establish a new inquiry.

Handling

30.    You may want to discuss the issues. Whatever decision you reach we will
need to prepare carefully for the handling of an announcement, and we will put up a
further submission at the appropriate time discussing the handling in detail. We will
need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be done,
there are a number of separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning of the
announcement, and the families who have made direct representations. We will
also need to take account of the separate roles of the DPP and the Attorney in
considering the grounds for criminal proceedings or a fresh inquest. Their distinct
statutory responsibilities mean that they may want to announce their decisions
separately.




                                     PAUL PUGH




 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                         9
                         Vty mbs C hief Superintendent Dbvid Duckenfield put in ctarge o f a major
                         sem i-final only 21 days before the game, when he was rela tiv ely

                     1   inexperienced a t p olicin g Hatches?

                         Mole 1-2, Duckenfield 3-4. Jackson 5-6


                         Vty were there no barriers or cardans to f ilt e r tte crowd a d prevent a
                         tu ild up outside the Leppings Lane end o f the grand i f , as the f a s

                     2   in s is t, there were the previous year?
                         Duckenfield 7-11, Jackson 12-13, Marshall 14-15



                         Vty was the game not delayed, as a ranter o f p o lice o ffic e r s thought i t
                          should have been, when i t became obvious that i t would not be pnwriMg to

                     3   get a l l the Liverpool fans sa fe ly in to the grand before the 3 pm kick-
                         off?
                         Duckenfield 16-31, Murray 32-39, Bichard 40-41 ___ _____


                         Vty d i& i't p o lice recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace


                     4
                          when eye w itnesses, including fo o tb a ll ccnmm tato r John Motson, were
                         aware o f the problems fifte e n minutes before kick-off?
                         Duckenfield 42-52



                           Vty wasn't the tir a e l leading to the central pens closed when they became

                     5   f u ll, the procedure adopted a t the previous year's Semi-Final?

                         Duckenfield 53-66, Crawford 67-77, Marshall 78-79


                         t ty did C hief Superintendent Duckenfield m islead the Secretary o f the Fa"
                         ty t ellin g him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the o ffic e r knew he

                     6   had given the order fc r i t to be opened?

                         Duckenfield 80-92, Murray 93-95, Crawford 96, Bichard 97-101,
                         Jackscn 102-103

                         Vty did i t take i an hour a fte r the f ir s t crushing began to p ill down the
                         10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and t ty were the gates which



                -«
                     7   led on to the p itch too sm all to be e ffe c tiv e in an emergency evacuation?

                         Duckenfield 104-108, Seaman 109-115, Hopkins 116-118, Eastwood 119-125,
                         Murray 126-129, Taylor 127, Bichard 130/1, Jackson 132/4, Calvert 135-137

                         Vty was no public address amcurcement matte - eith er informing the fans


                     8
                          as to %tet was happening, asking fc r th eir help or fc r any medical
                         personnel a t the grand to help - u r t il 3*30 prf?
                         Duckenfield 138-143, Jackson 144-148



                         Vty, then 42 anfculances reached the gran d , did more not get on to the
                          pitch tte r e the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained

                     9   medical help?
                         SYMAS 149, Hopkins 150-152, Higgins 153-154, Eason 155-156



                           Vty did only 14 o f those Who died go to hospital?
U niversal
                 10
                           Higgins 157-159
0FF1CESUPPUES
UDIV110C
                           QUESTION                 ONE


Why was Chief Superintendent Oavid Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Supenntendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had expenence of the ground
His expenence of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre. Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very expenenced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 • 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion, in view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report
215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
 policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
 of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
 Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                                                                                          o




                          QUESTION                 TWO


Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous expenence. intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions m the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would anse where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 7-15. Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?


Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 16-41, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Tayior - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
control room.

227. TTwjoith was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it
                                                                Q



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be m the discretion of the officer m
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration m
deciding whether to exercise it.




                                                                                  »
#
                               QUESTION                  FOUR


     Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
     terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
     Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off*?


     No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
    overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4                 Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
    and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
    say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson m
    the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
    realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
    attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings



    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
    room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
    view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
    field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
    working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
    excessive air traffic on channel 25. attempts couid have been made to aiert officers
    on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations
    in the event pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place fans
    were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
    control room.
             —*

    245. The 20 officers detailed to the penmeter track were distributed round the pitch so
    that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
    reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
    officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
    contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

    246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
    to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
    medical attention)-. At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
    invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
    by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
    and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
    crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
    and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
 unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule requirea
 consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

 247 "Senior officer meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher The Inspector m
 charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
 players' tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men.' In evidence he said

 "I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
 were m danger. I’d then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
 to the back of the stand “

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I’m wrong, rm going to get a right bollocking for this" Naturally one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again 1
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match bnefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected of takma
appropriate steps to remedy it.                                                 9


Lordtfustice Taylor • Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding intenm
recommendation 5. That provided:-

  *     5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authonsed under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
\
                                                                              0   <        1       v*


    need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
    spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
    not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
    whichever is the lower.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 11,12 and 16

    11. There should be a wntten statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
    police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and m
    particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
    monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding
    Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed m
    writing in advance.

    12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
    pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the dub is monitonng
    that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
    crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
    addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
    police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
    Recommendation 20 below.

    16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
    especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
    and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
    signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should indude demonstrations at
    the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
    different crowd densities.
                               QUESTION                FIVE


Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, tte- procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?




down central tunnel.
T h « fM U n u M a n d   overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief


On giving instructions for trie gates io oe openeu, .au.v               ™          ,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to dose tunne
in 1988 the central tunnel was dosed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.         »
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
 231 Planning apart, however, it should have been dear in the control room where
 there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
 be dosed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
 could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
 have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

  9.     Arrangements should be made:-

  (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
  maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
  either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
  otherwise, and
  (b) to dose off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capadty is
  about to be reached.
Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
he believed correct in a crisis moment.

Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.


OBSERVATIONS

This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 80 • 103, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
controLroom for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "Thafs the gate
thafs been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
 later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans'
 account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had forced
their way in.

99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom.
Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
emergency operations.
                       QUESTION                   SEVEN


Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.
Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the penmeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authonty and they decided that the gates should
 be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
 decision to leave the gates.
         jz*
 Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
 first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the acodent unit was directed but
 would have to travel some distance, if it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
 been at ground very very quickly.

 Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson’s statement "that anyone who had
 considered the possibility of crushing at Lepp»ngs Lane end would have instantly
 realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, ”l follow that
 point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
 lot of persuasion about that".

 When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
 Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bnng cutting
 equipment.
#
    Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
    request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
    the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

    The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
    access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
    the number he had wanted to bring out.

    Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
    however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
    into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
    which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
    away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
    'Breakin-Kif on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
    not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

    The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
    evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
    used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
    were not; ‘A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement1. The certifying authority issued
    a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
    should have been.


    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 104-137, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


    Gates

    258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
    intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
    emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
    examplertne collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
    had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
    since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
    brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
    empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
    If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat then the
    alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
    radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
    that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
     minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
     available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

    264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
    standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
    spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
    number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Or Eastwood, the
                                                                                    vaj? ^ n o^-v   7*


     conform 10 th? G uidl me rM llS u rrw a rco m m o n tcntlc,secl ,or ,a"'n9 ^ t i y -
     responsible for considering safety on ih a » ™ r« Th    a“ ,hose wh0 have b k
     of the pi.cn has caused .nsuffl^m anan “on “ be l a ^ T "                ,he s™ > v
     overcrowding. Certain it was that once the em«h                      a crusf1 due to
     were wholly inadequate for rescue pu “ 0ses          “ ° n 15 Apnl 9a,e* 3 a"< <


    Cutting Equipment


    ^ e~ 'r^ t^rr::L1er.^on\o„b,•rf'nh
                                     ar a>—3*p-a
   mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the oo iirl              croppers to cut the wire
   At 3.13 pm. PC Bichard req^sted Headqua^re to ^ L ifrtf6 ?y " Hh0* succe«
   hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance         S6'V,Ce t0 bnng


    Station Office^FletcheMn^anott^^                   e a ^ v ^ T 30 emergency tender and
    tender came along the roadway by the south s ta n d i           °r8W‘ The emer9ency
   » procew M her. i, (herefor. b ^ c k ilu t aM                    °    ^     wa*
   loans some eight minutes. From there. Mr Hm Z 1 5                ^ P'ns* L* * enWn«
  With resuscitation equipment. They rendered                      * * * went onto ^ Pitch
  Mr Fletcher and hitmen ran a ^ b S S X s o S m Z ? ?                   * the
  and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence the T T * 9 CUttln9 e<’ uiPm®nt
  required as by then the last of me dead a n d ^ f d I j ? " 8 6quipment was not
  pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty -tninlTn ,,?           .     b#in« removed from the
  assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid £ me * £ ? * “        fir* men


  Lord Justice Taylor • Final Report

 Gates



   endosu^^s o ^ p ^ .'^ i^ a s ^ o r ^ r w r ^ n f f i ^ ? ? * " ^               * » >e" or
  the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reass!?ra.  ^          «      0rd instant acces« to
  was an escape route and thirdly to keep oolica and «♦         !?er Hi,,sborough that there
  the gateway. I also had in m id m a t X E S S S T * T t0 Condltions
  ground*'be inadequate and I was not making anv^LSSI 9at6S m'9ht at some
  change at that stage. Along with r e d u ^ w p a l ! ^                       for structural
  ower fences, I must now consider w h e m e r^ S ?              T °f Sufficient «ates
  eave gates fully open. I know that some Police                   0* recommendation to
 to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion                  ^ have been anxfous that
 closing the gates near the end of the cam*                 pract,ce at some grounds of
 I would still hope that gates would be lefMFuih, n! ! ! ' nfl1. em shut but not locked
feel thi, can safely b e d o n .H^ . M " , 0 W , IiW w 1 >“ » h command
open, partially open or dosed they be                               “ h,lh* r «»y be fully
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They shoS?                              th* p* riod when
emergency ewts    a n d   spectators should be confident 0“ th?s             aVa"abks ,or
                                                                     G^\>J2a “W crvx

#
    Cutting Equipment

    205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
    sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
    from behind penmeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
    obsea'ed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
    unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
    would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
    recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
    unforeseen emergency.


    Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 17 and 21
    17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
    area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
    be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
    that pen or area.
    21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the dub at each
    ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
    fenang to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
    as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
    Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
    decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                                                                              *
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT


Why was no public address announcement made - either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back m ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to dear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes dear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 138 • 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence dose to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutM'ticked past some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

Fans

97. Apart from the message to dear the pitch and the belated call for medical
assistance about 3.30 pm. no information or advice was broadcast on the public
address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majonty of
the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters m the Kop
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infunated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing
Other officers were posted to the penmeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                          QUESTION                      n in e



W h y , When 42                                    fe v e ^ y in iu ^ te r e T n
to the pitch where tne ay»ny
need of trained medical help.
                                                                     n thfi ©v©n^ of 3 major




 a E tsS ? 'S r3 rs;~ s
 egress to the playing area.                                                amBulances onto

  M, Higgins
  me Playing area due >cm m lew w ^                on(y one r y e nto and               ^       ^

  "“ f    ™ 8evaiation of me injured and             VJidtoe and 'ans it I ^ P * * * OP*1® 1®"



  me                                            taken o , Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance




    S     S    i 'S   S   S     ^       «   P 'a « are, was correct.



    OBSERVATIONS

     Please }ee pages 149 • 1S8, Volume 2.


        Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report                                                .       . m,
              , sav at the outset of this chapter that no                     thTfire brigade on 15



         arrive sw«ly or wtth                           'u n fo rtu n a te * he had » e n * to g o ^ n



         y            s             r       ;      i, : —           r » U o n n . i7 r : ^                 n


          overwhelming evidence that to attempt
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down.
The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
 satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69
64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
attendance.
65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should employ a medical practitioner to be present and available to deal witii
any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
 contactable.


    (b)    At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000,
 the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
 immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
 and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
 those in th^ROlice control room.
 67 At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
 ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
 of 5,000 or more.
 68 The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
 crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
 the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

 69 A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
 match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                                    C3    kk P   ±   ft uv\ V0


                            QUESTION                  TEN


W h y did o n ly 14 o f th o s e w h o d ied g o to h o sp ita l?

Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

 Please see pages 157 -159, Volume 2.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
 296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
 response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
 attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
 did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
 He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
 on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
 equipment had amved earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
  of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
 whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
  The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
  overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
                                                                     G.            (/vx


milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the nsk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the tim^ when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
                                                                             ANN EX B

Questions raised by Granada and the families

The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably
to dissuade the inquiry from watching the tape) while the video technician Mr
Houldsworth testified that he had repaired the fault on the camera trained on
the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and it was working perfectly.

This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an
affidavit to this effect. On the day of the match there were five cameras scanning
the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording
machines, which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the
officer controlling the video made a decision to record. PC Bichard who controlled
the videoing procedure explained in his testimony that one of the cameras had not
been working well but added “ the quality has been improved. It was not up to the
mark but it was a lot better than it had been . We were getting pictures that is the
best way of describing it.” Therefore it is not true to say that the Taylor inquiry wsfs
led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective that they were not
worth viewing.

In cross examination during the inquest PC Bichard maintained his view that the
camera was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to
distinguish facial expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and
cannot distinguish any material difference in the quality of the recording which came
from camera 5 to that coming from the other cameras. This does not prove that there
was not a quality difference discernible to the police in the control box on the day. It
could be argued though that PC Bichard was putting a gloss on the evidence in a
way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In that he was not alone.
Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and^vasive.

The inquest jury and the inquiry only had the police account of what could be
seen from the police control box on that day and the capabilities of the video
system. The faulty camera was never challenged.

South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product of their
recording as explained above. For most of the tape the recorded material shows a
sequence of 25 second shots from each of the five cameras. PC Bichard testified to
the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
record the activity at the turnstiles which is where Duckenfield considered at the time
that the trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is
mainly of this area. Later parts of the footage cover what was happening inside the
ground. A full schedule of the video footage and the tapes themselves were
available to the Taylor inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers
 representing the families at the time of the inquest.


foppu\hou'iongsubppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                      10
South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at
these tapes. The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by
West Midlands Police and contained the most relevant footage of the disaster taken
from a variety of sources, including material from the BBC, from the underwater
search team who had hand held camcorders as well as from the police monitoring
equipment.

The compilation tape, which was seen by Taylor inquiry, showed the overcrowding
in the central pens. The question of whether the camera could have zoomed in on
the crowd is a detail which does not appear to have been an issue to the Taylor
inquiry. The line of questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the
police claimed they had or had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem
of overcrowding. This is shown in the transcripts, for example, of Lord Justice
Taylor's questioning of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

                Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen
           videos and it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain, is [it] not that by
           2.50 the two wing pens at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas
           the two centre pens, if you won’t have them full, were getting on for being full.
           A. Yes sir.

           Q. You agree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure
           that there was no further crowding of pens 3 and 4. A. That there were not
           more than the number to fit in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

           Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have put those
           pens at full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were
           approaching being full.

           Q. Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd
           control. There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have
           to cut of[the inflow into those pens. A. Yes sir.”


The report was heavily critical of the police in the detail of the lack of planning and of
the decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for
the disaster:

           “It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
           excellent service to the public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively
           and successfully at a large number of football games...Unfortunately their
           policing on 15 April broke down in ways already described and although here
           were other causes the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
           control.

           In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must
           report that for the most part the quality of their evidence was in inverse


f: oppuvhouvlongsub'ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                             11
         proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables who as
         witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. By contrast with some notable
         exceptions the senior officers were defensive and evasive. Their feelings of
         grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine . No doubt those feelings were
         intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their
         management . But neither their handling of problems on the day nor their
         account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of
         their rank."

Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that
it wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.

This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family
Support Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy of the material from camera
5 which was shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy of the tape that was
provided. This was indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police
say that the copy which was supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly
duplicated and blurred. Because of the degree of mistrust the families feel, they did
not question whether the poor quality of the video was for their copy alone but
assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South Yorkshire are sending us a
fresh copy of the version of the video which was seen by the inquest jury.

The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor
material from camera no 5.

This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to
explain the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely
effectively. It does not appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape
covers the run-up to the disaster; the situation looks dangerous; there is evidence of
overcrowding. The most likely reason that material from camera 5 was not used is
that the BBC material was so much better. We do not see any evidence that
particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation tape.


Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.

One of the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for
an inquiry was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor
inquiry. His statement would have been available to the Treasury Counsel who was
acting on behalf of Lord Taylor. The interim reports explains:

           ‘The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom
           statements were or could have been taken. Nevertheless , I am satisfied that
           they were sufficient in number and in reliability to enable me to make the
           necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from
           presenting an interim report in the required time and would not have added
           significantly to the relevant evidence. ”




 f oppu\hou\iongsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                      12
The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up

The central implication of the Granada programme is that the police were, and
continue to be, involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent of the
negligence. This allegation is forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in which he says:

      “One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way in which evidence
      presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South
      Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise
      as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West Midlands
      Police who assisted the coroner. ”

This ignores the crucial point that the purpose of an inquest is not to apportion
blame but to meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three
limited questions - who the deceased was and when and where he met his death.

 It is certainly true that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the
extent of his responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly
unsuccessful in these attempts: criticism was not averted either about his
involvement or that of South Yorkshire Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord
Justice Taylor wrote:

       “It is a matter of regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
       Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at
       fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield under pressure of cross examination
       apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that
       apart the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to
       blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
       crush was not cause by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
       being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to
       whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and
       encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced”

Houldsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.

PC Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording of the CCTV cameras was
inadvertently changed to time lapse mode (producing a series of pictures rather than
continual motion) probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving
positions within the control box. Mr Houldsworth stated that it was impossible to
switch recording modes when the machine is already running and that the relevant
buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught accidentally. It is hard, though,
to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the mode was changed
before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the relevant
images.

Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were
greatly enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day.
Houldsworth indicates that the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the
12 inches claimed by Bichard and that the monitors were capable of showing the
same information as shown on the larger screens used at the inquest.           Again,
despite Houldsworth’s contradiction of Bichard’s evidence, it is impossible to attach
any significance to what amounts to a difference of opinion.

West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact
that force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime
Squad and Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious
Crime Squad, was appointed as one of the investigation team.

The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, with the approval of the Police Complaints Authority and
Lord Justice Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:

         “It was therefore decided that the investigation of the disaster and the
         gathering of evidence for this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent
         police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands
         Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me;
         he appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge
         of the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both of them”.

The PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction
with the conduct of the investigation.

The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team would
have rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr
Beechey never, in fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position
may have meant that he had certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the
Squad. At the time of the Hillsborough tragedy, allegations had been publicised
about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14 August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police to investigate the
allegations against it.

Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included:

          • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance from
            Superintendent Beechey of the West Midlands Police in his conduct
            of the inquest;

          • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken
            Liverpool supporters; and

          • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the
            disaster. The Taylor inquiry considered the causes of the disaster and
            the inquest dealt with events up to the 3.15 cut>off point. The actions
            and decisions taken beyond that point, it is argued therefore, have
            not been publicly examined.


f:oppu\houdongsub\pp0167pddoc                                                      14
An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the
inquiries he should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons,
including the police. It is entirely a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and
witnesses should be heard.

Although the focus of the Taylor inquiry was on the causes of the disaster, its terms
of reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground
on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
and safety at sports events’. As such it was able to consider fully the actions of the
police and other emergency services at the ground throughout the relevant period.
Sections of the interim report dealt with what happened to deal with the disaster
after it occurred and the response of the emergency services.




  f 'nrmmhou\longsub\no0167od.doc                                                           15
            South Yorkshire

            POLICE                                              Richard Wells QPM,M.VAnn*. CLMf.
                                                                C h ief C o nstab le
            •JUSTICE    mtfi'COURACE




Poiice Poiicy Directorate                         Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)                       d&C,j Ml /SW             CSF 15/97
Horne unice
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                      q7
LONDON                                            Date:        3 February1997
SW1H9AT




V
HILLSBOROUGH
 Foiiowinn the screenina of the drama documentary "Hillsborough" on Thursday 5 December 1996
                                     I have now had the opportunity to study in some detail the
 contents of the programme and to conduct further research.
 As a result of the research into the material collected by West Midlands Police for the L o r d Justice
 Ta^oM nqu^ and the transcripts of evidence given at that inquiry, two volumes of documen s
 ^ e been compned wh^h cover the matters raised in your letter. It would serve no useful
 purpose for me to transcribe certain parts of the evidence into this letter and it seems appropna
 to provide the documents to you in their present form.

 Volume One deals with video evidence, together with comments from the coroner ° ^ ^ opP®r’
 H o m e Office Patholoaist, Professor Usher, Doctor Gumpet, a consultant neurologist, and
 Doctor Slater. Also in these documents are comments from Police Constable Bichard concern, g
 the operation of the video cameras in question.
  Let me say at tfwoutset that no new evidence has emerged and the issues raised in the television
  prcgTam l hatraTpreviously been aired in Lord Justice Taylors Inquiry or the coroners inquest.

  perhaps I can address specifically the concerns mentioned in your Ie«erdated 20            “
  of all I must emphasise once again that there is no new                                   Taylor
  on whether film from a video camera trained on the centtal enclosure. w m ^avadabie to tne y



  will see that they did not provide any useful information to the matctj' “ J” " 3" ®
  the disaster and the programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
documents provided, at Section Two.

Police Constable Bichard told the Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
available from the camera in question they were of poor quality although the camera was in fact
working.

There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
position. Evidence given by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
focused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the tape
enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
are used by control room personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record footage
only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclosagfc
video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question. Where t n ^
reproduction is of poor quality then that is the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
ground. For your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry and included here in their original form) of these particular
tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.

Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes, it
has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean, for
his intended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
not the police cameras were working. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
went missing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
locked and the alarm set. When they returned the next morning the room was still locked with the
alarm still armed. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
tapes was of n©\jse whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
the camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
the playing area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
call a clearly defined cut off time.
                                                -3 -


Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.

A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.

Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.
MAH-ea-07   17, a*    r n oh.   aauct                                                                                        ^



                                                                                                       /A NJ M < £ ><r   ^
                                    The Hillsborough Pilaster: April 1989.


                                                    Opinion



       Intfoductkm

       1      I am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
               appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areas of fresh evidence that
               have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly lupportcrs of Liverpool
               Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium In Sheffield as i jeml-flntl of the FA
               cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long Inquest, held in April and May 1990,
               and later between November 1990 and 21* March 1991, veidicU of accidental death
               wero recorded on the victims.

       2      A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six of the
              bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest. The main
              complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
              presented in the Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as AlHlfil A» In
              summary form, those main complaints were,

               2.1       The Coroner imposed sit arbitray cut-off point in time of 3.15, which had the
                         effect of excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the "Mqjor
                         Disaster Plan" promptly (pangmphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                         emergency services ptomptiy.

               2.2       The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances of tha deaths
                         of the 95; he failod therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                         of the victims wete alive after 3.15, and might have beat saved by prompt
                         medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to 5.12, and 7)

               2.3       The Coruner devutcd an excessive time, reflected in seventeen page* o f his
                         summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                         Liverpool supporters were under the influence o f drink. The report by Loni
                         Taylor, which was severely critical of the police, had ruled out tho
                         consumption of alcohol as a cause o f the disaster (psragnph 10.10)

                2.4      Th*Coroner exhibited hies towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                         sclcction of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 ami 11).

                2.5       The Coroner failed to leave thejury with any substantial task to perfocm, in
                          directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                          and unlawful killing.




                                                          I
M A K -•3-87   17.02   F R O M • BftJCE C A M r O B L L   CO              ID .                               P*OE   2   *   7'




                  The inquest verdicts "ore not qunhod. Hie judgment o f (he Court is u
                  The Court was strongly influenced by the feet that tho lawyers originally instructed
                  for the families had acquiesced in many o f the Corooer’i decisions (eg page 7), that
                  the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have nude a difference or had
                  Seen property excluded (pages 14- 36); that the direction of the Coroner to the jury
                  wwe orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and


                  Since 1993, as r am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                  2 ? ? , UP? >rt Greu? f whoIc> hftve continued to believe with deep conviction
                  that the legal system failed them badly, and that thay have been deceived aa to the
                  circumstances of death. After the 1993 judicial review il seemed to me that the
                 dwastcr would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quidly into history It
                 haa not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
                 professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officer*
                 at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                 course ofjustice at the inquest None o f the following matters were made known at
                 •he inquest

                Q c evidence of Roger Houldiwonh Attached lain affidavit of Roeer Houidswnrth
                dated 25* November 1996, attaching a statement o f May 1989 and supporting
                documents, and commenting on evidence given at the inquest (Aimc« r \ Contrary to
                the evidence prcsonted, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures o f the
                Upptngs UncTerraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                tapes and Mr Houidsworth's evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a ntanber o f
                officersloomuiedperjwy. This evidence was made known to the world .ttaigo in
                DceOTbcr 1996             GfJn,dt felwhtai televiiod a drama-documentaryon the
                 Liastcr. (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldaworth is at Anna* n \

                l i t ; nvw vidcotffpc^ftYidMM. Very recently, a member o f the Family Support arouo
                has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or^ oSw of
                those taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                fe r tv ^   °pCT f          " 7 *“** iv#U#We 10 Yoriuhire Television by the
                South VorMuiciPolicc shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
               gS „                        » rWf°tope by ^ Trevw Hicks of the Family Support
               Omup in the presence o f Mr Houldswwth, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Familv




               s ^ w ^ ^ t a s a s g a a s r - ’- -
                                 ShT V 0” af' * m               « «W.praMnttdu>                  U i..
               nou cfmrii         i          W®red Picture o f Individuals escaping from the stricken
                            y«        P*n, in which It is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The
tape has bad interference in the picture. It appear! that this tape is a copy at several
generations removed from either the copy’now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
(he videotape of which the new evidence ia a much better copy, bat it presents only
events after 3 pm.

The imnominee of the new cvidttncfi. The question whether the police could and did
notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm waa central at the inquest. On Day 77,
pugs 125, the Coroner directed the jury (AQQsaLO;

“The asueuxment of the temctft” ia a “vary important factor” and “maybe the single
most important factor in the whole inquest*1. "The total sum of evidence from the
Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
that nunc of them noticcd any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”

None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue In the
cane in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner s»1hc critical time. I
believe lhat the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
the High Court in 1993, let aiooe the jury in 1991.

The evidence of Dr Ed Walkar In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
light; see Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
appears at Annex G. The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
“ninus rhythm and cardiac output* liter arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1919, shows serious
criticisms o f the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
points out in his letter o f 7* February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3* May 1989 by Dr Wardiupe, who waa
dosely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on IS* June 1919 to
stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker waa not called
at the inquest.

It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker's
ovidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court’s judgment o f November 1993 the
Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
tho evidence disclosod the same patten, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
revealing remark comes from Dr Waidrope in his letter of 3* May 19(9 "Almost
immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill petienta
requiring urgent resuscitation''. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, waa
stractwofby the Coroner on an utterly different Actual assumption.

Tha pMi/iout inveatiyaHon- On* of ths most striking sspects of this history is the way
In which the evidence presented to the inquast waa evidence which tended to
exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very sorioua
questions Brine as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.
12    Conclusion. In my view thaw new pieces of evidence call for a full police enquiry or
       public inquiry. Exhibits luch u the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
       analysis by tome independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
       production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
       this upinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director of
       Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a full copy to the Home Secretary,
       who hua expressed Merest in this matter in the last few moaths.

13    1hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
      two or three o f the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
      acivicc.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1


3rd March 1997.                                                    Aim Jones QC
From:      Colin Harnett                                 cc   M r Michael
           PS/Home Secretary                                  Mr Howarth
           0 171 2 7 3 4 6 0 2                                Mr O'Brien
                                                              Permanent Secretary
                                                              Mr Boys Smith
           19 May 1 9 9 7                                     Mr Halliday
                                                              Miss Loudon, PP D .P T U

                                                              Mr   Evans, ABCU
                                                              Mr   P Edmundson, OPPU
                                                              Mr   Granatt
                                                              Mr   Warner
                                                              Mr   Ow en




Mr Puah. QPPU




HILLSBOROUGH

The Home Secretary and M r Michael have seen your submission of 8 May. The
Home Secretary has asked me to express his gratitude to officials for the very
thorough way in which they have examined this matter.

2.     The Home Secretary's view is that there will have to be some independent
examination of the "new" evidence. Ministers consider that the matter simply
will not be resolved otherwise. The Home Secretary adds that w e will need a
respected judge to conduct this examination rather than a senior member of the
Bar.

3.      The next steps are therefore as follows:

        there will be a meeting between Ministers and officials to discuss the
        terms of reference, handling with colleagues and presentation of the



        the Home Secretary is minded to meet M r McBride, the producer of the
        "Hillsborough" programme;

        there will be a meeting with Merseyside MPs and the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group;

        the Home Secretary will make a statement to the House.




12091-ch
       4.     We w ill be in touch to arrange the handling meeting. In the
       meantime, I would be grateful if you could offer early advice on the terms
       of reference, etc for the examination as a basis for discussion at that
       meeting.




                                COLIN HARNETT




12091-ch
From: Paul Pugh                               cc:   Sir Richard Wilson
      Head o f Operational                          Mr Boys Smith
      Policing Policy Unit                          Mr Halliday
      Room 529                                      Miss Loudon,
      Queen Anne’s Gate                             Miss Weskrff
      Tel: 0171-273-3141                            Mr R Evans
      8 May 1997                                    Mr Granatt
                                                    Mr P Edmundson
                                                    Mr Warner
                                                    Mr Owen




1. Mr Michael

2. Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue

In December a Granada television dramatisation of the Hillsborough disaster
claimed that there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the disaster. Since
then further claims have been made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
supported by local MPs and others. This submission assesses the case for a new
public inquiry; and considers whether you should make and announce a decision.

Timing

2.    There is no firm deadline for your decision, but the outcome is awaited with
keen interest by those involved.

Summary and Recommendation

3.    After the Granada programme we asked Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, to provide a full report on the claims made in the
programme. We have examined that report and the transcripts supplied by South
Yorkshire Police, watched the video film which Granada suggested might be new
evidence, and examined the video tapes produced by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group. Our assessment is that there are no grounds for establishing a new
public inquiry. The material has also been considered by the DPP, and by the
Attorney General’s Office. None of those who have examined it consider that there is
evidence to justify a new public inquiry, a reopening of the inquest, or the
prosecution of individuals. But a decision not to reopen the inquiry would be a
severe blow to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, who believe firmly that they
have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice. You may therefore wish to


f:\oppu\houlongsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                                  1




consider whether the recent representations should be further considered by officials
or independently examined. This is further discussed in paragraphs 28 and 29.

Background

4.     The Hillsborough disaster happened on 15 April 1989; 95 people died as a
result of overcrowding and crushing. There have been four separate investigations
or reviews of what happened: a public inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor; the
coroner’s inquest into each of the deaths; an investigation into police conduct
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority; and a judicial review of the verdict of
the inquest.

5.     The Taylor Inquiry was set up by the then Home Secretary immediately after
the disaster. The terms of reference were to inquire into the events and to make
recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
The Inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and received some 71 hours of video evidence from different
sources. Lord Justice Taylor published an interim report in August 1989 which set
out the causes of the disaster. He found that there were a number of causes:

           (i)        The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut
                      off access to the central pens which were already too full.

           (ii)       They were already too full because no safe maximum capacities had
                       been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual
                       pens numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
                       crowd density.

           (iii)      When an influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers
                      there afforded less protection than they should have done and the
                      barrier collapsed.

           (iv)        Tine need to open gate C was because of dangerous congestion at the
                       turnstiles. That occurred because, as both the club and police should
                       have realised, the turnstile area could not cope easily with the numbers
                       unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The police had
                       failed to draw up plans about how they would control large numbers
                       should they arrive in a short period.

            (v)        The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much
                       aggravated the problem, as did the Sheffield Wednesday football
                       club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.

 6.     He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person, but put a significant
 portion of the blame for the disaster at the door of the police: ‘... the main reason for
 the disaster was the failure of police control.’ (paragraph 278, interim report).




 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                             2
7.     He made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January 1990
made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken place
since then in safety at sports grounds and in the policing of football matches have
been based largely on those recommendations.

8.      The second investigation was the inquest into the deaths conducted by the
coroner for the western district of South Yorkshire. The purpose of an inquest, as
determined by the Coroner’s Rules, is to establish the identity of the deceased; the
place of death; the time and date of death; and how the deceased came by their
deaths. The inquest jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for
the Hillsborough victims was accidental death.

9.      The th ird investigation was conducted by West Midlands Police, supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal proceedings. The investigation also considered whether any police officer
should be subject to disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking
of over 5000 statements, and scrutiny of all the material which had previously been
examined. The evidence was sent to the DPP, who concluded that no person
should be subject to criminal proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided
that the senior officers in charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health in advance of a disciplinary ruling. The
PCA later announced that disciplinary proceedings against Murray would be
withdrawn because the retirement of Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a
joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
senior officer. Murray later left the police service.

10.     The fourth investigation was a ju d icia l review o f the coroner’s
proceedings. An application was made on the grounds that the coroner wrongly
failed to direct the jury about the verdict of lack of care or accidental death due to or
aggravated by lack of care relating to the negligence of the police which caused the
disaster; that the coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care by the
emergency services, including the police, and wrongly insisted on a cut off point of
3.15pm for the evidence, given that there was evidence that at least one of the
victims was alive after 3.15pm; and that pressure has been put on two witnesses to
retract their evidence about those signs of life. Having considered the conduct of
the inquest, the divisional court ruled that none of the procedural or technical points
raised justified the court’s intervention. In particular, the divisional court found that
the cut off point of 3.15pm was reasonable, and that the coroner’s directions to the
jury were impeccable.

Recent allegations

11.    The programme “Hillsborough” was a drama documentary which followed
three families through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme
claimed that it uncovered new evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The
programme was followed by an adjournment debate, instigated by Peter Kilfoyle, on
 17 December. Mr Howard in response said that he would consider all the


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                       3
representations and that        I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a
                                                                                      •
decision to re-open the inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the
public interest to do so. The charge has been made - it is one that I will consider
carefully - that there has been a cover up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
I shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that
evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or the
Coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would
have been different.’ (Hansard, cols. 861-2).The programme makers, the bereaved
families, local MPs, David Sheppard, the Bishop of Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror
have since been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened. The issue has
generated 48 Ministers’ cases and 125 letters from the public, all but one of which
have been in favour of a fresh inquiry, plus about 700 printed cards supporting the
request.

12.   There have been three broad categories of evidence put forward in recent
months:

• ten allegedly “unresolved questions” identified in the Granada programme;

• other issues arising from the programme;

• further allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
  opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, that in his view “these
  new pieces of evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


The ten “unresolved questions”

13.    The chief constable has provided a detailed response to each question and
pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in respect of each of the
questions. This is at Annex A - we have not included the supporting transcripts but
these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to consider
whether the Taylor inquiry reached the “right” conclusion - nor have we pursued
every possible point of detail. We have sought to establish whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised; and whether the evidence put forward in
recent months was available at the time of the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that
none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases not only did the Taylor inquiry consider the
questions but made specific recommendations as a result.

Other allegations

14.    Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press
release they took the form of loosely connected questions which suggested, though
did not overtly assert, that there had been a police cover-up. We also met members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it
became clear that whilst their allegations were similar to those implied by Granada
they took a more extreme form. The families firmly believe that there was a


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                       4
conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midlands Police, who conducted the
investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role of the police in
the disaster. The families feel that, as a result of this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case of
the inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict of accidental death when a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.

15.     The police were reluctant to accept any blame in the months after the
disaster, and were criticised by Taylor for that, although they have since accepted
their responsibility. We have seen, however, a continuing degree of defensiveness
from some South Yorkshire officers. It is possible to understand why the families
have come to the view that they have.

16.    There are two main strands to the case put forward by the Hillsborough
families and by Granada: first questions surrounding the video tapes; and secondly
the questions surrounding medical testimony - although the latter are more directly
relevant to calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry. Detailed consideration
of specific points is at Annex B. The Chief Constable ‘s assessment is at Annex C.
The opinion obtained by the Family Support Group from Mr Alun Jones QC is at
Annex D.

The “missing” video tapes

17.    Many of the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by
South Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of
misunderstandings. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in
their entirety; if these had been made available at the outset some of the concerns
which are now being expressed might have not have arisen.

18.     There is confusion about two events. One set of tapes was stolen on the night
of the disaster; Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police
control centre within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had a video
recording facility in a separate recording suite; this was under the supervision of the
Club and thejjolice had no control of its operation. During the night of the disaster
two video tapes went missing from that particular room; the discovery of the theft
was recorded as a crime and West Midlands Police made enquiries to trace the
person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are still mtssin<L-One of the
tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown the turnstiles
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Neither would have given a view of the
terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were
 probably stolen by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police
 believed to be damaging. South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a
 key to the room and that they considered one motive for the theft could have been
 that the tapes could have shown irregularities in the way that admissions were
 handled at the turnstiles that could have implicated club employees. These missing
 tapes have been confused by some commentators, though not the families, with the
 video tapes held by South Yorkshire Police.



 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                    5
                                                                                      #
The police videos

19.    Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South
Yorkshire Police might represent new material which had not been seen by the
Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that
for the most part they are of no consequence showing general views of the stadium
and surroundings. In the final half hour before the disaster occurred the recording is
almost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside the turnstiles. It does not show the
gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove therefore that the police
knew the extent of the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot be said to
represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability of the police, by showing
the extent of the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate
how it was that Duckenfield came to lose sight of what was happening elsewhere.

20.    The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that if was withheld because it showed
that one of the police cameras - number 5 - was working when the police asserted
in evidence to Taylor and to the inquest that it was not. The significance of this
camera was that it could have been used to zoom in on the central pens to show the
extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is clear that the video evidence,
including a detailed transcript of its contents, was made available to Taylor. The
inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself given rise
to allegations which are discussed in Annex B.

21.     The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a
matter of interpretation. The families believe that PC Bichard, the police video
operator, misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our reading of the transcripts
suggests that he claimed the camera was not working very well; this continues to be
the police view.    This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward by the police; we do not see any evidence that pictures from camera 5 were
any less clear than those from any of the other cameras. But we do not believe that
this divergence of view is significant.
               *      -z .




Medical evidence and the inquest verdict

22.     The question of a fresh inquest is in law a matter for the Attorney General.
Under the Coroners’ Act 1988 the Attorney’s consent is required for an application to
the courts to order a fresh inquest. The families have also appealed to the Attorney
General to recommend a new inquest, proffering the testimony of Dr Ed Walker. He
claimed in an article in Hospital Doctor that he tended Philip Hammond whom he
says was alive after 3.15. Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. In
it, Dr Walker said of a boy whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:

           “Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He
           was of a similar age (around 12- 14 years) with blond hair. He was also in
           Cardiopulmonary /arrest. I intubated him and noticed evidence o f gross
           inhalation of stomach contents. He also had marked gaseous abdominal


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167p&doc
                                                                                      6
           distension possibly indicating that he had has mouth to mouth resuscitation at
           some time.

           I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was
           also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and
           dilated throughout, and I believe he has since died.”

The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear
whether there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty, did not appear
at the time to contradict the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims
were effectively dead by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the
inquest because the consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a
composite picture.

23.     Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new
inquest, evidence that some of the deceased may have survived beyond 3.15 has
not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the past. In the
judicial review of the coroner’s decision in November 1993, Lord Justice McCowan
found that in respect of one of the victims there was “a realistic probability” he was
alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:

           “ I have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest or for merely
           quashing the existing verdict.

           If I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following
           matters would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose of a fresh
           inquest? To get a verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already
           been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault and
           paid compensation. To get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see
           no evidence to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
           all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination of the last
           minutes of their lives. I doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
           process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers of witnesses
           and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far short. Moreover, irrespective of
           whoser fa u lt, if anyone’s, it is , the fact is that four and a half years have
           already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion of
           a mere quashing of the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would
           regard that as absolutely valueless”.

24.    We believe that overturning the inquest verdict is what the families most
desire. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr Philip
Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster. They agreed that
Taylor had done a good job, though they maintained that there were aspects of the
inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
inquest verdict to be a gross miscarriage of justice. They strongly criticised the
coroner’s selection of witnesses as well as the cut off time of 3.15 after which he
would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce a finding
of death through “lack of care” or “unlawful killing”. It appears therefore that their call


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                         7
                                                                                             V




for a fresh inquiry is not so much an end in itself but a means by which they hope
                                                                                        •
that the Attorney would consent to an application to reopen the inquest, or failing
that, a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there
were to be a change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure
from the families on the Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges.

Criminal charges

25.     The question of prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he
announced in September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute
anyone in respect of the disaster. The CPS Code of Practice sets out the
circumstances when decisions to prosecute can be reconsidered. This includes
cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that there needs to be a
high threshold in such cases because of the principle of finality - that people should
be able to rely on their decisions. Although new evidence could trigger a
prosecution, the CPS have found no evidence in the recent representations of any
wrongdoing that would in their view justify criminal charges. The most they believe
that they have found is that PC Bichard regarded the quality of the video recordings
less favourably than the Sheffield Wednesday video technician, Mr Houldsworth. A
report is currently under consideration by the DPP herself; the firm recommendation
is that the criminal investigations should not be re-opened.

Police disciplinary charges

26.    A further cause for bitterness among the families is that no disciplinary
charges were upheld against any members of the police. In addition to Duckenfield
and Murray, all other officers involved in the case have left the force 'with the
exception of PC Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it might be argued
that Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the police
position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short of being involved in a cover-up of the
kind suggested by the families.

Conclusion

27.    Our assessment is that there is no evidence to suggest that it would be in the
public interest to establish a new public inquiry.

28.    We recognise, however, that there is no likelihood that the families will
accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence; they would see
such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
We have considered how to demonstrate objectivity and fairness. One option would
be to secure an independent assessment of all the material which has been
submitted in recent months. You may wish to consider asking a respected barrister
or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
that has been compiled. This could be a limited exercise; but he or she could look
once more at the evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider
written representations. That would only go half way towards the full public re-



 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                         8
V




    examination of events which the families want, so would not fully meet their
    concerns.

    2.9.   A further disadvantage is that it would keep the families’ hopes alive without
    real justification. I would feel happier about an independent external review if I felt
    that there were anything in the representations which, if substantiated, might
    suggest that it would be in the public interest to convene a further public inquiry or
    that such an inquiry might achieve more than the previous investigations. But we
    have seen no such evidence. On balance, I would advise you to announce a
    decision now that you do not intend to establish a new inquiry.

    Handling

    30.     You may want to discuss the issues. Whatever decision you reach we will
    need to prepare carefully for the handling of an announcement, and we will put up a
    further submission at the appropriate time discussing the handling in detail. We will
    need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be done,
    there are a number of separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
    Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning of the
    announcement, and the families who have made direct representations. We will
    also need to take account of the separate roles of the DPP and the Attorney in
     considering the grounds for criminal proceedings or a fresh inquest. Their distinct
     statutory responsibilities mean that they may want to announce their decisions
     separately.




                                         PAUL PUGH




     f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                        9
                    fafay was C hief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge o f a major
                    sem i-fin al only 21 dqys before the game, when he was r e la tiv e ly

                1    inexperienced a t p olicin g matches?
                    Mole 1-2, Duckenfield 3-4, Jackson 5-6



                    M y were there no barriers or cordons to f ilt e r the crowd and prevent a
                    build up outsid e t ie Leppings Lane end o f t ie ground i f , a s the fane

                2   in s is t , there were t ie previous year?
                    Duckenfield 7-11, Jackson 12-13, Marshall 14-15



                    Vfcy was t ie game not delayed, a s a ranter o f p o lice o ffic e r s thought i t
                    should have been, When i t became obvious th at i t would not be prertM g to

                3   get a l l the Liverpool flans sa fe ly in to the ground before the 3 pm kick-
                    off?
                    Duckenfield 16-31, Murray 32-39, Bichard 4041                  _____________
                                                                                   '


                    Vfcy d id n 't p o lice recognise overcrowding cn t ie Leppings lane terrace
                    when eye w itn esses, including fo o tb a ll ounmentator John Matson, were
                4   aware o f t ie problems fifte e n minutes before k ick -off?
                    Duckenfield 42-52



                    Vfcy wasn't the tunnel leading to the cen tral pens closed When they became

                5   f u ll, t ie procedure adopted a t t ie previous year's Semi-Final?
                    Duckenfield 53-66, Crawford 67-77, Marshall 78-79



                    Wtjy did C hief Si?)erintendent Duckenfield m islead the Secretary o f the FA


                6
                    ty te llin g him th at fans had forced open Gate C, when t ie o ffic e r knew he
                    had given t ie order for i t to be opened?
                    Duckenfield 80-92, Murray 93-95, Crawford 96, Bichard 97-101,
                    Jackscn 102-103


                    Vfcy did i t take J an hour a fte r the f ir s t crushing bejpn to p u ll down the
                    10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fan s, and why were the gates vdiich

                7   led cn to the p itch too sm all to be e ffe c tiv e in an emergency evacuation?
                    Duckenfield 104-108, Seaman 109-115, Hopkins 116-118, Eastwood 119-125,
                    Murray 126-129, Taylor 127, Bichard 130/1, Jackson 132/4, Calvert 135-137


                    Vfcy was no public address am ancem ent made - e ith er informing the fane


                8
                    as to What was happening, asking fo r th e ir help or fo r any medical
                    personnel a t the grand to help - u n til 3-30 pa?
                    Duckenfield 138-143, Jackson 144-148



                    lnhy, when 42 ambulances reached the gran d , did more not gpt cn to the
                    p itch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained

                9   medical help?
                    SYMAS 149, Hopkins 150-152, Higgins 153-154, Eason 155-156



                      Vfcy did cn ly 14 o f those who died go to hospital?
                      Higgins 157-159
U niversal
0FFjCE&JPPUEs
UDIV110C
                10
                           QUESTION                 ONE


Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre. Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 • 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report
 215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
 He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
 outside the ground. He has. if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
 off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
 tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
 special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
 come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
 adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
  policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
  of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
  Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                          QUESTION                 TWO


Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience. Intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions m the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would anse where we
would have to change our operational pian.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 7-15, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeabie pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
#                           QUESTION                 THREE


    Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
    thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
    not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
    before the 3 pm kick-off?


    Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
    the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
    However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
    reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
    the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
    pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
    purpose for delaying the kick-off.


    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 16 - 41, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
    thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
    come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
    wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out Finally, he did not know why
    he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
    2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
    for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not however,
    have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
    like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
    control room.

    227. Thejuth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
    with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
    cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
    behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
    proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
    kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
    problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
    safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
    delayed.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

    29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
    command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
    deciding whether to exercise it.
Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer m
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration m
deciding whether to exercise it.
                           QUESTION                  FOUR


Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?


 No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4. Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a dose watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25. attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.

245. The 20 officers detailed to the penmeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral brtefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
                                                                                                        1
                                                                               v o L b 4rV c/»*\   I4




 unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule requ^a
 consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

 247 "Senior officer" meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher The Inspector m
 charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
 players' tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I’d then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4. he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I’m wrong, I’m going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to dimb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those dimbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding intenm
recommendation 5. That provided:-

 . * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the dub is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11 There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and m
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the dub is monitonng
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
espedally those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should indude demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
\
    \




                                      q u e s t i o n        f iv e


        Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
        became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
        Final?

        T h e tu n n e l   was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
        overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
        Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
        down central tunnel.
        The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
        Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
        consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans go.ng down centraltunnei.
        On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on tak through
        hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropnate action to dose tunne.
        In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.3S pm, possibly because central pens full.
        All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


         OBSERVATIONS

         Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


         Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
         231. Planning apart, however, it should have been dear in the control room where
         there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
         be dosed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
         could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
         have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


          Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

          9.      Arrangements should be made.-

           (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
           maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
           either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
           otherwise, and
           (b) to dose off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capadty is
           about to be reached.
                                                                                                  \Q




®                               QUESTION                  SI X


    Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid mislead the Secretary of
    the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
    officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
    forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
    gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
    communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
    opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
    ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
     he believed correct in a crisis moment.

    Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
    However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
    concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
    disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
    ground.


    OBSERVATIONS
    This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
    gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
    considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

    Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.


     Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report
     98. At about 3.15 pm. Mr Graham Kelly. Chief Executive of the FA. Mr Kirton also of
     the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
     controLroom for information. Mr Duckenfieid told them he thought there were fatalities
     and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
     there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
      screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
      that's been forced: there’s been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
      later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans
      account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had forced
      their way in.
     99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
     Mr Duckenfieid went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
     three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
     likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
     want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
      emergency operations.
                       QUESTION                   SEVEN


Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to puii
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.
Mr Seaman Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood an engineer, agreed the penmeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated ”A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authonty and they decided that the gates should
 be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.
       «  *
 Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
 first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
 would have to travel some distance, if it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
 been at ground very very quickly

 Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson's statement "that anyone who had
 considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
 realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said. "I follow that
 point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don’t think I am going to require a
 lot of persuasion about that'.

 When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
 Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
 equipment.
                                                                             -A   V UVV     ?




Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kif on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement1. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104-137, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but. for
examplerthe collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
 If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
 radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
 that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
 minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
 available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
                                                                           \*Jp i          7




Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing stnctty
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have b e ^P
responsible for considenng safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was. that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i O pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage dose by without success
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

 104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resusdtation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty dearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.


Lord Justice Tayior - Final Report


Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
endosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds "be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
chang« at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of suffident gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
                                                                                       'H
                                                                 Q u J i i *W c rw ^




Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind penmeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 17 and 21
17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.'
21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the dub at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fendng to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT


Why was no public address announcement made - either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of mis request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.
The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes dear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 138 • 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John’s ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence dose to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
m inutes'ticked past some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artifidal respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

 Fans

 97. Apart from the message to dear the pitch and the belated call for medical
 assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
 address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
 attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
 given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
 dose enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majonty of
                                                                        G $'A J2 s V\ O V \ %*"



the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                                 QUESTION                  n i n e




^        e       s       s   s    s       *
                                                       nri was for use in the event of a major

m k ssszs^ 1= « "                                                              1“
tgress to the playing area                                                     ambulance$ onto

    Mr Higgins




    me Pi<Ch                                  „ »ns taken oy Mr    Higginsinradioingfor assistance

     V       &       S   X   Z   Z    Z       ' 7    ; ^          access and egress „

                                                                      £££■£ZSSX*"5
      r . r t r 6r «                      "     u      —          —

         OBSERVATIONS

         Pleasf }ee pages 149 -156. Volume 2.




                                                                                    - - «    “ S°ann
                                                                                                   d

             K & S       on W                                           t r j r 2 ? ^ tT tT s T y




             overwhelming evidence that to anemp
                                                                                               I 4*




A   milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
    electric charge.
    302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
    the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
    top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
    There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
    two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
    routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
    none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down.
    The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
     satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69

    64 There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
    aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
    attendance.
    65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
    The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
    be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
    be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

     66 (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000,
     the club should employ a medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with
     any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in
     advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
     off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
     should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
      contactable.


        (b)    At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000,
     the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
     immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
     and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
     those in the_ROlice control room.
     67 At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
     ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
     of 5,000 or more.
      68 The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
      crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
      the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

      69. A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
      50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
      match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                                                            ‘1




                           Q U E S T IO N            TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

 Please see pages 157 -159, Volume 2.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
 296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
 response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
 attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
 did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
 He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
 on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
 equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
  of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
  whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
  The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
  overwhelm ing evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
                                                                     <o£           tfw   -   {




milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
                                                                             ANNEX B

Questions raised by Granada and the families

The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably
to dissuade the inquiry from watching the tape) while the video technician Mr
Houidsworth testified that he had repaired the fault on the camera trained on
the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and it was working perfectly.

This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houidsworth has sworn an
affidavit to this effect. On the day of the match there were five cameras scanning
the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording
machines, which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the
officer controlling the video made a decision to record. PC Bichard who controlled
the videoing procedure explained in his testimony that one of the cameras had not
been working well but added “ the quality has been improved. It was not up to the
mark but it was a lot better than it had been . We were getting pictures that is the
best way of describing it." Therefore it is not true to say that the Taylor inquiry was
led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective that they were not
worth viewing.

In cross examination during the inquest PC Bichard maintained his view that the
camera was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to
distinguish facial expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and
cannot distinguish any material difference in the quality of the recording which came
from camera 5 to that coming from the other cameras. This does not prove that there
was not a quality difference discernible to the police in the control box on the day. It
could be argued though that PC Bichard was putting a gloss on the evidence in a
way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In that he was not alone.
Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and«evasive.

The inquest jury and the inquiry only had the police account of what could be
seen from the police control box on that day and the capabilities of the video
system. The faulty camera was never challenged.

South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product of their
recording as explained above. For most of the tape the recorded material shows a
sequence of 25 second shots from each of the five cameras. PC Bichard testified to
the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid to
record the activity at the turnstiles which is where Duckenfield considered at the time
that the trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is
mainly of this area. Later parts of the footage cover what was happening inside the
ground. A full schedule of the video footage and the tapes themselves were
available to the Taylor inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers
 representing the families at the time of the inquest.


 foppu\hou'longsub'ppO 167pd.doc                                                      10
                                                                                                  •
South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at
these tapes. The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by
West Midlands Police and contained the most relevant footage of the disaster taken
from a variety of sources, including material from the BBC, from the underwater
search team who had hand held camcorders as well as from the police monitoring
equipment.

The compilation tape, which was seen by Taylor inquiry, showed the overcrowding
in the central pens. The question of whether the camera could have zoomed in on
the crowd is a detail which does not appear to have been an issue to the Taylor
inquiry. The line of questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the
police claimed they had or had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem
of overcrowding. This is shown in the transcripts, for example, of Lord Justice
Taylor’s questioning of Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid:

           “. Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen
           videos and it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain, is [it] not that by
           2.50 the two wing pens at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas
           the two centre pens, if you won’t have them full, were getting on for being full.
           A. Yes sir.

           Q. You agree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure
           that there was no further crowding of pens 3 and 4. A. That there were not
           more than the number to fit in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

           Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have put those
           pens at full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were
           approaching being full.

           Q. Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd
           control. There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have
           to cut off the inflow into those pens. A. Yes sir.”


The report was heavily critical of the police in the detail of the lack of planning and of
the decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for
the disaster:

           “It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
           excellent service to the public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively
           and successfully at a large number of football games...Unfortunately their
           policing on 15 April broke down in ways already described and although here
           were other causes the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
           control.

           In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must
           report that for the most part the quality of their evidence was in inverse


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc
                                                                                             11
                                                                                           I'b




        proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables who as
        witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. By contrast with some notable
        exceptions the senior officers were defensive and evasive. Their feelings of
        grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine . No doubt those feelings were
        intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their
        management . But neither their handling of problems on the day nor their
        account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of
        their rank.”

Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that
it wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.

This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family
Support Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy of the material from camera
5 which was shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy of the tape that was
provided. This was indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police
say that the copy which was supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly
duplicated and blurred. Because of the degree of mistrust the families feel, they did
not question whether the poor quality of the video was for their copy alone but
assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South Yorkshire are sending us a
fresh copy of the version of the video which was seen by the inquest jury.

The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor
material from camera no 5.

This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to
explain the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely
effectively. It does not appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape
covers the run-up to the disaster; the situation looks dangerous; there is evidence of
overcrowding. The most likely reason that material from camera 5 was not used is
that the BBC material was so much better. We do not see any evidence that
particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation tape.


 Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.

 One of the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for
 an inquiry was why Mr Houidsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor
 inquiry. His statement would have been available to the Treasury Counsel who was
 acting on behalf of Lord Taylor. The interim reports explains:

            “The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom
            statements were or could have been taken. Nevertheless , I am satisfied that
            they were sufficient in number and in reliability to enable me to make the
            necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from
            presenting an intehm report in the required time and would not have added
            significantly to the relevant evidence.”



 f oppu'-hou longsub ppO 167pd.doc                                                    12
The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up

The central implication of the Granada programme is that the police were, and
continue to be, involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent of the
negligence. This allegation is forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in which he says:

           “One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way in which evidence
           presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South
           Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise
           as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West Midlands
           Police who assisted the coroner.”

This ignores the crucial point that the purpose of an inquest is not to apportion
blame but to meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three
limited questions - who the deceased was and when and where he met his death.

 It is certainly true that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the
extent of his responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly
unsuccessful in these attempts: criticism was not averted either about his
involvement or that of South Yorkshire Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord
Justice Taylor wrote:

           “It is a matter of regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
           Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at
           fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield under pressure of cross examination
           apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that
           apart the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to
           blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
           crush was not cause by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
           being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to
           whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and
           encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced”.

Houldsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.

PC Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording of the CCTV cameras was
inadvertently changed to time lapse mode (producing a series of pictures rather than
continual motion) probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving
positions within the control box. Mr Houidsworth stated that it was impossible to
switch recording modes when the machine is already running and that the relevant
buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught accidentally. It is hard, though,
to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the mode was changed
before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the relevant
images.

Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were
greatly enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day.


f 'oppuvhou'Jongsub'ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                        n
Houidsworth indicates that the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the
12 inches claimed by Bichard and that the monitors were capable of showing the
same information as shown on the larger screens used at the inquest.           Again,
despite Houldsworth’s contradiction of Bichard’s evidence, it is impossible to attach
any significance to what amounts to a difference of opinion.

West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact
that force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime
Squad and Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious
Crime Squad, was appointed as one of the investigation team.

The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, with the approval of the Police Complaints Authority and
Lord Justice Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:

           “It was therefore decided that the investigation of the disaster and the
           gathering of evidence for this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent
           police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands
           Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me;
           he appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge
           of the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both of them".

The PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction
with the conduct of the investigation.

The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team would
have rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr
Beechey never, in fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position
may have meant that he had certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the
Squad. At the time of the Hillsborough tragedy, allegations had been publicised
about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14 August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police to investigate the
allegations ageinst it.

Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included:

            • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance from
              Superintendent Beechey of the West Midlands Police in his conduct
              of the inquest;

            • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken
              Liverpool supporters; and

            • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the
              disaster. The Taylor inquiry considered the causes of the disaster and
              the inquest dealt with events up to the 3.15 cut-off point. The actions
              and decisions taken beyond that point, it is argued therefore, have
              not been publicly examined.


 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                   14
An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the
inquiries he should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons,
including the police. It is entirely a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and
witnesses should be heard.

Although the focus of the Taylor inquiry was on the causes of the disaster, its terms
of reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground
on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
and safety at sports events’. As such it was able to consider fully the actions of the
police and other emergency services at the ground throughout the relevant penod.
Sections of the interim report dealt with what happened to deal with the disaster
after it occurred and the response of the emergency services.




  f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd-doc                                                          15
            S o u t h1 Y
                       XT
                          o r1k s h i r e

            POLICE                                               Richard Wells qpm. s m *™). a.%-.
                                                                C h '. e j C o n s t a b le

             JUSTICE    u - it h   COURAGE




Police Policy Directorate                          Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)                        d&C/JMUSW                      CSF 15/97
Home Office
5
L oS S ?N Anne'5Ga,e                                           3 February 199T
SW1H 9AT




V
HILLSBOROUGH



 contents of the programme and to conduct further research.




 s y x rsrss s s s r s s z x x j ~ .
 to provide the documents to you in their present form.
                                                                                                   —



 E H £ S = S S
 the operation of the video cameras in question.




    t t s s s s s ^ js 2 g t t £ £ £
    on whether film from a video camera trained on me central e                                     |Sendosed for your




    £   dUasTer andme   pregramme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
                                               - 2 -




Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
documents provided, at Section Two.

Police Constable Bichard told the Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
available from the camera in question they were of poor quality although the camera was in fact
working.

There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
position. Evidence given by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
focused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the tape
enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
are used by control room personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record footage
only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclosed
video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question. Where the
reproduction is of poor quality then that is the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
ground. For your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry and included here in their original form) of these particular
tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.

Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes, it
has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean, for
his intended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
not the police cameras were working. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
went missing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
locked and the alarm set. When they returned the next morning the room was still locked with the
alarm still armed. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
tapes was of nonuse whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
the camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
the playing area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
 such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

 Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
 made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
 that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

 A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
 which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
 explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
 Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
 remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
 observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
 call a clearly defined cut off time.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry or the coroner’s inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten • the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.

A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.

Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor’s original findings.
H A » -« 3 -a 7   17 .6*    rnoii.   BRUCE   C *H P B £ ^   CO                                                 ^

       %
N *’                                                                      /\N i N l^ V        2^

                                          Tiff Hillsborough PiiMter: A P fil.im


                                                            Opinion



             Introduction

             1       I am Hiiked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                      appropriate legal counc to follow in the light of             fresh evidence that
                      have come to light recently Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
                      Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stsdium In Sheffield as i semi-final o f the FA
                      cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
                      und later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts of accidental death
                      were recorded on the victims.

             2      A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
                    bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdict* and obtain a fresh inquest The main
                    complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
                               in ihr Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as Annex A- In
                    summary form, those main complaints were,

                     2.1       The Coroner imposed sn arbitrary cut-off point in time o f 3.15, which had the
                               effect of excluding relevant evidence aa to the failure to implement die “M*jor
                               Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                               emergency services promptly.

                      2.2      The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual ciroumstances o f the deaths
                               of the 95; he faiiod therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                               of the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                               medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to S. 12. and 7)

                      2.3      The Coroner dewted an excessive time, reflected in aevenleen page* o f his
                               summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                               Liverpool supporters vwn under the influence o f drink. The report by Lonl
                               Taylor, which was severely critical of the police, had ruled out the
                               consumption of alcohol as a cause o f the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

                      2.4      TfcaCoroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                               selection of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                      2.5      The Coroner failed to leave tile jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                               directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                               and unlawful killing.




                                                                 I
7.02   F R O M • BRUCE   CAHPBBH.   CO                ID ■




 The inquest verdicts were not quoted. The judgment of the Court is at Anne* a.
 The Court was strongly influenced by the fact that the lawyers originally instructed
 for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coronet’! decisions (eg page 7), that
 the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not realty have nude a difference, or had
 heen properly exciudcd (pages 14- 36); that the directions of the Coroner to the jury
 wore orthodox; and that a new inqucit would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
 40).

 Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
 Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
 that the legal nystem failed them badly, and that they have been deceived aa to the
 circumstances of death. After the 1993judicial review it icemed to me that the
 disaster would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
 has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
 professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police office™
 at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
 course orjustice at the inquest None o f the following matters were made known at
 (he inquest

 The evidence o f Romt Houidsworth. Attached 1« an affidavit of Roger Houidsworth.
 dated 25”' November 1996, attaching a statement o f May 1989 and supporting
 documents, and commenting on evidence given at die inquest f Annex Cl. Contrary to
 the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras f avo clew pictures of the
 l epptngs Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is oorrect, video
 tapes and Mr Houidsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
 officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at largo in
 December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
 disaster. (The evidence of die witnesses referred to by Houidsworth is at Annex n i

 The new videotape evidence. Vory recently, a member o f the Family Support group
 has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to bs those, or copies o f
 those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies are enclosed. 1 am
 told that tapes, or copy tapes, were nude available to Yorkshire Television by the
 South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
 inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
 Group in the presence o f Mr Houidsworth, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Family
 Support Group, and Ann Adliagton o f my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
 that pdiceofifcers were lying, and that the pictures o f all relevant areas o f the ground
 were dear? detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
 Mr HouJdsworth in bis evidence of November 1996. Events ia the relevant area may
 not, for various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm. but
 they were dearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

 1 have also been shown a copy o f what was, I am told, presented to thajury. It ia a
 very badly duplicated snd biuncd picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
 pens shortly after 3 pm, in which It Is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The
tape has bad interference in the picture. It appears t a t this tape is a copy it several
generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hides, or from
the videotape o f which the new evidence if a much better copy, but it presents only
events after 3 pm.

nte importance of the new evidence. Hi* question whether the police could and did
notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm waa central at the inquest. On Day 77,
puge 125, the Coroner directed the jury (AqdglE);

“The asueKxment of the terraces" ia a “very important factor” and "maybe the tingle
most important factor in the whole inquest". "The total sum o f ovidence from the
Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard waa
that none o f them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue In the
ca*e in thcpre-3.15pm period, regarded aa by the Coroner as the critical time. I
bdieve that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

■l-hc evidence of nr Ed w»ik«r In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
light; see Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
appear* at Annex G. The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
“sinus rhythm and cardiac output* after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
ShcfTidd. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1919, shows serious
criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
points out in his letter of 7* Fobrunry 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3* May 1989 by Dr Wsrdiupe. who waa
dosely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15* June 19*9 to
stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
at the inquest

It is difficult to exaggerate the significance o f the concealment of Dr Walker’s
evidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court's judgment o f November 1993 the
Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
the evidence disclosod the same patten, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
revealing remark comas from Dr Waidrope in his letter of 3* May 1989 "Almost
immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patients
requiring urgent resuscitation’'. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
strartwefby the Corona on an utterly different Actual assumption.

The previous investigation. On* of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
In which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
exculpate die South Yorkshire authorities and die police ftom blame. Very serious
questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the Weal
Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.
12    Conclusion. In ray view thaw new pieces o f evidence c til for a full police enquiry or
      public inquiry. Exhibit* such ss the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
      iiiulysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
      production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore rtcoramend that
      this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
      Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a foil copy to thu Home Secretly,
      who has expressed interest in this matter in the last flew months.

13    1 hope that the Director might feci able to allow a senior lawyer in her office lo meet
      two nr three o f the Family Support Group, Aim Adiington m dm eto expand upon this
      advicc.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray's bin
London WC1


3rd Much 1997.                                                     Atan Jones QC
From: SueMcDougall                             cc     Permanent Secretary
Operational Policing Policy Unit                      Mr Boys Smith
Room 527                                              Mr Halliday
8 273 2621                                            Mr Morris
                                                      Miss Loudon
                                                      Mr Pugh
                                                      Miss Weston
                                                      Mr Clifford
                                                      Mr Granatt
                                                      Mr Rock
                                                    i Miss Whetstone




Mr Maclean simultaneous
Home Secretary

fflLLSBOROU!


Issue
On 17 December you gave an undertaking in the House o f Commons to consider whether
there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. Richard Wells
Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire was asked to examine each o f the questions raised and
consider whether there was any new evidence. This submission reports on his findings, on the
representations made by members o f Hillsborough Family Support Group and considers
whether you should make and announce a decision.


Timing
2.       You have not indicated when you will come to a decision, other than to say it will be
as soon as possible, but the outcome is awaited with keen interest by those involved.


Summary and Recommendation
3.       In his letter attached at A, Richard Wells concludes:
         It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary “Hillsborough “ provided no
         new evidence upon which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Taylor’s
         originalfindings.
Having examined the transcripts o f the evidence supplied by South Yorkshire Police, watched
the video film which Granada suggested might be new evidence, and examined the video tapes
produced by the Hillsborough Family Support Group, we agree with Richard Wells’
assessment. The material has also been considered by officials in the CPS, and by the
Attorney General’s Office. None o f those who have examined it consider that there is the
evidence to justify a public inquiry, a reopening o f the inquest, or the prosecution o f
individuals. But we recognise that a decision not to reopen the inquiry is unlikely to satisfy the
Hillsborough Family Support Group, who have managed to generate a certain political
momentum and who claim, and have media support for the view, that they have been the
victims o f a miscarriage o f justice. You may therefore wish to consider whether the evidence
should be further considered by officials or independently examined. This is further discussed
in paragraphs 22 and 23.


Consideration
4.      The programme Hillsborough was a drama documentary which followed three families
through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme claimed that it uncovered new
evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The programme makers, the bereaved
families, Mr Peter Kilfoyle, the member for Liverpool Walton, David Sheppard, the Bishop of
Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror have been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened.
The issue has generated 47 Ministers’ cases and 114 letters from the public all but one of
which have been in favour o f a fresh inquiry.


5.      In the Commons you said that you would only reopen the inquiry if you were
convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so, in coming to that decision you would
“ consider whether there is any new evidence and if so, whether that evidence is o f such
significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or before the Coroner, either the outcome
o f Taylor inquiry or the verdict o f the jury would have been different.” A further reason for
reopening the inquiry might be if there were evidence to suggest that there had been some kind
o f police conspiracy or cover up. Factors which would weigh against re-opening the inquiry
would include the difficulty in establishing the truth eight years after the event took place, the
implied criticism that the Taylor inquiry had not been thorough, the cost, the pain which such




smd-0077                                          2
a fresh inquiry might bring to those involved in the disaster, and finally the possibility that after
an inquiry the bereaved would still feel dissatisfied.


6.       Any decision on whether or not to reopen the inquiry must take account o f what it
might achieve. Unlike some inquiries which might be criticised for changing nothing, Lord
Taylor’s recommendations have been far reaching. They have included the introduction o f all
seater stadia and have been instrumental in ensuring that there have been no major incidents at
football grounds over the last eight years. Lord Taylor was robust in his criticism o f the police.
He found that the disaster was caused by a number o f factors o f which the police lack of
control had played a major part. The Granada programme, Hillsborough, though it contained
some references to the inquiry appeared almost wilfully to ignore its thoroughness. It is highly
likely therefore that many people who saw the programme would not have realised the extent
to which the questions raised had been examined by the inquiry nor the severity with which the
police were criticised.


7.       Since the programme there have been three separate categories o f questions raised.

These are:
• the ten supposedly unresolved questions which Granada identified.
• other questions which are implied by the Granada press release;
• the specific allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
     opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, attached at C, that in his view “
     these new pieces o f evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


8.       The ten unresolved questions were the most easy to consider. Richard Wells has
provided us with answers to each, and pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in
respect o f each o f the questions. This is at Annex B - we have not included the supporting
transcripts but these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to
consider whether the inquiry reached the right conclusion - that would have been impossible
without undertaking an investigation on the scale o f the original inquiry which itself lasted six
months and generated 107 files - nor have we pursued every possible point o f detail arising
from the recent allegations. Rather, we have sought to establish, first whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised and secondly whether the evidence put forward in



 smd-0077                                           3
                                                                                                     #
recent months was available at the time o f the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that none o f the
evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the time o f the Taylor
inquiry. We were impressed by the fact that in eight cases not only did the Taylor Inquiry
consider the questions but made specific recommendations as a result o f their deliberations.


9.      Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press release they
took the form o f loosely connected questions which suggested, though did not overtly assert,
that there had been a police cover up. We also met members o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it became clear that whilst their allegations
were similar to those implied by Granada they took a more extreme form. The families firmly
believe that there was a conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midland Police, who
conducted the investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role o f the
police in the disaster. The families feel that, as a result o f this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case o f the
inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict o f accidental death when, they consider, a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.


10.     There does not appear to be anything o f substance in the claims, though in view o f the
police response in the immediate aftermath o f the disaster and perhaps a continuing degree o f
defensiveness from some South Yorkshire officers which we have observed, it is possible to
see why the families have come to the view that they have. We found that the families put a
sinister twist to events or omissions which do not appear to be significant to more
dispassionate observers. A good example o f this is their complaint about the appointment of
West Midlands Police as the investigating force at a time when its credibility had been
damaged by the activities o f the serious crime squad; at first sight this decision appears
unfortunate in such a sensitive case, but in fact it was not until August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad.


 11.    Detailed consideration o f the points raised by Granada and by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group and by Alun Jones QC is at Annex D but there are two main strands which are
central to their case: first the questions surrounding the video tapes and secondly the questions




 smd-0077                                         4
surrounding Dr Ed Walker’s testimony though in feet the latter are more directly relevant to
calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry.




The “missing” video tapes


12.     Many o f the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by South
Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of misunderstandings and whilst the
police have acted correctly in supplying all material which has been specifically requested it is
perhaps a matter o f regret that they have not been more proactive in seeking to allay the
families’ concerns. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in their entirety;
if these had been made available at the outset some o f the concerns which are now being
expressed might have not have arisen.


13.     Briefly, there is confusion about two events. One set o f tapes was stolen on the night
o f the disaster; Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police control centre
within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility in a
separate recording suite; this was under the supervision o f the Club and the police had no
control in its operation. During the night o f the disaster two video tapes went missing from
that particular room; the discovery o f the theft was recorded as a crime and West Midlands
police made enquiries to trace the person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are
still missing. One o f the tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown
the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground. Neither would have given a view o f the
terracing, The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were probably stolen

by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police erroneously believed to
be damaging South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a key to the room and
that they considered one motive for the theft could have been that the tapes could have shown
irregularities in the way that admissions were handled at the turnstiles that could have
implicated club employees. These missing tapes have been confused by some commentators,
though not the families, with the video tapes held by South Yorkshire




smd-0077                                          5
The police videos.
14.    Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South Yorkshire Police
might represent new material which had not been seen by the Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire
have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that for the most part they are o f no
consequence showing general views o f the stadium and surroundings. In the final half hour
before the disaster occurred the recording is almost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside
the turnstiles. It does not show the gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove
therefore that the police knew the extent o f the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot
be said to represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability o f the police, by showing
the extent o f the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate how it was
that Duckenfield came to lose sight o f what was happening elsewhere.


15.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that it was withheld because it showed that one of
the police cameras - no 5 - was working when the police asserted in evidence to Taylor and to
the inquest it was not. The significance of this camera was that it might have been used to
zoom in on the central pens to show the extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is
clear that the video evidence, including a detailed transcript o f its contents, was made available
to Taylor. The inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself has
given rise to allegations which are discussed in the annex C.


16.     The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a matter of
interpretation. The families believe that PG Bichard misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our
reading o f the transcripts suggest that he claimed the camera was not working very well: this
continues to be the police view. This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward by the police; we do not see any evidence that pictures from camera 5 were any less
clear than those from any o f the other cameras. But we do not believe that this divergence of
view is significant.




 smd-0077                                        6
Calls for a new inquest


17.    The families have also appealed to the Attorney General to recommend a new inquest,
proffering the testimony of Dr Ed Walker. He claimed in an article in Hospital Doctor that he
tended Philip Hammond whom he says was alive after 3.15. If true, this would not appear to
be a strong enough reason for the Attorney to recommend a new inquest. Dr Walker’s
testimony is not in any case conclusive. It transpires that he did give a statement at the time of
the disaster. In it, Dr Walker said o f a boy whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:
        “ Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived He was of
       a similar age (around 12- 14years) with blond hair. He was also in Cardiopulmonary
       /arrest. I intubated him and noticed evidence ofgross inhalation of stomach contents.
       He also had markedgaseous abdominal distensionpossibly indicating that he had
       has mouth to mouth resuscitation at some time.


       I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was also
        established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but hispupils werefixed and dilated
        throughout, andI believe he has since died ”


 The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear whether
there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty did not appear at the time to
contradict the findings o f the Home Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead
by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence because the consultant in charge James
Wardrobe presented a composite picture.


18.     Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new inquest, as
I pointed out in my submission of 26 February, evidence that some o f the deceased may have
survived beyond 3.15 has not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the
past and this view was upheld by Lord Justice McCowan in the Judicial Review o f the
Coroner’s decision in November 1993. He found that in respect of one o f the victims there
was “a realistic probability” he was alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:




 smd-0077                                        7
                                                                                                  #
        " I have discovered no good reasonfor ordering a new inquest orfor merely
       quashing the existing verdict.


       I f I hadfound such a reason and had to exercise my discretion thefollowing matters
       would have weighed with me. What would be thepurpose of afresh inquest? To get a
       verdict criticising thepolice. Such criticism has already beenfirmly levelled by the
       Taylor Report. Thepolice have admittedfault andpaid compensation. To get a
       verdict criticising the emergency services? I see no evidence tojustify such criticism,
       and in any event it would be irrelevant if all six were brain dead by 3.15pm. To
       obtainfurther examination of the last minutes of their lives. I doubt that anything
       more would be learned, but theprocess would be a very harrowing one involving
       large numbers of witnesses and lasting if notfo r 96 days, for notfar short. Moreover,
       irrespective of whosefault, if anyone’s, it is, thefact is thatfour and a halfyears
       have alreadypassed since the tragedy occurred As to the alternative suggestion of a
       mere quashing of the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would regard
        that as absolutely valueless.


19.     A further complication with the demands for a new inquest is that whilst the families
speak o f the inquest as though it were one event with a single verdict it was in law 90 separate
inquests held together. For a verdict of “lack o f care” to be brought forward, the evidence
would have to be considered to support that view in the circumstances that each individual
died rather than as a view o f the total disaster.




Other possible reasons to reopen the inquiry


20.     Whilst we concluded that there was no new evidence which would justify reopening
the inquiry we also considered whether, despite this, it would be in the families’ interests to
reopen the inquiry. It is perhaps useful first to consider what the families hope might be
achieved by such a course. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr
Philip Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster; they agreed with my
suggestion that Taylor had done a good job, though they maintained that there were aspects of



smd-0077                                             8
the inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
inquest verdict to be a gross miscarriage of justice which they equated to the Bridgewater
case. They strongly criticised the coroner’s selection of witnesses as well as the cut off time of
3.15 after which he would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce
a finding of death through “lack o f care” or “unlawful killing”, “ rather than accidental death”.
It appears therefore that the calls for a fresh inquiry are not so much an end in itself but a
means by which they hope that the Attorney would come to reopen the inquest, or failing that,
a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there were to be a
change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure from the families on the
Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges. A point which has been repeatedly
emphasised by the media in this case is that no policeman was ever prosecuted and that no
policeman was ever disciplined. However as is shown below, in the absence of anything far
more substantive coming to light, this is not a possibility.


Criminal charges


21.     The question o f prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he announced in
September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute anyone in respect o f the
disaster. The CPS Code o f Practice sets out the circumstances when decisions to prosecute
can be reconsidered. This includes cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that
there needs to be a high threshold in such cases because o f the principle o f finality - that
people should be able to rely on their decisions. Hillsborough has been thoroughly considered
on several occasions and although new evidence could trigger a prosecution, the CPS
recognise that this would be a popular decision, they have found no evidence o f any
wrongdoing that would justify criminal charges. The most they believe that they have found is
that Mr Bichard regarded the quality o f the recordings less favourably than Mr Houldsworth.
The CPS lawyer who investigated this point commented “ I cannot prosecute somebody for
their assessment o f the standard o f videos.”




smd-0077                                          9
Police disciplinary charges


22.    A further cause for bitterness among the families of the victims is the fact that no
disciplinary charges were upheld against any members o f the police. After the DPP’s decision
not to prosecute, the Police Complaints Authority decided that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges, but these did not
reach a conclusion because Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired because o f ill health
before the disciplinary tribunal’s ruling on whether or not he was guilty. The Police
Complaints Authority announced subsequently that disciplinary proceedings would be
withdrawn against Mr Murray explaining that what in effect was joint allegation of neglect of
duty could not be fairly heard in the absence o f the more senior officer. Superintendent Murray
has also left the force. South Yorkshire Police inform us that all other officers involved in the
case have left with the exception o f Mr Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it
might be argued that Mr Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the
police position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short o f being involved in a cover-up of the
kind suggested by the families. It would appear a very odd decision if he were to be pursued
for his involvement, eight years after the event, when the officers in charge o f policing were
not.


Next steps


22.     If a desire for a change in the inquest verdict, prosecutions or, at a minimum,
disciplinary action against former officers is a motivation behind the calls for an inquiry, it also
follows that a decision to reopen the inquiry would not in itself bring finality. The families
would still feel disappointed: we understand that they are examining whether it might be
possible to take the case to the European Court of Human Rights. There is no likelihood
therefore that the families will accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence
but will see such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
You may therefore wish to consider whether there could be merit in asking a respected
barrister or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
that has been compiled as is suggested in Alun Jones’ opinion. This could be a limited




smd-0077                                         1 0
exercise; we would not suggest that the person chosen should hear testimony as that would
effectively be a reopening o f the inquiry itself but he or she could look once more at the
evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider written representations. Though
this in itself is unlikely to satisfy the families, other than temporarily, it might help convince the
wider public that there was no conspiracy. The disadvantage o f such a course would be that
there could still be dissatisfaction both at the procedure and at the outcome if, as seems
inevitable, the recommendation was finally that no further actions should be taken. It would
also set a precedent which would be cited when the public were dissatisfied with the outcomes
o f other inquiries. It would remove the finality that inquiries are supposed to create. We do
not therefore recommend this course.


Handling
23.     If you decide that there should be a limited independent review o f the evidence the
announcement could be made quickly and would be welcomed by the media. If you decide that
this would only defer rather solve the problem then we need to prepare carefully for the
handling o f an announcement that there is to be no further action so that we are in a position
to satisfy the press that the questions raised have been properly examined. We suggest that
we should put up a further submission discussing the handling in detail. We understand that
the Attorney would not want to make any announcement about the inquest at the same time as
this would confuse his legal role with his role as part o f the Government, but at the same time
it is important that the Home Office and the Attorney’s Office are not played off against each
other. We will also need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be
done; there are a number o f separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning o f the announcement
and the families who have made direct representations. One possible was o f handling this
might be for letters to be hand delivered to those most involved. We will supply drafts. The
timing o f the announcement is also important; it should not be too close to the anniversary o f
the disaster 14 April.




                                         Sue McDougall




 smd-0077                                         11
             South Yorkshire                                                        fVrxirve*. 'fV

             POLICE
             JUSTICE    with   COURAGE
                                                               Richard Wells qpm, MMOmnx om # .
                                                               Chief Constable




Police Policy Directorate                        Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)
Home Office                                      Our Ref:    D&C/JML/SW CSF 15/97
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                           Date:       3 February 1997
SW1H9AT




\ * J              ,


 HILLSBOROUGH

 Following the screening of the drama documentary "Hillsborough" on Thursday 5 December 1996
 and your letter dated 20 December, I have now had the opportunity to study in some detail the
 contents of the programme and to conduct further research.

 As a result of the research into the material collected by West Midlands Police for the Lord Justice
 Taylor Inquiry and the transcripts of evidence given at that inquiry, two volumes of documents
 have been compiled which cover the matters raised in your letter. It would serve no useful
 purpose for me to transcribe certain parts of the evidence into this letter and it seems appropriate
 to provide the documents to you in their present form.

 Volume One deals with video evidence, together with comments from the coroner, Doctor Popper,
 Home Office Pathologist, Professor Usher, Doctor Gumpet, a consultant neurologist, and
 Doctor Slater. Also in these documents are comments from Police Constable Bichard concerning
 the operation of the video cameras in question.

 Let me say at the outset that no new evidence has emerged and the issues raised in the television
 programme have all previously been aired in Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest.

 Perhaps I can address specifically the concerns mentioned in your letter dated 20 December. First
 of all I must emphasise once again that there is no new evidence. Secondly, you seek clarification
 on whether film from a video camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor
 Inquiry. Such a video film was made available to the Taylor Inquiry and a copy is enclosed for your
 information, together with another video film, completing the video record available from police
 sources, that day. The second video, like the first, was made available to Lord Justice Taylor. You
 will see that they did not provide any useful information to the match commanders on the day of
 the disaster and the programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
                                                   -2-


 Police Policy Directorate                                         3 February 1997


 Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
 of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
 documents provided, at Section Two.                                                           6

                               -0ld th® Lord Justice Ta^ or>s lnc>uiry that whilst some pictures were
 working                     3 ,n quest,on they were of P°or quality although the camera was in fact


 ™ S L d06c ?® m t0 b® s° me confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
 around aitholfnh06 T h"     P° ,,Ce Constab,e Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
 ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
£ £ £ £ ! “ UP^ 9S Lf " e 8nd ° ' m9 « " UBd exclusiv8|y' the recorded m ate rials the tape
enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
              “ " f 01 r° ° m Personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record footage
                     ^       Certa,n monitors in ^           room. It will be seen from the enclosed
video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question Where the
nm.mHU pn “ ° f P° ° / quality then          is the camera trained     the Leppings Lane end of the
F,°“ d.         your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
            h f0® wtheuTayl0r lnquiry and induded here in ^ e ir original form) of these particular
              form        bas,s of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.

 Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes it
 has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean for
 his mtended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
 repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
 2? S e| P?!‘ce1cameras were work,n9- In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
went nosing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
locked and the alarm set When they returned the next morning the room was still locked with the
alarm still armed. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
tapes was of no use whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
tne camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
    u        area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
call a clearly defined cut off time.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
 questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
 allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
 those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
 points, they were fully addressed.
A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.
 Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
 issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
 events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
 recommendations.

 It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
 which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.
                           QUESTION                 ONE


Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Supenntendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
 of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
 Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                          QUESTION                 TWO


Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience, intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 7-15, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                        QUESTION                  THREE


Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?


Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 16-41, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not, however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
control room.

227. The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
                                                                  G^VAJib'VVcnrt




Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it.
m


                               QUESTION                  FOUR

     Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
     terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
     Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?


     No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
    overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4                 Chief
    Supenntendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
    and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
    say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
    the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
    Supenntendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
    realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
    attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings



    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
    room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
    view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
    field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
    working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
    excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
    on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations
    in the event pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place fans
    were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
    control room.

    245. The 20 officers detailed to the penmeter track were distributed round the pitch so
    that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
    reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
    officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
    contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

    246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
    to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
    medical attention)” At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
    invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
    by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
    and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
    crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
    and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
                                                                               VAJLS 4"\ C/VA,   (4



 unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
 consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

247. "Senior officer" meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher The Inspector in
charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
players’ tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said:

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding intenm
recommendation 5. That provided:-

  * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                                                                                    «
                         QUESTION                FIVE


Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?

The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.

The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel.
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

 9.   Arrangements should be made:-

 (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
 maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
 either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
 otherwise, and

 (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is
 about to be reached.
.   I




                                   QUESTION                  SIX

        Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid mislead the Secretary of
        the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
        officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


        Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
        forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
        gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
        communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
        opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
        ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
        he believed correct in a crisis moment.

        Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
        However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
        concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
        disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
        ground.


        OBSERVATIONS
        This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
        gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
        considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

        Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.


        Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

        98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
        the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
        control room for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
        and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
        there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
         screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
         that's been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
         later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans'
         account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
         their way in.

         99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
         Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
         three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
         likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
         want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
         emergency operations.
                        QUESTION                  SEVEN


Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.

Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authonty and they decided that the gates should
be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.

Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
been at ground very very quickly.

Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson's statement "that anyone who had
considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
lot of persuasion about that".

 When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
 Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
 equipment.
                                                                         Q           V '-rvv    7


#
    Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
    request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
    the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

    The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
    access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
    the number he had wanted to bring out.

    Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
    however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
    into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
    which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
    away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
    ’Breakin-Kit' on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
    not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

    The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
    evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
    used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
    were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement*. The certifying authority issued
    a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
    should have been.


    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 104 -137, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


    Gates

    258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
    intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
    emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
    example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
    had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
    since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
    brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
    empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
    If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
    alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
    radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
    that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
     minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
     available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

    264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
    standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
    spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
    number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
                                                                          \ ajp   i   i r \ c w   "?




Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i O pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success.
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.


Lord Justice Taylor • Final Report


Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
                                                                           Ani crw ^


Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 17 and 21

17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fencing to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made • either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 138 • 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John’s ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutes ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

 Fans

 97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
 assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
 address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
 attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
 given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
 close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majonty of
)                                                                           (j ^\AJ2 s V> LTV\




    the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop.
    still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
    They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
    fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end
    The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
    they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
    the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
    they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
    Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
    purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
    contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
    intensified.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

    Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
    individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
    ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
    attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
    should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                              q u e s t i o n              n in e




need of trained medical help?



Thede
    Sm         «     t " ^




 egress to the playing area.                                                      ambulances onto
 Mr Hiaains SYMAS took the view that i                     t          goj ng on there. A Bottleneck


 s s s h s s s s s
  the PitCh‘                                                   Mr Hiaains in radioing for assistance

                                                                                       to ^    piaying




   r a    S    f —            S s onto me playing ~            was correct.



    OBSERVATIONS
    Please see pages 1 4 9 -1 5 6 . Volume 2.



     Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
     296 I say at the outset of this       c h a p te r   .hat no                                 on 15

     ir r e    r n     o     81^      ^




      K ir ; » r 5 c s ^ « ^ S :
       ^ " a m
       le S e r livesbcould
                        ln c e t he
                            have been s a v ^ H 'S "              ^                    ,      ^ e d i on
         The other doctor complamed oM he                           g defM lator 0n the pitch with people
         overwhelming evidence that to attempt
                                                                     Cs*)va£ \\ cm VO


                           QUESTION                  TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 157 - 159, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
                                                                     < O ^ V jlA > V i   if v v




milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
M A R -03-8 7   17:8*    FROM.   BRUCE   CAMPBELL     CO




     m
                                      fhe Hillsborough Disaster. Aral 1988.


                                                       Opinion


           Introduction

           1      I am naked to give on opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                   appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three area* of fresh evidence that
                   have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
                   Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium In Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
                   cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, told in April and May 1990,
                   and later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts of accidental death
                   ware recorded on the victims.

           2      A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six of the
                  bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest The main
                  complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
                  presented in (he Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as AoflCX A. In
                  summary form, those main complaints were,

                   2.1     The Coroner imposed an arbitrwy cut-off point in time of 3.15, which had the
                           effect o f excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the “Mtyor
                           Disaster Flan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                           emergency services promptly.

                   2.2     The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances of the deaths
                           of the 95; he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                           of the victims were alive alter 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                            medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to S. 12. and 7)

                   2.3     The Coroner devutcd an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages o f hb
                           summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                           Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The ropoit by Lord
                           Taylor, which was severoly critical of the police, had ruled out the
                           consumption of alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

                   2.4      The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                            sclcction of evidence and treatment o f witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                   2.5      The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial Uwk to perform, in
                            directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                            and unlawful killing.




                                                            1
M A R -83-87   17-B2   FROM-   BRUCE    CAMPBELL     CO                ID.                                     P M E




          3      The inquest verdicts wore notqusshod. The judgment of the Court is at Annex b .
                 The Court was strongly influenced by tho fact that the lawyers originally instructed
                 for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner's decisions (eg page 7), that
                 the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made a difference, or had
                 been properly excluded (pages 14- 36); that the direction o f the Coroner to the jury
                 wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                 40).

          4      Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                 Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
                 that the legal nystem failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                 circumstances of death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
                 disaster would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
                 has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
                 professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officers
                 at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                 course o f justice at the inquest. None of the following matters were made known at
                 the inquest.

          5      The evidence of Roaor Houldsworth. Attached ii an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth.
                  tinted 25"' November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                  documents, and commenting on evidence given at the inquest (Annex CD. Contrary to
                  the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave dear pictures o f the
                  1 eppings Lane Temices where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                  tapes and Mr Houldsworth's evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
                  officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at largo in
                  December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
                 disaster. (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex TYi

          6      The new videotape evidence. Very recently, a member of the Family Support group
                  Has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of
                 those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                  told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
                 South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                 inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
                 Group in the presence o f Mr Houldswoith, Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
                 Support Group, and Ann Adlington o f my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
                 that police officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas o f the ground
                 were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
                 Mr HouldswcMih in his evidence of November 1996. Events in the relevant area may
                 not, for various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm. but
                 they were clearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

          7      1 have also been shown a copy o f what was, I am told, presented to the jury. It i« «
                 very badly duplicated and blurred picture of Individuals escaping from the stricken
                 pens shortly after 3 pm, in which It is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The

                                                          2
«o j   hKun< a




  tape has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this lope is a copy at several
  generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
  the videotape of which the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
  events a Her 3 pm.

  The importance of the new evidence The question whether the police could and did
  notice ihe pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
  page 125, the Coroner directed the jury f Annex Kl:

 “The assessment of the terraces" is a “very important factor" and "maybe the single
 most important (actor in the whole Inquest'’. “The total sum of ovidence from the
 Control Room, that is Mr Duclcenfetd, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
 that none of them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

 None of this evidonce was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue In the
 case in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded aa by the Coroner as the critical time. I
 believe (lut the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
 the High Court in 1993, let atone the jury in 1991.

 The evidence o f Dr Ed W alker In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came lo
 light; see Annex F .. The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
 appoint «t AnOfixQ- The » » evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
 “sinus rhythm and cardiac output11liter arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
 Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
 criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
 points out in his letter of 701February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
 Slater. D r Walker was congratulated on 3"*May 1989 by Dr Wardiupe, who was
 closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15** June 19*9 to
 stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
 at the inquest.

 It is difficult to exaggerate the significance a f the concealment of Dr Walker’s
 ovidence. At page 10 of the Divisional Court's judgment o f November 1993 the
 Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
 the evidence disclosod the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
 death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
 revealing remark comes from Dr Waidrope in his letter of 3rdMay 1989 “Almost
 immediately the department was flooded with luge numbers o f acutely ill patients
 requiring urgent resuscitation''. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
 structured by the Coroner on an utterly different factual awumpiign.

Xhe previous investigation One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
In which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
Midlands Polico who assisted the Coroner.
                                                                                                #
12    Conclusion- In my viow these new pieces of evidence call for a full police enquiry or
      public inquiry. Exhibits such ts the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
      analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
      production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
      thi* opinion, together with the documents referred to in it b« sent to the Director o f
      Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a foil copy to the Home Secretary,
      who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few moathi.

13    I hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
      two or three o f the Family Support Group, Arm Adlington and me to expand upon this
      advicc.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray's Inn
London W ei


3rd March 1997.                                                   Alun Jones QC




                                            «




                                            4
                                                      Annex ©


Questions raised bv Granada and the families




The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably to dissuade
the inquiry from watching the tape)while Mr Houldsworth testified that he had
repaired the fault on the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and it
was working perfectly.


This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an affidavit to this
effect, which is attached at Appendix 1. On the day o f the match there were five cameras
scanning the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording machines,
which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the officer controlling the
video made a decision to record. PC Bitchard who controlled the videoing procedure
explained in his testimony that one o f the cameras had not been working well but added " the
quality has been improved. It was not up to the mark but it was a lot better than it had been.
Wewere gettingpictures that is the best way ofdescribing it. " Therefore it is not true to say
that the Taylor inquiry was led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective
that they were not worth viewing.


In cross examination during the inquest Mr Bitchard also sticks to his view that the camera
was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to distinguish facial
expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and cannot distinguish any material
difference in the quality o f the recording which came from camera 5 to that coming from the
other cameras. This does not prove that there was not a quality difference discernible to the
police in the control box on the day. It could be argued though that Mr Bitchard was putting a
gloss on the evidence in a way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In this he
was not alone. Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and evasive.




smd-0077
The inquest jury and the inquiry only had the police account of what could be seen from
the police control box on that day and the capabilities of the video system. The faulty
camera was never challenged.


South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product o f their recording as
explained above. For most o f the tape the recorded material shows a sequence o f 25 second
shots from each o f the five cameras. PC Bitchard who was controlling the monitors testified to
the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Superintendent Duckenfield to record the activity
at the turnstiles which is where Superintendent Duckenfield considered at the time that the
trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is mainly o f this
area. Later parts o f the footage cover what was happening inside the ground. A full transcript
o f the video footage is attached at Appendix 2; this and the tapes were available to the Taylor
inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers representing the families at the
time o f the inquest.


South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at these
tapes The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by West Midlands
Police and contained the most relevant footage o f the disaster taken from a variety o f sources,
including material from the BBC, from the underwater search team who had hand held
camcorders as well as from the police monitoring equipment.


The compilation tape, which was seen bv Tavlor inquiry, showed the overcrowding in the
central pens. The question o f whether the camera could have zoomed in on the crowd is a
detail which does not appear to have been an issue in the Taylor inquiry. The line o f
questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the police claimed they had or
had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem o f overcrowding. This is shown in the
transcripts. Lord Justice Taylor is questioning Superintendent Duckenfield:


           M r Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen videos and
       it really is not any useyou saying that. It is plain; is not that by 2.50 the two wing




smd-0077
        pins at the Leppings Lane endwerepretty empty, whereas the two centrepens, if you
        won 7 have themfu ll were getting onfo r beingfull. A. Yes sir.


        Q. You agree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure that
        there was nofurther crowding ofpens 3 and. A. That there were not more than the
        number tofit in comfortably be allowed into thosepens?


        Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would haveput thosepens at
       full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were approaching beingfull.


        Q. Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd control.
        There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have to cut off the
        inflow into thosepens. A. Yes sir.



The report was heavily critical o f the police in the detail o f the lack o f planning and o f the
decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for the disaster:


        It isfa ir to state that over manyyear the south Yorkshire Police have given excellent
        service to thepublic. They have handled crowdproblems sensitively and successfully
        at a large number offootball games... Unfortunately their policing on 15 April broke
        down in ways alreacfy described and although here were other causes the main reason
        for the disaster was the failure of police control.


        In a ll some 65police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report
        thatfo r the mostpart the quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their
        rank There were manyyoung Constables who as witnesses were alert, intelligent and
        open...By contrast with some notable exceptions the senior officers were defensive
        and evasive. Theirfeelings ofgriefand sorrow were obvious andgenuine. No doubt
        thosefeelings were intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred
        under their management. but neither their handling ofproblems on the day nor their




smd-0077
        account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their
        rank


Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that it
wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.


This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family Support
Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy o f the material from camera 5 which was
shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy o f the tape that was provided. This was
indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police say that the copy which was
supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly duplicated and blurred. Because o f the
degree o f mistrust the families feel, they did not question whether the poor quality o f the
video was for their copy alone but assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South
Yorkshire are sending us a fresh copy o f the version o f the video which was seen by the
inquest jury.


The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor material from
camera no 5.


This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to explain
the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely effectively. It does not
appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape covers the run-up to the disaster; the
situation looks dangerous; there is evidence o f overcrowding. The most likely reason that
material from camera 5 was not used is that the BBC material was so much better. We do not
see any evidence that particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation
tape.




Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.


One o f the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for an inquiry
was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor inquiry. His statement



smd-0077
would have been available to the Treasury Council who was acting on behalf o f Lord Taylor.
The interim reports explains:


        The witnesses called were only a smallfraction of thosefrom whom statements were
       or could have been taken. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that they were sufficient in
       number and in reliability to enable me to make the necessary conclusions. To have
       called more would haveprevented mefrom presenting an interim report in the
       required time and would not have added significantly to the relevant evidence.



The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up


The central implication o f the Granada programme is that the police were, and continue to be,
involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent o f the negligence. This allegation is
forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in
which he says:
       One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way in which evidencepresented
       to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities
       and the policefrom blame. Very serious questions arise as to the process by which
       evidence was selected by the WestMidlands Police who assisted the coroner.


This ignores the crucial point that the purpose o f an inquest is not to apportion blame but to
meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three limited questions - who the
deceased was and when and where he met his death.


It is certainly true that Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the extent o f his
responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly unsuccessful in these
attempts: criticism was not averted either about his involvement or that o f South Yorkshire
Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord Justice Taylor wrote:
       It is a matter of regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
        Yorkshire Police were notprepared to concede they were in any respect atfault in
       what occurred Mr Duckenfield underpressure of cross examination apologisedfor



smd-0077
        blaming the Liverpoolfansfo r causing the deaths. But that apart thepolice case was
        to blame the fansfor being late and drunk and to blame the Clubfor failing to
        monitor the pens. It was argued that thefatal crush was not cause by the influx
        through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being defective. Such an unrealistic
        approach gives causefor anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would
        have been more seemly and encouragingfor thefuture if responsibility had been
       faced.


Houldsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.


Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording o f the CCTV cameras was inadvertently
changed to time lapse mode (producing a series o f pictures rather than continual motion)
probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving positions within the control
box. Houldsworth indicates that it is impossible to switch recording modes when the machine
is already running and that the relevant buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught
accidentally. It is hard, though, to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the
mode was changed before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the
relevant images.


Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were ‘greatly
enhanced compared to those available to the police on the day. Houldsworth indicates that
the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the 12 inches claimed by Bichard and
that the monitors were capable o f showing the same information as shown on the larger
screens used at the inquest. Again, despite Houldsworth’s contradiction o f Bichard’s
evidence, it is impossible to attach any significance to what amounts to a difference o f opinion.


West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact that
force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime Squad and
Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious Crime Squad, was
appointed as one of the investigation team.




smd-0077
The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police, with the approval o f the Police Complaints Authority and Lord Justice
Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:


        It was therefore decided that the investigation of the disaster and the gathering of
        evidencefor this Inquiry should be conducted by an independentpoliceforce. Mr
        Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of WestMidlands Constabulary, undertook this
        task He was made responsible directly to me; he appointedAssistant Chief Constable
        Mervyn Jones to takefull-time charge of the investigation. I am deeply indebted to
        both of them.


There is no information on why West Midlands was chosen, but clearly it was necessary to
select a force with no connection, however tenuous, with the incident or those involved. The
PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction with the
conduct o f the investigation.


The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team is likely to have
rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr Beechey never, in
fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position may have meant that he had
certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the Squad. At the time o f the Hillsborough
tragedy, allegations had been publicised about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14
August 1989 that the Chief Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police
to investigate the allegations against it.


Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included:


        • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance from
           Superintendent Beechey of the West Midlands Police in his conduct of the
           inquest;


        • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken Liverpool
           supporters; and



smd-0077
                                                                                                        #•*




       • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath o f the disaster. The
          T aylor inquiry considered the causes of the disaster and the inquest dealt with
          events up to the 3.15 cut-off p o in t The actions and decisions taken beyond
           that point, it is argued therefore, have not been publicly examined.


An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the inquiries he
should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons, including the police. It is entirely
a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and witnesses should be heard.


Although the focus o f the Taylor inquiry was on the causes o f die disaster, its terms o f
reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on IS April
1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports
events’. As such it was able to fully consider die actions o f die police and other emergency
services at die ground throughout the relevant period.




smd-0077
