 PAUL WILLIAM CASLILE


 1.      Paul Carlile the                  son and brother respectively           of the

         Applicants Sandra Stringer and Donna Carlile was born
                        I
         on 8 th August, 1969, and was 19 years old when he died

         at Hillsborough football ground on 15th April, 1989.



 2.      He went to the stadium - in the company of friends, but

     ^ ^ i t is not         known whether he was in               their company when

        he tcck up a             position inside the stadium in enclosure

        3.

                 %



3.      During the course                  of the mini inquest         the jury heard

        from Professor                Usher that         in his   view the     cause of

        death was           traumatic asphyxia.               The death      would h=ive

        been     painless as               he    would    have fallen       unconscious

        within       10     or   20    seconds      of his chest      being crushed.

        This was           followed by           the evidence of      Police Officer

     ^^^Geralaine Evans and Detective Inspector Michael Layton

       which when combined produced                       the following chronology

        of events: At 2.45 p.m.                     Paul Carlile was outside the

        ground near to                the perimeter gate.            Some time before

        3.03 p.m.           he climbed           over the fence from enclosure 3

       into enclosure                 4.    Between      3.03 p.m.    and     3.15 p.m.

       Michael            Hollinghurst, an            off duty    nurse, found      Mr.

       Carlile lying on the                     floor unconscious in enclosure 4

       whereupon           he tried         to    resuscitate him       but was     not




ANNAAP                                          0
         successful.        He     then     moved    on        to    treat"^another

         casualty      after     being     told     by     a    uniformed ' police

         officer to leave the terrace.               Shortly after 3.15 p.m.

         DC Goulding and DC Pont saw Paul Carlile being carried

         from    the general       direction        of     the tunnel,         in' the

         concourse at      the Leppings         Lane end            of the    stadium.

         The    two    officers and        an   unidentified              ambulanceman

      attempted to revive             him but were not               successful.     At

     4.35       p.m.      behind      the Leppings          Lane stands         Doctor

     Monaghan certified Paul Carlile dead.



4.   The  jury also heard directly from Mr.  Hollinghurst
         T *
     that it was only when the pressure began to ease in

     enclosure 4 that he realised Paul Carlile was lying at

     his feet.           He began     helping him and another                 man who

     was unconscious             a few feet       away..       Eventually      he was

     told that it was time                for him to leave the enclosure,

     and he did this through a hole in the perimeter fence.

     He recollected            two ambulancemen            had arrived        to take

     over       from      him    in       the   attempts             to   resuscitate

     casualties.



5.   The Applicants         submit that much important evidence was

     not put          before the      jury thus      depriving them            of the

     opportunity properly to consider                      what happened.          Much

     of this          evidence was        also relevant             to the   issue of




ANNAAF
                                         -3 -


       whether death' was aggravated by lack of care," an issue

       which was not left to the jury.



 6.    The evidence         that Mr. Eollinghurst gave was markedly
                          *
       different        to that contained in a statement he had

       previously        made.        In this    he stated      that he     first

       became aware of Paul when                he felt him climbing up his

       legs.     He     was pulling himself up by             holding onto Mr.

      • Eollinghurst's          trousers.       Mr.   Eollinghurst        reached*

       down and        took Paul's hand         and began pulling         him up.

       This task        was made      difficult by         people standing     on

       Paul.      He lost        Paul's hand and          so took hold     of his

       hair'.    All     this time Paul was trying            to pull himself

       up.      He was in        pain and aware       of what was        going on

       around him.        This contrasts strongly with the evidence

       of Dr. Usher        that Paul would have            fallen unconscious

       within 20 seconds of            being crushed and would not have

       been in pain.            In the statement Mr. Hollinghurst also

       said that        he was    told to       leave the     enclosure by     a

       policeman or ambulanceman on the grounds that he could

       do no more.        However the       person who told him to leave

       did not        himself check      Mr.     Carlile     to see   if there

      were      any     signs    of    life,     before     instructing     some
                                                      /

       supporters to        carry him to         the back of     the terrace.

      The Applicants submit that this evidence was extremely

      important and possibly indicated that Mr. Hollinghurst




'AN1JAAF
          was given insufficient time              to attempt to resuscitate

          Hr. Carlile.



 7.       There was       a ^discrepancy between PC Evans account of
                            I
          the       activities of DC Goulding and DC Pont and DC

          Gouldiiig's own account.              This account, contained in a

          statement he had           made, was to the effect        that he was

          initially on his own with             Paul Carlile.     He then left

          him in       order to      see what    his colleagues     .were doing

         .after which he returned to him             with DC Pont.      DC Pont

         then left and returned to him with an ambulanceman.

               %
                i
 8   .   The Applicants         were informed by West        Midlands Police

         Officers that Paul           Carlile was the first         casualty to

         have been taken          off the terraces.        This matter never

         came out at the inquest.            They are deeply concerned by

         the        fact   that he    was   left    in   the area     and    only

         certified dead at 4.35 p.m.               They feel that he'should
         have been one of the first persons to have been placed

         in an ambulance and taken to hospital.                 They were also

         informed that Dr. Monaghan              had requested the use of a

         machine when        he was attending        to Mr. Carlile.         This

         possibly indicates that he believed that he could only

         be     certain that      Paul Carlile       was dead     or alive     by

         using such a machine           or that alternatively efforts to

         save Paul may have           been successful had a machine been

         available.




ANNAAF
 9.   The Applicants submit        that had all this ' evidence "and

         the evidence   of Dr.    Glynn Phillips, Dr.      John Ashton

         and Hr.   F. Eccleston    been put   before the     tribunal,

         there would have been    sufficient material for them to
                        %
         consider whet’her to return a verdict that the death of

         Paul Carlile was aggravated by lack of care.




ANNAAp
                                   (D
    HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


              PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE




                       Before

'DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM.-BS, MRCGP

             (Her Maiestv's Coroner)




                         At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                         On

                  3rd May, 1990.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. H a r p h a m , Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        APPEARANCES:




 MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

 MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                /
                           Forrest)

 MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

 MR.    GREGORY            Sheffield City Council

 MISS    THORPE            Eastwood & Partners

® E S S A. ADDLEMAN        Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

 MR. P. ISAACS             Cnief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

 MS. B. NORCLIFFE and      Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
 MR. P. METCALF            Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                 :VANS Called

         TTT3 CORONER

POLIC:-: IMSP^OTOP. TUCTTAT:T, LAYTON Called

      ■Yv TH-V CCaONER
 ?rd r?:y, 1?90


     x r V ' a s t Xirro m s djj/ttt of patjt. '/tuia?-: casli?^

      T'ZZ   COilOin'l:    Good morning.        Please sit down.

       in. P-lASoil:  Sir, the evidence you arc ( j o i n - to
Ihear now relates to Paul Villiam Cnrlilq.      Sir, Paul's
 mtim is within the precincts of the building but would
!rather not hear the pathological evidence so ■will come
 in, as it were, halfway through the hearing, Paul's
 stepfather and two sisters and aunt are present in
 Court, sir. Sir, the practice that represents them
 is a member of my Group and I, therefore, appear in the
 usual guise this n o m i n j as their agent through the
 Steering Committee .

      TIED COUCHED:        You, sir, are the stepfather, is
 that right?

      JT^l’FATI’TDIi:     Yos.

      TI-735 C011CI3ER: Just so I lcnov who I am looking at.
TThich arc the two sisters? Ilight.

      Can I just e?:plain to you, before we begin, so to
•speak, the procedure so that you know what is coning.
 You have probably already been told, in the circumstances,
 but very very briefly X ar.i go5.ng to read the evidence
vh5.ch I took right at the beginning last year in April,
 in fact, the 1 9 th, and then, when I have done that, I
 am going to tell you what the blood alcohol levels
were and then we will listen to Prof, Usher i;ho will
 toll us about the pathology. I think I will pause then,
1'r. Fr'.ser, so that we can allow Paul *s mum to come back
if she wishes. ’.lien wo are all settled again, so to speak,
the presenting Officers of the T/est Midlands 3 olice will
present the evidence which they have summarised for me
and Inspector Layton will deal with the visual side of
the evidence, lie will describe it, first of all. There
is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
is there, in this particular instance?

     XJTSFISCTOn LAYTON:             There is, sir.   Some of it is
not oonfimiecl.

     THD CCTiONEIi: Anyway, he will describe it. You may
findthat bit a little bit confusing. Do not bo too
worried about that because, in a moment, after he has
described it, ho comes round here and, as far as ho is
able, ho shows us on these big plans what he has boon
talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
better.




                                 -   1-
                 :iThc body which is the subject of this
                 Inquest has been identified to DC 3 ^ 5 5
                 ’
                 ..'allr.ee of the S o u t h Yorkshire Police
[                    that of laul ’/illiam Carlile by Georje
                 Peake, his uncle. I I o was 19 years of o. qc
                having been 003711 on tlio Gtli .‘.ujust, <9£>9
                 at Liverpool. He vr.s a single nan and he
                lived at [
                I            . He was a plasterer by occupation.
                17c died at J15.11sborough Football Ground
                following an incident there on Saturday,
                 75th April, lp89. rc 1212 Goulding caused
                the body to bo removed to the Jlodico L<^Cal
                Centro and there he identified it to
                Detective Constable Simon Vei£old v/ho
                stibscqucntly identified tho same body to
                Prof. Usher. It is tho family wish that
                the body should be cremated.”

        I then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
wrote to you and, in fact, I think you, IIr. Stringer
 signed tho form, James Stringer, which X -sent to you on
 the 2 7 th April, "19 S9 and asked you to check names and
addresses and, although tho pronounciation of the surname
\r .\s corroct, in fact wo had nispelt it and it should be
spelt f.Carlile1. And vo had also inispelt Kirkby because
we had loft tho ,k t out. It is spelt ,Kirkbyt but I
have boon told that it is pronounced ‘I'irkby *.        T.
am learning. Apart from that, I think, all tho other
information was, in fact, correct'

       IZ 1 .   J. STTJITTGZ-T*:   Yes.

     TTv) CORCI’sTSlI: "..lien I opened this Inquest Dr.
Forrest cane alone ^nd told us all aljout tho blood
alcohol levels for everybody and, in the ease of Paul,
tho level which I10 measured was 61 ng/100 ml.

       ITov wo are going to turn to Frof. Usher.
                        P7K?F. ALAI* USIESI* Called;

                            Dy TIIS CORONER:

3. Prof. Usher, you are a Home Office Pathologist and
   Prof. of Foronsic L'odicino here in Sheffield, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

     Prof. Usher, you arc going to tell r.ie about a man by
     tho name of Paul Uilliam Carlile and what number did
     ve .... — A. 73 t sir.

I.   That is right, yes.           Can you tell me then, please? -
                                           ]'*?CF.   VJ'-TT.Tj



   A. The body J e;;cnir.cd v;as that or a heavily-built,
   dark-haired young, v/liite nalo, 171 cr.is in height and
   weighing GO kgs. The typical signs of traur:atic
   asphyxia ’..-ere present both externally and internally.
   There was some swelling o f the brain which is, a^-ain,
   not nncennion in traumatic asphyxia, and occasional
   petechial haemorrhages on the lungs. Tlie heart weighed
   about UOO grans and that is slightly enlarged but I
   am quite certain that heart disease played no part
   in bringing about this man's death.

Q. Ue v.-ill cone back to the heart in a moment. - A. Xn
   fact, X give his cause of* death as traumatic asphyxia.
   I really believe that he had an average expectation of
   life for his age.
Q. You do, because I think you said there was slight
   particular hypertrophy, which is thickening, and you
   also mention, I notice, that the valve seemed a little
   bit dilated? - A. Yos, it did. I do not know this
   man's occupation so ....

Q. A plasterer. — A. Veil, that is fairly heavy muscular
   work and it may well be that this slight enlargement
   of his heart was, in fact, due to work hypertrophy of
   his heart.

Q. So what you are saying is nothing to worry about,
   ccrtninly nothing for tho family to worry about — this
   is not a genetic matter which they need to be concerned
   about for themselves? - A. No, not at all.

Q. That is really what X wanted to bo quite certain about
   in r.:y mind. - A. Yos.

        Mr. Fraser?

                      ny I-TR. FRASER:

Q. Trof. Usher, can you offer some reassurance to the
   family about the timescale for this type of injury
   in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
   for 1'aul to lose consciousness once the crushing that
   wo have heard about actually started to tako place? -
   A. Yes, the reason for Paul's doath was that his
   chest was held so tightly that he could not breathe           '
   in or out and,, once that had happened, then he would
   have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between
   10-20 seconds. He would have died within a few
   minutes but at the time, of course, subsequent to
   his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
   any pain.

       THE COI'OHER: Can you check that the family got
  that because it is so important that people shoiiL d
  appreciate it.

       HR. FllASER:    Yes,   thank you.

                               ( F t)
       TilID CCnC2”-;R:      Any C|ucst5.ons?     (Mo quo.stj.ons from
  the Jur~vr)

. Prof•. Usher, I ar-i m o s t o b l i g e d t o y o u and t h e sane
  arrangement as before, than!: yon. - A. Yos, indeed.

       .TITE CC-TiGlTilR: Prof. Usher is in the building so
  ho joes back to his office. Mow, shall we wait for
  nun to come back? (?QS. CA3LILT3 CAT-"-' INTO CCUT?T)
  Paul's mum is now with us.

      Kollo, Mrs. Stringer. Ue will call the Ivest
 Midlands 1;ol5.ee Officer, I think.

         O F F I C E GSTULDIN3 FLIZAD75TH EVANS Called:

                          13y TItTD C0R0NJ-:T?:

 ^/hen you aro ready will you introduce yourself and
 take mo through the summary, please? - A. I am
 Geraldine lili^abeth 2£vans, an Officer of tho T.rest
 Midlands Police.

 Yes, tell me what you have summarised in this case,
 please? — A. At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th
 April ....

 I am sorry, not what you have summarised, what has
 beon summarised would bo more accurate, I thiiic ? -
 A. At O9 3 O hours on Saturday, 15th April, I9 S9 , Mr.
 Paul Villiara Carlile, together with a Mr. laul Barren
 Jiurray and Mr. Ian Joseph Ford, left Liverpool and
 travelled by train to Sheffield in order to watch
 the FA Cup Semi Final football match which was due
 to be held at tho Hillsborou^!* Stadium that day.

 Upon their arrival in Sheffield they boarded a bus
 which took them to the Leppings Lane end of the
 Stadium, arriving at about 1230 hours. They met up
 with other foriends and sat on a wall outside the
 ground whilst they had refreshments.

 Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his own stating
 that ho was going to a nearby public house in order
 to try to swop his terrace ticket for a seat ticket.

At about 13^0 -hours a Mr. Paul Patrick William Nagle
was outside the Stadium in Leppings Lane when he
saw Paul who was in the company of Mr. Carl David
Lewis. Mr. Nagle arranged to see the other two men
later inside the ground. In fact, this is the last
t5.mc Hr. Nagle saw citlior man again.

That was at 13^0, was it not, I think you said? -
A. Yes.  Shortly after I5 I5 hours and following the
                                        r
                                        * T ♦
                                                t* w........
                                                1v •
                                                     . ..




 sovorc cnishinc in the «est Stand tcrracinc, DC
 Gou.lding and DC 1'ont cntcrod the Stadium via Gate
 C a:;c; sav: a r’uji who they nov: know to bo Paul
 Carlilo being carried from the general direction of
 tho tunnel on the !/est Stand concourse. Together
 with r.n ambulanceman, vfho has not been identified,
 the officers attempted to rovivs Paul but without
 succcss, The persons carrying Fnul have not been
 identified,

 A Michael Thomas Uollinghurst, an off duty nurse,
was a spectator at tho match and was in Ten h at the
 Leppinjs Lane end of the ground when he became aware
 of tho increasing pressure being exerted on hin by
 the crowd, After being subjected to this pressure
for approximately 1 5 ninutes, Hr, Ilollinghurst became
avrrc of. a space being created around him, and on
looking dovm to the floor of the terracing, ho saw a
nan ho not-/ lenows to bo Paul l-Jilliam Carlile, Mr,
7'ollinghurst sat; that Paul was blue in-the face and,
on not detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
by heart massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation,
r«"ul failed to respond to tho emergency treatment and
I?r. Ilollinghurst then moved on to troat another
casualty.

Can I just stop you? This is very late information,
is it not? - A, That is correct.

And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
hove come before tho paragraph about Detective
Constables Goulding and Font because that is still
within tho torraccs? — A, Yes,

That is right, is it not? — A, Yes,

Just so t’-«at wo get the order right, - A, At 1635
liours Dr, David Monaghan examined Paul at tho rear
of tho "oct Stiincl and pronounced life extinct.

Shortly thereafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
of I'aul to tho gymnasium uhere a temporary mortuary
had been sot up.

Thin Officer lator oscortcd the body of Paul to the
Medico Legal Centre whore he confirmed tho
identification _to DC 77eigold,

At approximately 0300 hours on Sunday, 1 6 th April,
1      I hr. George leako identified the body of his
nephew to Dctectivc Constable Yallace at the ;.'cdico
Lcigal Cout7rc,

On Monday, 1 7 th April, 193?* following an idontificaticn
by Dctcctive Constable ’veigold, Prof, Alan U^hor
carriod out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
cnur.c of death.
 iDviacnce is included ro^'arclinj tho analysis of the
 blond sar^tle from I aul vhcrc the presence of ethanol
 vas detected, Tiio witnesses '^roving the continuity
 of tiio blood sajr.ple arc Mr. Philip Harvey llich,
 L'etoctive Serjeants Fie teller and Turner and 'Jr.
 Alexander Robert Forrest carriod out ±2ic analysis.

 Pound in the personal effects of Paul vas a full
 natch ticket. He is shown on visual evidence, sir,
 near to the outer perimeter ^ate at 1h%h I-ours.

          That concluded the sunnary, sir.

          TiLi                   Mr. Fraser, anythj.ng yoti want to
 as!-:?

          \ l»   i'**i".?i;         rv.Cjtio'iJ,

          I-P. MIMM:          ITo, than!-: you, sir.

          III. CATC;IPCL7S:         To, thanlc you, sir.

             PCLICS TI:o2::-:CTC-P. MICIIAE7, 1A Y T 01' Called:

                                3/ T?r; ccnouzp.:

Yes, Inspector? — A. Sir, ••richael Layton, Detective
Inspector, ’. l o s t Midlands Police. Sir, if I can say
t h e m arc a number of sna.Tl additions to the evidence
that you ;to to hear so if y o w could bear with me.
Sir, an ercauiiiation has 7.>een made ofvid.eo film and
phctographic evidence and Paul has been identified
alive outside the stadium*

 Do-ra Carlile, Paul's sister, and in fact the sane
 applies to Michelle, his other sister-, who is also in
 Court, have identified Faul on a photograph which has
been given. the reference number in«\LlO/33A. This
photograph, sir, is timed at 1h 5 h and shows Paul
Jilivs outside the ground near to the outer perimeter
gate. In fact yesterday, sir, on a second photograph,
l . . 7 L ' G / 3 h : . t which is timed at 1^55* Paul again has been
identified by Donna and Michelle as being near to the
outer perimeter gates.

Carl Levis, as you have heard, also one of those who
died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
there is no evidence as such that they were together
after being seen at 13^0 by Fir. Nagle,

Gir, on the 2 9 th March, 1990, Donna and Michelle were
again aeen and perhaps I should point out that, in
total, the two girls have viewed visual evidence for
something like 15 hours together with their social
worker ana, in fact, they r.:ade further identifications
of ’'aul both on photographs and video.
 vi<;occ sho" ];-ul, t:>ey carwiot be 100 ’icr copt certain


                          tr.c T O are a nuroer oi
                      but o»i a photograph rarer one od
                       they believe is I'aul is shown
                      c no. 3 iiito Enclosure <;o, .
That photograph, sir, is not timed.

There r.re, in Tact, then, sir, a number of other
photographs and I cTo not know whether you wish no
to I'o-'xl "13. the rcferoiice number's out but I have
rcforrccl to one of thcr.i on the pl.ni wli5.c!i I will
5.nd5.cuto Inter.

Pie?. th.it one bocauac they s.*re all, 31 ta2:o it, fairly
clone together? - A. Yes, they are, s5.x*, and in fact
they are in Knclosm'c no. Jj upart from the first one
J have just me;itiono<T.

Sir, the photograph I have referred to on the plan is
PTi2 / 2 and if you could just bear with me a second, si:
I will confirm the time. Sir, that photograph is
■timed at 15°5* Again, on a J31'C video, referenced
I1A2/ G and timed at 1503:50:18 and also 1503:52:03,.
agr.il-> the person that tho girls believe is Paul is
shewn on that video. All those identifications
actually arc in jinclosurc no. h apurt from the first
OitC.

3T X can just stop you there because at this point I
socii: to remember because every effort had been made
but this w.s still just the start and this was one
of the cases vhcre wo thought it was Snclosure U but
vc could not really bo certain? - A. That is right,
sir. In fact, one of the points I was going to nalce
was that the subsequent evidence you will hear will,
in fact, slightly alter tho figures which I gave to
you on the first day and perhaps I will mention it
in a moment.

Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
prepared a plan which has been given the reference
no. ^r.’vTL 128. There is another addendum, sir. In
respect of -JIr. Ilollinghurst, whose ovidence you have
already hoard abtmt, he lias viewed photographs and
confirms that Faul is one of tho persons that ho
tried to revive and he lias signed a plan of tho
terracing indicating tho position at which he treated
Paul. That plan, sir, is referenced I-mi/l. I thinlc,
sir, that probably covers the additional visxial
ovidence.




                         i—
 .
 ’^■jclor.uro no,    and that possibly tvo, r.t t>ut otago,
 i:u*y /ir.vo boon in ’.^lclosuro no, h , As a result of'
 tho cviclonco of Hr, Ilollinghurst, in fact, it is now
 oight people that we believe l.’cre in no, h and one
 that may have been,

Hir, coji I refer you then to a plan which has been
given the reference no, KlfJL 1 7 0 and that relates to
tl.'.o identifications outside the ground, sir.

That will be C221. - A, I have already referred to it,
sir, but IH.ML 128, which is a plan of the terraces

That is C222, This is tho one where the two young
ladies, if I can refer to them, spent so much effort? -
A. That is right. Finally, sir, MTH/1, which is Mr.
Ilollinghurst *s plan.

That will be C223. — A. Sir, if X can deal, first of
all, with the identification outside and that is
MIAJL 170. Tine point at which we believe Paul   —
well, wo lenow Paul is shown is at this point here t
the outer perimeter gates near to here. These are
the outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
here.

     TIIU COI^OriiDR:    Ladies and gentlemen of tho Jury,
can you see that?       Mot Gate C .. ..

     TII72 UITNESS:     It is the actual outer gate, sir.

      TIPv CORG'^R:   Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of the
terrace plan, this is Snclosure no. -3 and this is
Jvnclosuro no. h and, in respect of the identification
where it appears that Paul is, as it were, going from
3 to Jj- at the dividing fonce, the position that I
believe that is shown is at this point here. In
respect of tho photographic and video identifications
actually in Enclosure no, U, as I say, on the plan
I have referred to just one, PRT/2, but the position
shown is here. I think it is fair to say, sir, on
those photographs and the video, I am satisfied that
Paul is probably still alive at that stage but I
cannot say at what stage of the medical process that
you have already-heard about Paul lias actually reached.

Yos, on tho assumption it is Faul, tho person you are
looking at? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Then in rcspect of tho photograph MTIl/1, Mr.
Ilollinghurct *s ....

Not photograph - plan, I think? - A. Yes. I-Ie has
indicated a position again in no. h Enclosure and in
this position here, in Enclosure no. k .
                —         -3 -   ( W   )
i’. 'jic:, of cor.rsc, 71". ilollinghurst *s ovidenco   s quite
    cloor that ho vns if. U n d o sure h t i;as it not? - A. That
    iis right, s.rr , yes.

         I-^. FlVi.31^:       No questions, sir, thrnk you.

         • iVi. I.Iim:    ?.o, thank you.

         jf-.l, CATC"PCL22:         I'.o ,   thank you.

         Hi’. FilASSR:  Sir, just befoi’o you conc.lucio, will
  you lot rie road a very short note that the family gave
  to r.:c thirj rooming which contains words of thanks
  which come hotter from them than mo, sir.

        TiHv COTIGKSH:        Y   o g   ,   thanic     yo u .


        I?!?. FnAS'CII: Tho note is from the family in
  general, sir, and I road it as it stands. They want
   to thank Michael I-ayton and Potor Hogan who, I
  understand, is an Gfficor who assisted Inspector
  Layton, sir, for their help throughout the Inquiry.
  They want to thank the two Officer's, Goulding and
  Pont, for tlio assistance which they cave to Paul on
  the day, together Avitii the ambulanceman whose name has
  not been traced. Sir, they want to thanic Maureen 'iroe
  and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services and they
  have been, in the family's words, sir, a "lifeline for
  us throughout the last year." Sir, they want to thanic
  Ilichael Ilollinghurst for trying to save Paul. They
  say, S!1/orcls will never express how we feel but knowing
  that he was with Fctul, we are all grateful*" Finally,
  sir, they want to thanic you for being, again their
  words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you have
  been throughout those Inquests and, in particular,
  the Inquest into their loved one.

       THIS CCROIilST’:      That is very kind of you.          Thank
  you ever so much.        ’.Tiich is Donna?

      I think I have told 3rou, ladies and gentlemen,
 that there are very few families that I have the
 opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
 in fact, .and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
 well but I did not know who you were at thet ime.
 So you are one of the few families whom I have had an
 opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
 say nice things -about me. I appreciate it very much.
 I appreciate it even more that you have said nice
 things about the Officers, in fact, I think they are
 both in Court, and, of course, all the other people
 who you liavo mentioned and who we have he*\rd about.
 I must say that I was very pleased that we managed
 to get the evidence from Mr. Hollinghurst because
 not only does it help with the technical problems as
 to where he was, it is the fact that he was a nurse ---
 okay, lie did not succeed in reviving Paul but at least
 you have the comfort that fairly immediately after
 the incident there was somebody who was actually near
                                    .         r fr *
¥



                 Paul doir.j liid best and that is sono cncouragonont and
               I all credit t.o hi::i raid all credit to you Tor acknowledging
                 it. 'Tlv.iik >/ou very i.rucli indeed.

                      J nii’
                           . - in a sense I an just echoing what you have
                 said - very very conscious in all Inquests tout the
                 only one I ar.< thinking about at the moment is this one,
                 thinking about Iruil, I ari very very conscious how
             g I greatly loved people are who we hear about and today,
                 at the nor.'.ent, wo have heard about Paul and I would like
                 you to know how much we Teel for you and for you, Mrs.
                 Stringer, a very hard tine for you and I am sorry that,
                if you lilce, we have added upset to you this morning
                but you are here, you have {jot your family, and they
                will support you, I an quite sure.

                    The last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
               had tho delay because, of course, that would have added
               to your stress today. It was not anybody* s fault but
               there is nothing I can do about. I an very sorry that
               it happened to you today. Anyway we waited because we
               did net want you not to be here. Thank you for coming.
               God bless you.
         D




         F




         G




         H

                                                   O   D
>m Ltd
                                         -   10-
                                      M. T. HOLLINCTTra^T


           MICHAEL THOMAS HOLLINGHURST Sworn

                    Bv THE CORONER?

 It is Michael Thomas Hollinghurst? - A. Yes.
Of                                              ? - A.
No, I have changed addresses since then.
Tell us what it is now? - A.
                 since June last year.
You are a charge nurse by profession? - A. Yes, that
is right.

And also a football fan? - A. Yes.
Following Liverpool I take it? - A. Quite right.
Is it right that on 15th April 1989 you went to the
football ground in Sheffield to see the Semi Final? -
A. Yes.

Am I right in thinking that you went by car? - A.
Yes.

You left I think at about 10.30 with four friends? -
A. Yes.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. We
actually parked the car up at about 2.15.
That was quite a long journey. Was there any reason
for that? - A. There was quite a lot of traffic in
and around the Stockport area but when we got almost
to the end of the Woodhead Pass we decided to call
and have something to eat as a couple of us had not
brought anything to eat and we called infor
something to eat and a drink.
You stopped at the Woodhead Pass? - A. At the very
end, the Sheffield end.

What time did you get to this place where you
stopped, about? - A. About 1 to 1.15.

You had something to eat and then you came on? - A.
Yes.

Having parked, you made your way to the ground? - A.
Yes.

You do not know where you parked I take it? - A.
Overton Road.
                                          M.   T.   HOLLINGHTtpct '


 Q. How far from the ground? - A. I would say it is about
    a ten minute walk.

Q. Were there other supporters going to the ground at
   the same time? - A. Yes.

Q. Liverpool or others? - A. Mainly Liverpool.

Q. Did you notice anything about their behaviour which
   worried you in any way? - A . No, everybody was good
   humoured.

Q. Did you see anybody drinking cans of alcohol? - A.
   There were the odd ones but not excessive numbers.
Q. What I am interested in is - and I am not trying to
   pin you down to say if there were 2 2 - an approximate
   percentage of the total crowd that you saw in your
   judgement? - A.  Of people who were walking to the
   ground who were actually drinking?
Q. Yes. - A. Not a   high percentage at all.    As Isay, we
   saw the odd one or two.
Q. Very few as far as you were concerned and their
   behaviour was fine? - A. Everybody was good humoured,
   yes.
Q. I think you got to Leppings Lane at about 2.25? - A.
   Yes, an approximate time.
Q. What was it like outside? - A. We immediately made
   towards where the turnstiles were and there were a
   few hundred or maybe a thousand or so people already
   around the turnstile area.

Q. When you say the   turnstile area do you mean the
   actual turnstile   area or the area outside the
   perimeter gates?   - A. The area that actually leads
   down towards the   turnstile.
Q. Had you been there before? - A. The previous year.
Q. So you had been there before? - A. Yes.
Q. So there were about 500 to 1,000 people? - A. Making
   a rough estimate, yes.
Q. Just look at the model so that we get it right. Just
   show him the turnstile area I indicating\. Are we
   talking about that area there or the area outside the
   gates? - A. We immediately went down to the ■nrea that
   has got a partition dividing it down the middle
   leading towards the turnstiles.
                                                             63


                                         M.   T.   HOLLINftHTTP<;>r


Q. That is the turnstiles A to G? - A. I think that is
   the area we went down to, yes.
Q. That is the area where the people were? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any mounted Officers or anybody else? -
   A. I noticed in particular one mounted Officer who I
   had seen several times outside Liverpool's ground.
Q. Where was he? - A. He was in that area.
Q. Did you see what he was doing, if anything? - A. He
   was trying to get some kind of order, people to queue
   in some kind of order.
Q. Why did he not succeed? - A. There were already a
   mass of people. There would be no particular queues.
   There didn't appear to me at that stage to be anybody
   sectioning people into queues which is the kind of
   arrangement I am used to when I go to football
   matches at Liverpool certainly.
Q. Because the configuration at Liverpool is completely
   different, is it not? - A. Yes.
Q. Was there any pushing? - A. As I say, there was no
   order at all and so there were no orderly queues and
   there didn't seem any facility for making any orderly
   queues. People were just sort of massed in what was
   really a small area trying to get through a few
   turnstiles.
Q. Did you see anybody distressed? - A. Yes.
Q. In that area I am talkingabout?  - A. Yes, becoming
   more so over the next few    minutes.
Q. Why was that? - A. The crush got more and more. We
   arrived and more and more people were arriving behind
   us and so the numbers we are talking about originally
   obviously were swelled by the people arriving behind
   us .
Q. Did you feel anybody pushing you? - A. Everybody was
   being pushed. It got to the stage where there was a
   crush of people and, in fact, some people were
   distressed and trying to make their way back out of
   the crush outside the turnstiles.

Q. You did not take that course? - A. No.
Q. Does that mean you were not particularly
   distressed? - A. Yes, I was quite frightened at that
   stage actually as most people around me were, you
   know.
                                                          64


                                        M.   T.   HOLLINGHtrRST


Q. At this point, as I understand it, you could not help
   yourself any more? - A. No, as I say, I got into that
   area and people were arriving behind us and it just
   gradually got worse.

Q. Did you hear anybody making appeals for people not to
   push? - A. People were shouting all sorts of things,
   "Don't push, there are people getting hurt, there are
   people getting crushed".

Q. It made no difference? - A. No, it didn't seem to
   make any difference at all.
Q. You entered through a turnstile, is that right? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You did not see any of the big gates open, is that
   correct, or did you? - A. I didn't, no.
Q. Having got in, do you know what time it was that you
   got in by any chance? - A. Only judging by the next
   few minutes I would say between ten to and five to
   three.

Q. That is an estimate, is it? - A. That is an estimate,
   yes.

Q. You do not actually know the exact time? - A. I don't
   remember looking at the time.
Q. Having got in did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. When you got to the entry of the tunnel before you
   went down did you by chance look towards the pitch? -
   A. Through the tunnel?
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, that is what I am basing the time on
   because as we were entering the tunnel the players
   were on the pitch. The match hadn't started.
Q. We know what time that was and your time is quite
   accurate actually. At the entry of the tunnel the
   players were on the pitch. You could see them, could
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. What was the tunnel like? Was it empty, full, or
   were you able to get down it? That is what I am
   trying to find out? - A. We were getting down it.
   There were a lot of people going down but it wasn't
   crushed. A lot of people were making their way
   through the tunnel.
Q. Before you went in you actually heard people talking.
   I think you mentioned that you heard stewards or
   somebody saying, "Plenty of room inside" or words to
   that effect? - A. Yes.
                                     M. T. HOLLINGHITRST



Where was that? - A. Once we got through the
turnstile everybody thought they were out of the
worst of it because it was such a bad crush outside
and we were relieved to get through. Of the four of
us who were making their way through the turnstiles
we lost one and so the three of us were still left on
the groundside of the turnstile and we met up
together. Obviously we wanted to make our way
straight into the ground and there were stewards
around and a couple of Police Officers. I distinctly
remember a Police Officer saying, "Make your way
straight in. There is plenty of room on the
terraces, plenty of room inside".




                            /Q. Did he point you in-
                                                          66

                                            M. T. HOLLINGHPRST

 Q. Did he point you in any direction or did he just say,
    "May your way through"? - A. Just generally.   He just
    said, "Make your way in."

 Q. He didn't point in any way.   He just said, "In lads", or
    words to that effect, "There's plenty of rooa"? - A. Yes.
Q. Was it said to you personally or just generally? - A. No.
   I mean, within a couple of feet of me as I was making my
   way
Q. Down you went down this tunnel and you   got to theother
   end of it, of course? - A. Yes.

Q. You went   left or right? - A. Left.
Q. When yougot on to that terrace - we call it pen 4 - tell
   me what happened and how it was? - A. Well, on the way
   through the tunnel the three of us were still together.
   Having been there the previous year, as I have said, when
   it was quite full the previous seasons we had noticed
   that the terracing to the left corner had been
   particularly empty yet where we were was crushed, the
   season before.   Even going through the tunnel, and as
   far as I can remember even on the way to the natch that
   day, we said we would make our way to that left terrace.
Q. That is the banked one, the high one? - A. The left hand
   corner behind the goal.   Of course, not knowing that
   that end was penned off in separate pens. We thought it
   was all one complete terracing.
Q. So that was your objective to get... - A. Out of where it
   was crushed.
Q. You entered pen 4, however, because you were expecting to
   walk along the terrace? - A. Yes.
Q. Justdescribe to me what that pen was   like wnen you
   enteredit? - A. It was quite full - well, very full, but
   nothing that I had not seen on a football terrace before.
   It was fairly fluid because we could make our way
   through, albeit it was a struggle at first for a few
   minutes.   Then it suddenly became more and more tightly
   packed by the minute really.
Q. Do you recollect when you first entered, wheTa you said it
   was quite fluid, had the match kicked-off? - A. No.
Q. It had not? - A. No.
Q. Then you say it became tighter, that was the word you
   used.   Do you recollect what time that was in relation
   to the match?   I am not asking you to tell me what time
                                             M- T. HOLLINGHURST

     it was, but in relation to what was going on on the
     pitch? - A. I think we are talking about around kick-off
     time that it really became oppressive and got more and
     more so in the next few minutes.

Q. The tightness, was it coming from behind you? - A. As far
   as I could gather it was coming from behind me.
Q. You had initially made your way in, as yon say, and then
   it got tighter.   Did you come to a stop? - A. I think
   what we actually did was      come across the     dividingfence,
   that we didn't know was there, obviously.    Then we just
   came to halt and stopped      virtually where     we were.
Q. Against    that fence? - A.   We came back in    slightlyand
   then...
Q. So you were able to move off the fence at that stage? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Was that kick-off time or before? - A. That was just
   before kick-off time we hit that fence. Roundabout kick-
   off time we are talking about now.

Q. At that point had you ever been in a situation like this
   before on the terrace? - A. No, that is when it started
   to become really frightening then because...
Q. You are saying at kick-off time it became frightening? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Up to then you had coped, so to speak? - A. Yes.   As I
   say, I have been in football crowds before but it became,
   unlike any football crowd I had ever been in before.

Q. I think you were rotated once or twice, is that right? -
   A. Certainly once, yes. At one stage I had my back
   completely to the pitch, facing upwards towards the
   stand.

Q. Did you see people' being pulled up at that point? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Then did you manage to turn round againor were youmoved
   round? - A. I just remember that...   I did get back the
   other way.   I don*t know how I managed to do ito
Q.   You had lost your friends by that time? - A. Yes.
Q / What happened then?   What did you see or notice? - A.     >
  \ The crush got worse rather than better and after a few    \
    minutes I was aware that somebody was on the ground right
f   by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.
                                              M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q.    H a s thematch still in progress when you became aware   of
     this or can you not remember? - A. Yes, the match was
     going on.
Q. This was in fact a young man? - A. That's right.

Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see whether his pulse
   was going and things like that, as soon as you could? -
   A. Yes, but not at that particular moment.
Q.   I realise that. - A. As soon asthe crowd cleared...
Q-    That isin fact   my next question.   How long did it take
     before you were   able to get at this lad? - A. I really
     could not put a   timescale on it because it just seemed
     like forever.     It seemed like it was getting tighter and
     tighter and you   were fighting for your breath.   It was
     probably only a   matter of ten minutes at the moment, five
     or ten minutes.
Q. I presume the match had stopped by then? - A. By that
   stage, yes.
Q. Did you see it stop? - A. I was not aware of what was
   going on to be quite honest.
Q. Most people aren't... - A. I was not aware of when the
   match particularly stopped or when...
Q. Most people can remember bits but they do have great
   difficulty with timing so don't be concerned about that.
   What you are saying is that the pressure eased after
   several minutes, it is difficult to say how many but
   after several minutes? - A. Yes, the pressure began to
   ease and a space...
Q. Then you were able to get down? - A. People were in more
   and more space and that is when-I actually saw someone on
   the ground below me.
Q. As I say, at that point that is when you had a look to
   see whether there was anything that could be done for
   this lad?_- A. Yes.
Q.Cln fact I think you came to the conclusion there wasn't A
  Cis that right? - A. I tried, as well as the lad who was
   immediately below me.   There was somebody just a couple
   of feet further away.   He was also in the sane
   condition.
Q. So you tried for both of them? - A. Yes, I was going
   back...
                                                        69

                                          M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. Did you know whether the other person recovered?   Have
   you any idea? - A. Pardon?
Q. Do you know anything about the other person, not the lad?
   We know about the lad because you identified him, didn’t
   you, in due course? - A. I believe...   Well, I
   identified the other person as well.   I believe they are
   bof.h deceased.

Q. It was somebody called Paul Carlile? - A. The young man
   was.




              Q. He was the first
                                                              71


                                      M. T .   HOLLINGHURST



Q. Where had you been on the terraces in 1988? - A. I think
   we were, it would probably be Pen 3, the one to the
   right of the tunnel.

Q. As you come down the tunnel ....      A. Rather than the one
   to the left, yes.

Q. And what had been your experiences in that pen in 1988
   which had led you to make the decision you had for 1989?
   - A. Well it was quite crushed. It was quite crushed
   in relation obviously to the situation that we could see
   in the corner of the pitch which is why we made the
   decision in 1989 to try and make our way in that directio
Q. I am sorry to press you a little, but when you mean
   "crushed" could you put that into perhaps a little detail
   of what it meant as far as space went of the people aroun
   you? - A. Well it was a heavy football crowd. As I said
   when I first came in 1989 it was probably still fluid but
   there were quite a lot of people in that particular area
   compared to an area which was a few yards away where
   there was nobody as far as we could see.

Q. I just want to go back to 1988 because you clearly had
   been concerned of what had happened in 1988? - A. Yes.

Q. What had been your concern? - A. I thought somebody may
   have been injured in 1988 and at half-time people were
   clambering into the Stand in 1988 during the half-time
   break out of that pen.
Q. Do you mean clambering up ....   A. They were being
   helped up into the seated area at half-time to get out^
   of the standing area.
         MR. KING: Thank you. I ought to say because as
   you know I represent, or you may not know, a large
   number of the be.reaved and injured including the
   family of the boy who you helped. Can I say also on
   behalf of them how grateful they are for what you did.
   Thank you.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Hollinghurst, when you said you got to Leppings Lane
   at 2.25. did you mean right at the top of Leppings Lane
   or did that mean right by the perimeter gate? - A. No,
   we made our way straight down to where the entrance was.
Q. What I am trying to find out   is where you were at 2.25?
   - A. We went straight to the   turnstile area. From
   walking from the car we went   straight to the ground, we
   didn't make a stop anywhere,   we just went straight to
   the ground to get in.
                                                                    72



                                         • M: T .   HOLLINGHURST'



Q. How did you know it was 2.25. Why did you say that
   time? - A. That is just a rough estimate. Approximately
   2.25 judging on the events that, you know, my perception
   of the events that followed.

Q. So you are not absolutely sure about the time then? -
   A. I did not look at my watch at that particular time.

Q. What was it like anyway when you got to Leppings Lane,
   was it easy enough to walk right down to the perimeter
   gate? - A. Down to the area where the turnstiles was but
   as I say there were probably 500/1000 people already in
   that area. They were in that area, the immediate area
   before the turnstiles and obviously trying to get into
   the ground at that time.
Q. So the crowds were mainly congested just near the perimete
   gate, they'weren't spreading up the Lane at the time? -
   A. I don’t know what you mean by the "perimeter gate"?
Q. The main gate before the turnstile area? - A. They were
   in the area that you funnelled into before the turnstiles.

           MRS. McBRIEN:    All right.     Thank you very much.

                     Further By The CORONER:

Q. 1988, do you know what time you arrived in 1988 as a
   matter of interest? - A. I could not tell you sorry.
Q.   We want you to mark the plan, want you to show us where
     you were. We are asking all the witnesses.   If you would
     walk up to the overhead. - A. Is it where I ended up?
Q. What I want you to show me, I want you to mark the positio
   where you were with a cross where you finished up near the
   lad whom you helped. Point out which is Pen 4? Before
   you mark it you had told me that you were next to the
   perimeter fence. Are you saying that you managed to move
   back off, the radial fence, you moved back off it, didn't
   you? - A. When we came to a halt in the fence we just
   stepped back inside.

          THE CORONER:     Mark it then.      That is fine.
          MR. BEECHEY:     345 sir.
          THE CORONER:     Thank you.

Q. When you   got to the radial fence before you moved back
   off, was   that when kick-off had taken place or had
   kick-off   not yet taken place. I just can't remember
   what you   told me? - A. I don't think the match had kicked
   off.
                                                              57

                                                     P. EDWARDS


Q. I am sorry? - A. I was worried about how packed it
   was in 1980.

Q. When you say very packed, I want to know which bit
   was very packed. Are you saying that the whole of
   the terrace from one end to the other was packed?
   Sergeant Griffiths, can you put the ground plan up?
   This, of course, is a ground plan of 1989 but if you
   just turn round and look. Just indicate the
   terracing from one end to the other. Ignore all
   those radial fences because you are quite right that
   they were not there. Are you saying that the whole
   of that was packed or are you saying that just a
   central section was packed? - A. When we first came
   in to the right that was less packed. As we moved
   across it was packed for a good distance.  It was not
   just the centre. A wide area was packed.

Q. It was sufficiently dense there for you to want to
   move towards the front? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that because right at the front it tends to be a
   little bit easier? - A. Yes.

Q. Because people    do not actually like standing there or
   whatever? - A.    At the time I was young and that is
   where a lot of    young people go at the fence, out of
   the way of. the   crowd and you have got a better view.

Q. I do not think you are very old now but you were
   younger. Thank you very much indeed. - A. Yes.

                      IAN JOHN FEARNS Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER

0. You are Ian John Fearns? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is it still                  - A. It is, yes.

Q.                           I believe? - A. That is right.

Q. Mr. Fearns you are another lifelong Liverpool
   supporter? - A. Yes.

Q. You came to the 1989 match anyway on the 15th
   April? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you come to the 1988 one as well? - A. Yes, I
   did.

Q. Let us talk about 1989.     I think you had a ticket? -
   A. I did.



                         ©
                                                              58

                                                      P. EDWARDS



Q. You came by train I believe, is that right? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. It was not a football special but it was just a      ■
   regular train? - A. It was a shuttle train that was
   on its way to Norwich which passed through Sheffield.
Q. You stopped off and you got off I think at about
   quarter to twelve I think the train arrived, is that
   right? - A. That is approximately quarter to twelve.

Q. It does not   have to be to the minute or anything like
   that. When    you got off how many people were there?
   Were you by   yourself or did you travel with a
   group? - A.   I travelled with one friend on the train.

Q. Which one was that? - A. Terry Mainwaring.

Q. I think you met two or three other people I think? -
   A. We met three other friends when we were actually
   put on to the buses that were laid on to take us to
   the ground. We actually met them on the actual bus
   itself.

Q. Was that Paul Carlisle, Paul Murray and Ian Ford? -
   A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Were you wearing football gear? - A- No, I was
   wearing casual jeans and a jeans shirt.




                                /Q. So how come....
                                                         59



                                         I.J.   FEARNS



Q. So how come that you got on to the football coaches? -
   A. Well as we were coming off the train the Police were
   saying: "Liverpool supporters this way, Nottingham
   Forest supporters the other way", so we just followed
   their directions.

Q. Then you were steered towards these coaches? - A. We
   waited in the forecourt, car park of the area till the
   buses actually arrived.

Q.    So you were quite pleased because you came with one
     friend and you had met three more so there were five of
     you at that point? - A. Yes, .that is correct.

Q. You then, I think the coach eventually or bus took you
   towards Leppings Lane.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you got off near the ground about half-past-12
   something of that order? - A. Something about that.

Q. I think the first thing you did was find yourself a chip
   shop, got something to eat, and then I think you bought
   four cans of lager each. Is that right? - A. That was not
   specifically what I said during the course of the interview
   by the Police. I said we purchased a couple of cans of
   lager. I did not give any quantity.

Q.    I see,so how many cans did you actually have yourself?
     - A. I myself only purchased two.

Q. It does not matter to me whether it is one or ten. Well
   ten might matter to me but all I am trying to find out
   as briefly as I can, you had a couple of cans. Right?
   I think you sat on some nice grassy slope? - A. Yes, there
   was a verge just across the road.

Q. Because it was a beautiful day? - A. Yes.

Q. All I want to deal with at this point, I want you to tell
   me about Paul Carlisle, all right, because he was with .
   you at about 12.30? - A. He was.

Q. How long did he stay with you? - A. He stayed for approx­
   imately I would say, what, half-an-hour at the most.

Q. In other words you are saying he left you for whatever
   reason at about 1 p.m.? - A. That is correct.

Q. You never saw him again after that, did you, on the day?
   - A. Unfortunately not.

Q. So when he left you that in fact was goodbye, unfortunately
     - A. Yes.
                                                          60


                                         I.J.   FEARNS



Q. Now Paul, why did he go? Tell me why he left, as far as
   you know. Don't tell me what other people have told you
   at this stage, just what you know as to why he left? -
   A. Paul was saying previously when we met him on the bus
   and for a number of days before that he wanted to obtain
   a Stand ticket. Unfortunately he only had a season ticket
   at Anfield for the ground so he was only allocated a ground
   ticket and he wanted to actually try and swap this ticket
   and obtain a Stand ticket.

Q. I see, so when you say "ground ticket" he had a terracing
   ticket? - A. He did indeed.

Q. And what he wanted was to have a Stand ticket to go upstairs
   - A. Yes.

Q. Was that the reason why he left because he hoped to do a
   swap? - A. He hoped to do a swap.

Q. And in fact I think you went towards a place called the
   Horse and Jockey but you have got no idea, he just said
   "That is where I am going".  Is that right? - A. Well he
   said he was going up to the pub up the top of the hill to
   try and swap his ticket. We gave him roughly three-quarters
   of an hour and followed up.

Q.    Oh I see. And having followed himyou neverfound him?
     - A. We didn't no.

Q. So you can't say whether he succeeded or not but you know
   that that is what he was trying to do? - A. That is the
   reason he left.
Q. Hoping to do, shall we say? - A. Hoping.

Q. So   you then followed him up and eventually you came back
   to   the turnstile area at about half-past-2 I think. That
   is   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, approximately quarter-past
   to   half-past. I could not be sure.

Q.    I am not going to take   you throughthe     detailofhowyou
     got in apart from asking whether you went through a turn­
     stile or through a gate? - A. I went through a turnstile.

Q. The only other question I want to ask you is did you see
   any of the big gates open? - A. No, not at all.

Q. You never saw that? - A. No.

Q. When you got in tell me who you were with when you got
   through your turnstile? - A. When I entered the actual
   ground I was with Terence Mainwaring; Ian Ford; Paul Murray
   and we had met up with a friend just outside called
   Carl Lewis.
                                                            61


                                         I.J.   FEARNS



 Q. So it was Ian Ford, Paul Murray .... How well did you
    know Paul Murray, did you know him well as well? - a .
    We went to home games. I knew him more through Paul Carlisl*
    who knew him a lot better than myself. He was a friend we
    went to the matches with.

 Q. And then you met up with this other lad called Carl Lewis?
    - A- That is correct.

 Q. You met him on the inside? - A. On the outside. We were
    actually in the area outside the turnstiles with him and
    we all entered the ground together.

Q. Did he come through a turnstile as well as far as you knew?
   - A. He did.

Q. Now on the inside there were the five of you including
   yourself, I think you noticed some Police Officers in thar.
   concourse area. Is that right? - A. I did indeed.

Q. Do you know about how many you saw? - A. No, it was just
   about three or four, five at the most.

Q.  And    didthey   search you, can youremember? I don't mean
    all of them? - A. I recall them searching some fans but
  . I myself never got searched.

Q. So you saw that was happening but you weren't? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you wait any longer for Paul or did you decide you
     did not know where he was and you were going .... A. No,
     we assumed if he had swapped his Stand ticket we obviously
     would not meet up with him until the way home or if he
     hadn't we told him we would be in the ground at a certain
     place, you know, hoping to meet him in there, so we made
     our way straight there.

Q. And did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Now something peculiar I think about Carl Lewis. Did
   he actually have a terrace ticket? - A. He didn't, he hac
   a Stand ticket.

Q. What did he do, did he go to the Stands or did he ccite
   with you? - A. Unfortunately he came in through the turn­
   stiles with us and we were waiting for Paul Murray who
   was still outside at the time. I don't know exactly what
   happened but between the time we were actually goinc in,
   which must have been all of about two minutes, Carl did
   not have his stub so he was not allowed up into the
   Stands.

Q. Was your ticket torn, can you remember, your ticket I am
   talking about when you came through or was it intact? -
   A. No, the person on the gate had taken the stub frcr.
   the ticket.
                                                             62


                                         I.J.   FEARNS



Q. I am not too worried precisely what happened to the ticket
   but what you are saying is he could not get up to the      '
   Stands because he could not prove ... A. He could not prove
   he had a Stand ticket.

Q. So if he was going anywhere he had to go down on to the
   terracing? - A. Well that was the way.

Q. And in fact that is what he did with the rest of you? -
   A. Yes, he did.

Q. And you all went down I think the tunnel.     Is that right?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you know there were other routes into the ground? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. But do I take it that   you liked being behind the goal.
   I don't mean directly   behind the goal but in that centre
   section? - A. Well at   Anfield that is usually where we
   stand so therefore to   make it easier when Paul Carlisle
   had gone away to swap   his ticket that is where we said we
   would be.

Q. I see. So that was where you were hoping Paul would come
   if he had not succeeded with his swap? - A. That is right.

Q. And you went down the tunnel. The tunnel I take it was
   reasonably clear. You did not have any particular
   difficulty in the tunnel? - A. No, no real problems at
   all.

Q. And when you exited from the tunnel did you turn right or
   left? - A. Right.

Q. Have you any idea what time this would have been that you
   got there? - A. Roughly about 25-past, half-2.

Q. How long would you say it took you to get through the
   turnstile area? - A. From the outside I would say between
   15 minutes, you know about 10/15 minutes.

Q. If you got to the turnstile area at the time you told me
   you would have had to be later on the terracing wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes. As I say they were given as approximate
   times.

Q. In your statement you put 20-to-3.~ Would that sound
   reasonable to you or would you prefer to change that?
   - A. 20-to-3 was when we actually got on to the terracing.

Q. Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.     You have
   understood what I am asking? - A. Yes.
                                                              63


                                        I.J.   FEARNS



Q. At that point were you able to find, select a spot where
   you wanted to be? - A. We obviously had to push through
   because obviously there was a crowd there but we didn't
   find any great difficulty at all except when we got in
   obviously the crowd was still increasing and there was a
   lot of pushing going on.

Q. Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes, I did. The first surge
   must have been about quarter-to-3 but that was just with
   people singing and what have you because as I say at that
   time there was nothing out of the ordinary. Then it must
   have been some time between 10-to, 5-to-3 there was the
   surge that came and that just pushed me right down to the
   front.
Q. Can you remember whether the players were already on the
   pitch at that point, not for playing but for pre-kick-off?
   - A. No, they weren't.

Q. They weren't or you can't remember? - A. No, they weren't
   on the pitch.

Q. They were not. So you felt this surge whichcarried you
    forward before the players cameonto the pitch? - A. I
  ' did.

Q. Some time after 10-to-3 you would say but before the players
   were on the pitch? - A. It was before the players came
   on the pitch.

Q. Before, that is right. Did you hear the teams being
   announced? - A. I can't honestly remember. I probably
   did but I can’t honestly say.

Q. Did you see the players come on   to the pitch at all? -
   A. No.

Q. Did you see any bit of the match? - A. No.

Q. I don't mean the detail, but did you .... A. I never got
   to focus on one player or the ball at all.

Q. So you are not able to say any of your events in relation
   to what was going on on the pitch apart from being sure
   when the surge came it was before they had come out? - A.
   It was before they came.
Q. Did you get split up from your friends? - A.   Yes.

Q. But I think you did actually see Carl at one point, he
   was slightly over to the right, wasn't he? - A. Carl was
   originally standing to my right just in front of Terry
   who was also standing to my right. When the surge came


                         (37)
                                                                   64


                                           I . J . FEARNS



     that pushed me right forward to near the front I went
     off sort of to the left and Carl went straight forward
     and that was the last I saw of him.

Q.   Was it at this point when this big surge came? -       a   . Yes.

Q.    Did this surge go forward and ease back at all or did it
     stay continuously forward? - A. No, when the surge came
     the pressure was so intense with the surge that I decided
     me and Paul Murray had been pushed that way, we will see
     what it is like down the front because usually there is
     a gap between the railings and where the terracing starts
     coming up. We got into this gap and then the surge just,
     you know, it became more and more and then we became
     trapped unfortunately.

Q. Tell me: when you first got down to the front was there
   in fact a gap there? - A. No. We assumed there would be
   a gap there but when we got there there wasn't and there
   was no way back.

Q. Obviously we know things became dreadful in the front
   there, we know that. What I am trying to find out when
   you first got to the front bit where you were hoping
   things would be easier, was it in fact any easier at
   that point when you were moving or being moved by the
   surge? - A. No, when we actually got to the front it was
   just as packed as what it was up the back and then it
   just gradually got worse.

Q. Could you see the little gate? - A. I saw it when I
   was further up the pitch being opened once but when I
   was forward I had no view of the gate at all.

Q. Tell me about that. When did you see this little gate
   open then, tell me? - A. It was just before the surge
   came the gate opened.  I don't know for what reason or
   whether there was a fan trying to get out.   I honestly
   don't know. I just remember the gate opening and the
   Police Officer pushing the fan back in and closing t.he
   gate.

Q. You say this was before the players were on the pitch?
   - A. That was before the players were on the pitch.

Q.   You are quite sure about that? - A. Positive.

Q. And you say you saw it opened and the fan being pushed
   in at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. After that you lost   sight of it?   - A. Yes.
                                                        65


                                       I . J . FEARNS



Q. How did you yourself get out as a matter of interest?
   - A. I was stuck in the crush for about a full 20, 25
   minutes and when the pressure did finally ease off a
   little and I was able to move ray body and turn, I
   literally panicked and forced ray way to the back.
   A gentleman who was nearer the back actually took hold
   of me and he did literally hit me and told me to calm
   down and then him and a friend passed me up into the
   Stand above.




                        Q. You did the right ....
                                                               66

                                                    I» J.   FEARNS


Q. You did the right thing to go back actually.    I am sure
   that was the right thing   for you to do. I want you to
   show us on the plan where you, were when     you took your
   match viewing position, and then show me the second
   position, where you finished up near the front.
   (The witness marked Exhibit C4 67) I think you said
   that in 1988 you were in   one of the stands, is that
   right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.   There was one other thing I wanted to ask you. Do you
     remember a beach ball being knocked about? - A. I do,
     when I first went in, yes.

Q.   Was that the position which you have marked with a "1"?
     - A. Yes.

0. Were you there at that time? - A. I was there at that
   time.

0. So the big surge happened sometime after that? - A. It
   did.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Fearns, you tell us that Paul - this is Paul
   Carbide - wanted to swap his ticket? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. So he obviously did not want to be on the terrace in
   the standing area, he wanted to be in the stand.  Did
   he say anything to you as to why he wanted to swap it?
   - A. He never said anything to me personally but me and
   my friend Terry Mainwaring came to the assumption that
   obviously he was a bit worried about this.  For what
   reasons, I didn't get into ....

Q. I am just interested in whether he spoke to you.  Mr.
   Terry Mainwaring is here, isn't he? - A. He is not, no.

          THE CORONER:   Ask him for the hearsay.     I am not
     intending to call Mr. Mainwaring.

          MR. KING:   I see.  Sir, I want the best evidence
     but this may be the best I can get.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.   I don't mind you taking the
     hearsay on this point.

         MR. KING:    Thank you,   sir:

Q. Let me investigate a bit further then:  what did you
   assume and why did you so assume was the reason for why
   Paul did not want to be on the terraces? - A. For the
   whole of that season, even being at Anfield on the Kop,
                                                              67

                                                 I.   J.   FEARNS


     on numerous occasions Paul when he did stand behind the
     goal, moved away to either the side or nearer the front
     because the pressure, he felt it was too much for him.

Q. Do you know whether he had been to the serai-final in
   1988? - A. He had been, yes.

Q. Were you there with him in 1988? - A. No, I didn't
   travel with Paul.

Q. Did you ever speak to him about his experiences in
   1988? - A. Only about the game itself.

Q. Not about his experience on the terrace? - A. Not about
   any experiences, no.
                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Fearns, did you say you saw the perimeter gate
   opened before the players came out? - A. The perimeter
   gate in area "C" was actually opened once to my
   recollection, that.I can remember, but that was
   immediately shut by the Police Officer who was on the
   track.

Q..-Yes, you are talking about in the perimeter fence,
    aren't you? - A. Inside the ground itself. Not gate C,
    as in the concertina gate, no.

Q. No, gate 3.' I was wondering if you could look at C277,
   the sixth time from the bottom. Can you see there it
   says 14.59.20, I think it is, "Gate 3 open"? - A. Yes.

Q.    So that was a little later than you have said, wasn't
     it? - A. No, I said ....

Q.    You said you saw it open before the players came on the
     pitch? - A. Yes, it did open once. As I say, there was
     no big flood onto the pitch. The Police Officer just
     closed it straightaway.

Q. It is just the time that I am trying to get correct. -
   A. As I say, I couldn't be certain on it. It was
   before the teams were on the pitch though.
Q.    Because we know the teams came out at 6-minutes-to-3
     and 14.59 is when gate 3 opened, so all the events that
     you have mentioned in the pen, could they have been
     just a few minutes out, do you think? - A. As I say,
     that is possibly the case, but I can remember that gate
     being opened before the teams were on that pitch.

Q.   Yes, it is not the events themselves, it is just the
     timing. They could be that little bit later?
                                               I-   J.   FEARNS


     MR. KING:   Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien, it is a
long time since I made the point, but all we know for
certain is that 14.59 shows the gate in a state of
openness.  Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien, probably not
deliberately, has rather misrepresented to the witness
when indicating at 14.59 the gate was in the process of
being opened.

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying
to find out is whether this witness could be five
minutes wrong with his time but we don't know.

     MR. KING:   We don't know.  I am only trying to
make sure that there is no confusion over the
significance of 14.59 on the chart for gate 3.  That is
only a time when we know the gate was in a state of
openness.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   And it d o e s n ’t say anywhere that
gate 3 was opened before, does it, sir?

      THE CORONER:   No, it does not, but you cannot
from that figure say that it didn't open before; you
cannot say that it did; and you cannot say what
happened after it.   All you can say, as Mr. King
correctly points out, is that at 14.59 it was open.
How long it was open, whether it was shut again,
whether it stayed open continuously, from the figure
itself you can't tell.   What this witness is saying,
and he will correct me if I misrepresent what he is
saying, is that his recollection is that the gate did
open, but that it was considerably earlier, before the
players were on the pitch, that somebody came out and a
Police Officer put him back in, and then it was shut,
but he has no further recollection of any events on the
gate.   That is his evidence.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Fearns, you do say that your
timings could be a little out, don't you? - A. Yes, but
I do know distinctly that the teams were not on the
pitch when I first saw that gate open.  As I say, when
the gate was opened it was closed virtually immediately
by a Police Officer who was on the track, so for the
record that might not go down as the gate being open,
but as I say, it was opened and closed straightaway.

When you saw that gate open what was the state of the
pen then? - A. From where we were it was starting to
get really quite packed at the time.  It was just
before the surge actually happened.  As I say, then the
surge came and recollection from then was just panic
really.
                                                                69

                                                   I.   J.   FEARNS


Q. You didn't feel in any danger at all when you saw.that
   gate first opened? - A. No.  I was feeling a bit
   worried about the intensity of the pushing, but it was
   just like any cup game to me at the time.

Q. Did you see how the gate was opened? - A. No.  I can
   only recollect the actual gate opening and the Police
   Officer closing it virtually straightaway.  I couldn't
   tell you who opened, why it was opened.

Q. Did anybody g2 t out at that time? - A. No,   the gate was
   closed virtually immediately.

Q. Nobody at all? - A. No.

q.        THE CORONER:   Did you say nobody got out?  I
     thought you said somebody got out and was put back in?
     - A. Well, they didn't get out - that was the question.

0. I see, yes.    I understand.

           THE CORONER: • Mr. King, are you happy with what
      you have heard with regard to Mr. Mainwaring?  As I
      say, I do not intend to call Mr. Mainwaring because I
     •think it isn't really terribly --- I know it is very
      important to the family but it is not terribly relevant
      to the Inquest.  Do you want to ask him any further
      questions?

          MR. KING:   Yes.  I don't want to suggest
     something which he has no knowledge of.

              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Did you know Mr. Carlile in the previous season,          that
   is Paul Carlile, in the 1988 season? - A. Yes.

Q. Would he go to the Kop at Anfield in the 1988 season? -
   A. Yes, he did.

Q. In the 1988 season did he exhibit the same reluctance
    to be on the Kop and worried about crowding? - A.^ Yes.
    I myself only started going to football matches with
   Paul Carlile, it was about the '87 season.   Ever since
   then I knew for a fact that he was nervous of the large
   crowds, but as I say, he never, ever actually came out
   and said it to me personally.

Q. In the 1987 and '88 season he was still going on the
   Kop as far as you knew? - A. Yes.

Q. Then he went to the '88 semi-final at Hillsborough? -
   A. Yes.
