                                                       G                           Cui              OK    VIOvV
                                                                                                                     f\j


                                                       F
                                        Chelsea
Directors:                                                                                                 President:
  K. W. Bates                                                                                                G. M. Thomson
  C. Hutchinson                                                                                            Manager:
  Y. S. Todd
                                                                                                                Bobby Campbell
  S. S. Tollman
                                      Football Club                                                        Club Secretary:
                                                                                                             Janet Wayth

                                    Stamford Bridge London SW6 1HS
                                         Telephone 01-385 5545
                                         Facsimile 01-381 4831
                                                                                                          IV JoK^^w
                                            DISCUSSION PAPER                                             Pwj* N a u ^ ttv /

                                  RE:     INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS                                         N -      Sw cM '

                       I                       Li3 1-N.OV^ J                 T oxins/              fVj.
                                                                                                                         KMv>1
                                                7> o / 9 .         ^cU j
                                                                                                                                 'j l O
  5.    Personnel to check crowds                               We feel that this appointment is
        for signs of distress.                                  impractical and not effective.
                                                                The location of personnel on
                                                                the track is, we feel, a bad
                                                                vantage point and signs of distress
                                                                could be viewed far clearer via
                                                                close circuit TV in the Police
                      V x k u * * *        ,                    Control Room.

                                                                The provision of these personnel
                                                                merely creates another layer
                                                                of bureaucracy between the scene
                                                                and the Control Room.


 8.     Pitch gates to be kept
        fully open at all tines.                                We are in total disagreement
                                                                with this recarmendation. Perimeter
                                                                fencing is an integral part of
                                                                the Club's safety precautions.
                                                                If the gates are to be kept open, Q . . ■ \
                                                                the whole perimeter fencing may           ■
                                                                as m i l be removed.   *- f
                                                                                                                   T
 9. Officer authorised to allow
    spectators on to pitch to                                   We make arrangements outside the
    relieve over-crowding.                                      ground to control the number
                                                                of spectators entering and, if
                                                                necessary, make a match all­          La
                                                                ticket to prevent overcrowding.
                                                                We then have officers on the         Ke KjuW jv»
                                                                track who allow spectators onto *m
                                                                the pitch to escape fron the       • J ^ /yj
                                                                over-crowding - which we have        5      .,
                                                                earlier prevented!                      1

   Club Call:                                            Ticket News:                                               Ken Bates Hotline:
 0898 12 11 59                                          0898 12 18 59                                                   0898 66 46 66
                           Chelsea Football and Athletic Company Limited Registered No. 84348 England
                                  -   2   -




19. Admittance to viewing areas
    within period of one hour.                We fail to grasp the relevance        S'
                                                     one hour period. Even     *
                                              for small matches the turnstiles
                                              are opened lh hours before kick
                                              off. For large matches the gates
                                              open two hours before kick off.


25.   Provision of pre-match
      entertainment.                          Over the years we have failed
                                              to find a form of entertainment
                                              which is entertaining enough
                                              to encourage early arrival.
                                              Provision of such must also take
                                              into consideration local conditions
                                              such as weather and state of
                                              playing area. In addition, we
                                              would not like to assume responsibility
                                              for the safety of, say, a marching
                                              band when pitch gates are open        7    f
                                              and a violent invasion could
                                              not be prevented


29.   Option to postpone
      kick off                                This decision should only be
                                              taken by the Chief Officer of
                                              Police on grounds of public safety.
                                              If the crowds outside are under
                                              control, kick off should not
                                              be delayed.

                                              This may cause a tendency to
                                              delay kick off for financial
                                              reasons as under the new Special
                                              Services Agreement the Clubs
                                              will be responsible for extra
                                              Police time incurred.
\
1


                                       C H A PTER 24 - T H E R EC O M M EN D A TIO N S

      315. The recom m endations which follow are the m inim um necessary to ensure that existing football
    grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon thfe evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
    inform ation I have received. They com plem ent the recom m endations which M r Justice Popplewell set out
    after his inquiry at Bradford.

       316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
    started forthwith and com pleted as soon as possible.

    Maximum Capacities for Terraces
    ★         1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
            should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

            A pen or area is to be deemed “ self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
            another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

    ★        2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
            Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

            (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure” , proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
                which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
                in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

    ^       (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
                margin.

    ★        3. Arrangements should be m ade:-

            (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
                figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
                ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherw ise, and

            (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


        Filling and Monitoring Terraces
        ★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
            responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
            other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
            variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

        ★     5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
            area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
            sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
            period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
            or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
            below, and by radio to the control room.


        Fences and Gates
              6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
            duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
            crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
            demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
            different crowd densities.

        ★     7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
             different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “ Emergency Exit” .



                                                                 57
                                             «•

                                “   3^   :




★       8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
       when spectators are on the terrace.

★        9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
       a police officer authorised to decide w hether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
       The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and know n to be so by all
       stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
       either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★       10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
       are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
       necessary'. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
       brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W hether to use it should be a decision of a
       nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★          11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
        to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

 ★         12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
        complies with the criteria contained in C hapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessm ent of the
        maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
        reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates
          13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
        which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure th at the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report.

           14. Any local authority within w hose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
        w hich no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthw ith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
        Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


           16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
        amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
        accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
        effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
        with the local authority’s rules.

           17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
        of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
        the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group’s term s of
        reference should encompass all m atters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
        ground and attendance at matches. T he Advisory' Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
        and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
        written reports for consideration by the local authority.


     Duties of each Football Club
• ★       18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
        inspections should be made to ensure th at each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
        anticipated.


                                                             58
                                                                                                                        ar
                                                                                                /


★           19. The correlation between each viewing area in th e stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
          as to ensure th a t all the spectators intended to be admitted to th at viewing area can pass through the
          turnstiles w ithin one hour. If that cannot be done, th e capacity of th a t viewing area should be reduced
          accordingly.

★           20. Ib rn sd le s should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
          reached and arrangem ents should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
          operators for th is purpose.                                                                         ‘

            21. Closed circui t television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
          concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★           22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively
          reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
          and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
          area.

★           23. Inform ation on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
          the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
          should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

    ★      24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
I         by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
          admitting spectators to the ground.

            25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
          entertainm ent aim ed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


    Police Planning
    ★       26. The C hief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
          should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
          concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

    ★       27. The O perational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
          officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any
          is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

    ★      28. The O perational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
          any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
          sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

    ★       29. The option to postpone kick-ofr should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
           Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

              30.     There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
           monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
           at turnstiles or of num bers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
           in the interpretation and use of these data.


        Communications
             31.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
           received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
           priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
           used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
           sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                               59
          32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
        with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

          33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
        areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
        announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
        noise in the ground. This arrangem ent should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for ever}’
        m atch.                                 . '

          34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
        Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
        the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★          35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
        liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★          36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
         ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
         spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
         concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
'       rooms of each of the emergency services.

    ★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        within the ground itself.

    ★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
        they are required.


    First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
    ★     39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
        club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

          40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
        equipment to be m aintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
        medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.
                                                                                           *      *
    ★     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
        any medical exigency at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. H e should be
        present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
        match. H is whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
        contactable.

    ★      42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
        attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

          43. T he number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
        be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
        requirement of the Safety Certificate.
                                           The Rt H on L o rd justice Taylor
IN Q U IR Y IN T O T H E HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER                           SO Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                     fi+ 'J                01-2732577/3602/2370




 Dibb Lupton Broomhead
 6 Butts Court
 LEEDS
 LS1 5JX
                                           Date

                                        2 October 1989



3) ^ S<j
 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Irhank you for your letter of 26 September. I
 suggest you regard the end of October as the
 deadline for submissions for Part II of the
 Inquiry.
                                  %
                                           'R K V J U -U L



                                      R M WHALLEY
                                 Secretary to the Inquiry
