From: MJPyne                                                cc Mr Edmundson
      Operational Policing
      Policy Unit
      Room 528, QAG
      @ 273 - 2433
      30 March, 1998



Mr Englefield

DEBATE ON THE MOTION FOR THE EASTER ADJOURNMENT

HILLSBOROUGH

I attach lines to take and briefing on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Hillsborough
scrutiny for the Lord President at the debate on the motion for the Easter
Adjournment.



                                      M JPyne
                                HILLSBOROUGH

Will the Government reconsider its          to postpone a request to retire on ill
refusal to order a new inquiry/inquest      health grounds until the completion of
into Hillsborough?                          disciplinary proceedings.

The Home Secretary is satisfied that Lord   BACKGROUND
Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a
thorough scrutiny of the evidence. He has   The Home Secretary announced on 18
considered all the material allegations     February that he, the Attorney-General,
about missing or concealed videotape        the DPP and the Chief Constable of
evidence, the alleged interference with     South Yorkshire had accepted Lord
witnesses and witness statements and        Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions that
concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut­   the 'evidence’ submitted to his scrutiny
off time at the Inquest.                    did not justify ordering a fresh inquiry,
                                            inquest or further consideration of
The Home Secretary has considered the       criminal or disciplinary proceedings.
Judge’s report carefully and he accepts
the conclusion which the Judge has          The Home Secretary said Hillsborough
reached that the evidence submitted to      highlighted the 'profound shortcomings’
him does not add anything significant to    in the police disciplinary system. In
the evidence available to and considered    response to the Home Affairs
by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests.     Committee’s report in January, on 23
                                            March the Home Secretary announced
                                            proposals for new discipline procedures
Will the Government ensure that             and measures to increase public
officers can no longer avoid                confidence in the complaints system.
disciplinary action by taking early
retirement on ill health pensions?

In January, the Home Affairs Select
Committee made some important
recommendations about the police
complaints and discipline procedures.
The Home Secretary announced his
response on 23 March, including his
intention to reduce the standard of proof
to the civil standard in discipline
procedures and to remove the existing
double jeopardy provision which restricts
criminal and disciplinary action on the
same facts. He also endorsed the
Committee’s recommendation that forces
should show greater commitment to their
powers to verify claims of sickness and
disability and, where appropriate,
