                                                                                                                                            2 Park Lane
 H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                                                                  Leeds
                  S O L I C I T O R S                                                                                                       LS3 1ES
           ---------------- ----------------------- ------------------                                                                      Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                            DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                            Fax (0113)284 7001

    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny
    Room 1106
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London
    SW1H 9AT


   Our Ref:                                                              Your Ref:                                                      Date:
   PCM.SB.MMI. 1-103
                                                                                                                                            11 November 1997


   Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

   PREPARATION OF STATEMENTS FOLLOWING THF. HU .1 SRORQur.H niSACTTO

  Thank you for your letter of 28 October 1997 which as you know did not in fact reach me until 7
  November 1997.

  The following response is made with my clients’ permission but the factual material is derived from
  my files and any views expressed are my own. The clients’ permission extends to disclosing to you
  the attached documents but this disclosure is in confidence to the Hillsborough Scrutiny.

  Here are my answers to the points raised under paragraph 4 of your letter. I have grouped under
  item 1 comment on each o f the points made in paragraph 3.

  1. 1.            understand that the decision to ask all officers present to provide self taken statements was
                 made at a meeting at Police Headquarters on Monday 17 April 1989. I was not present at
                 this meeting. I cannot therefore say whether officers were specifically asked to include
                 comment and impression.

  1. 2 .
                It is correct that when the West Midlands Police asked for statements from particular officers
                the self taken statements for those officers were forwarded to me. I read through the
                statements and made comments by fax to Chief Superintendent Denton. I did not amend any
                statements. Where my comments suggested changes, these were principally removal of
                comment and impression.          They also included suggestions to re-address apparent
                contradictions or ambiguities, to consider removal of evidence about events after the officers
                had gone off duty and, on occasions, to reconsider intemperate language.

 1.3.           The statements were intended to be used for the purpose of Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry
                but they were not, so far as I am aware, intended to form Criminal Justice Act statements.
                There is a letter dated 7 May 1989 from Mervyn Jones to Peter Wright which refers to
Offices also at:

7 D evonshire Square                Trinity Court                    Pennine House                  Suite 688 Lloyd's
London                              16 John Dalton Street                                                                                     Avenue Louise 250
                                                                     39-45 Well Street              One Lime Street
EC2M 4Y H                           M anchester                                                                                               1050 Brussels
                                                                     Bradford                       London
T elephone (0171) 655 1000          M 60 8HS                                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                     BDI 5NU                        EC 3M 7HA
Fax (0171) 655 1001                 Telephone (0161) 830 5000                                                                                 T elephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
                                                                     Telephone ( 0 1274) 734700     Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399
                                    Fax (0161) 830 5001                                                                                       Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                                                     F a x (01274) 307239           Fax (0171) 6 2 1 1217

A list o f Partners can be vtewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society ,n the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                       2

                                                                                11 November 1997
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny


                             ‘rec° llections in writ'"*- and ‘written submissions’. I would have
       expected this letter to refer explicitly to CJA statements if that was the intention.

       With the passage of time it is difficult to say precisely why this approach was adopted Re
       reading the file I think that it followed on from the procedure adopted t i t h ,he se^or
       the disaster T a l T f f i "“ "“ T    whoJ ' ad borne the bru"‘ o f 1   Press criticism following
           disaster. At an early stage these officers were asked by the West Midlands Police to
                                     1                                  atta° i a C° Py ° f my attendance note
       P t u        f t T - . 6 pr0vlsl0n    these statements was discussed between myself and
       Peter Hayes, the then Deputy Chief Constable. This states - at the top of page 2 :-

                 “It was a& eed’ however, that it would be sensible fo r me to see these
                statements before they went to the West Midlands Enquiry and to have
                some time to go through them with the men involved’'.

      Again I cannot really say whether this was my idea or Peter Hayes’ idea but it does seem

      aT IT tim en,r        Y                        ^     ^ n°
      fi.rth time’.th®se mf n had been the subJ'ect of severe criticism and might well expect to be
      farther criticised at the enquiry. I attach a copy of my attendance note dated 2 May which
      details the meeting with the senior officers on that day. The note indicates that changes were
      suggested but the comment in relation to A C C Jackson does tend to indicate that these
      changes were not major.


     Pn,*611 n . ' f f ° f 7 Ma,y’ referred t0 in I-3- above, was received by the South Yorkshire
     note nf^hat Supenntendent De,mon sPoke t0 me             » May and a copy of my attendance
      I f         7 n ,trS ,t'° n >s enclosed. You will note the final paragraph which effectively
     records the decision to scmtmise these statements without stating whether this was my idel
     or Chief Supenntendent Denton’s. I. does however record that the intention was to remove
      comment or matters o f speculation

3.
     As indicated at item 1.1. above I am not aware that anyone specifically asked for officers’
     B e ttk o n \ m ™Pressions- The only record of the request will be in Chief Inspector
     J f til       i f of the ™eetl"S of 17 APnI which I have not seen. There is no doubt that the
     self taken statements did include comment and impression.

4.
     Without wishing in any way to be flippant about such an awful tragedy I am afraid that the
     reference to usual procedure” would no. have found an echo in the meetings which we had
     at that time. Ninety five people had died. Officers who had given a lifetime o f public service
     suddenly found themselves objects of public vilification and accused o f negligence leading to
     mass slaughter. I do no, think that anybody really knew what would be usual proceduI !n
     those circumstances. I would say however that by then the enquiry into the events - whether
     MWh?nd?pUr       ‘°   lUTVT tCnmm'enquiry or not • was flrm|y ^ <he hands of the West
     appr^riate                        aUth° rity '° imp0Se whatever P ™ « ^ e <hey thought
                                                                                                    3
                                                                                  11
                                                       The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                           The Hillsborough Scrutiny


        As a matter of additional personal comment, it seems to me that the West Midlands Police
        had little practical choice, because of the constraint imposed by the political requirement that
        the Taylor Enquiry should produce an interim report before the commencement of the next
        football season. To conduct the enquiry on the basis of West Midlands officers taking CJA
        statements from individual South Yorkshire Police officers would probably have rendered
        that goal impossible to achieve.

5.     I do not know precisely what procedure was adopted after I had provided faxed comment on
       statements presented to me. I am not in a position to say whether any officer refused to sign
       an amended statement and indeed I am not aware as to whether officers were presented with
       amended statements as opposed to reviewing their own statements in the light of the
       comments I had made. It may be that the former was the practice adopted because of the
       time pressure. Whether or not that was the case I cannot recall any instance when the matter
       was referred back to me and I must assume either that the officers signed amended
       statements, or that if they did not, the statements went to West Midlands in their original
       form.

I hope this is helpful. Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours sincerely



P C METCALF




                                                                                    m mi.001-0103.let 1.101 l.pcm.doc
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     29th/30th April, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




(1)     Attending Terry Wain on telephone 29/4.

        He read to me the contents of a letter received
        from the West Midlands Force, asking for Senior
        Officers to prepare what would effectively be
        self-taken statements to present to the West
        Midlands inquiry.  This had given rise to some
        concern.  He and Belinda had drafted a form of
        holding response to be sent by ,the Deputy, but
        the latter had amended this to tone it down
        somewhat.  I approved it in its amended form,
        which effectively said that the Police would be
        doing everything they could to co-operate but
        asked what was the specific purpose of these
        statements and whether they would be the only
        statements likely to be required.

        He told me that the Deputy would be seeing the
        Officers concerned on Sunday and would like to
        speak to me afterwards.  I said that I would be
        available.


(2)     I spoke to Peter Hayes at Sunday lunchtime.   The
        Officers had now all seen the videos and were
        fairly relaxed about giving factual statements.
        They were not particularly concerned that these
        would be self-taken rather than CJA.   I raised
        with him the points which had concerned me,
        namely, that the inquiry was supposed to be
        fulfilling some statutory functions in terms of
        disciplinary proceedings and in terms of
        supporting H.M. Coroner.   I said that it might
        not be fair on the Officers if these self-taken
        statements were to be used for those purposes,
        as opposed to the purposes of the inquiry.   He
        discussed this with the Chief Constable, who was
        also present and said that the Chief Constable
        was satisfied that the West Midlands inquiry had
        a duty to report only to the Judge.   Moreover,
        it seemed that there was no practical difficulty
        because there was not going to be anything in the
        self-taken statements which would not have been
        in CJA statements if taken.


                                             /. .. contd.
                                    - 2 -




      s;i rS S 5 ;™ ‘= s«rs;‘-
      “ "    “    5° through them w i t h ^ e men ^nvSlvId301"®




      again later m          the day.                        u    me

3)
      cJt0rv,?n ' he telePhoned back and said that the


            a f t ™ ™        ^   then to See the < * « « »       in


                                            ™      - Lhat
     discuss format and presentation of the report
     down tSeSappJndiS.indeXing ^           PSrhapS CUttin?

     o f ^ h ^ asked if      I could take away with me a copy
     case and       J °5     vldeos which were relevant to the
     He s a id t h a ^ h p   anY relevant still photographs,
          said that he       would arrange for this.

     d L « aid tl!a \.he WOUla be 9°ing away for a few
        y break, but could be contacted if need be.




                        p. c. Metcalf
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:     2nd May, 1989


RE:       HILLSBOROUGH




Attending at Sheffield Police Headquarters.

(1)     I had a meeting with the Chief Constable at which
        he asked how things were going and I reviewed
        progress.

        He raised the point that Mr. Hayes appeared to
        have left instructions for the self-taken
        statements to deal only with the events of the
        match:  he felt that they should go rather wider
        and deal with the planning and history.   I said
        that this depended very much on what had actually
        been asked for, but if the request for statements
        was general, then the statements themselves should
        be general.

        He indicated that he would make himself available
        for consultations or meetings at any time in
        connection with this matter.


(2)   I then spoke with Stuart Anderson and we discussed
      what needed doing in the afternoon.  Essentially,
      this was to go through the self-taken statements
      which had been prepared and I asked then to have a
      discussion with Terry Wain about the format of the
      report.  At this stage, I was able to have a look
      at the letter which had been received from the West
      Midlands Force and I noted that it was somewhat
      ambiguous.  The request was for a recollection of
      events prior to, during and after the match.    My
      reading of this would have limited it to the day
      in question but, on the whole, I felt it
      preferable to deal with the case as fully as
      possible.


(3) . During the course of the afternoon, I went through
      statements with A.C.C. Jackson (Operations),
      Superintendent Roger Greenwood (Ground Commander),
      Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield (Overall
      Commander), Superintendent Roger Marshall
      (Liverpool Sector Commander), Superintendent
      Bernard Murray (Operations, Second in Command),



                                            /...   contd.
                         - 2 -



      Superintendent David Chapman (Nottingham Forest
      Sector Commander) and Chief Inspector Bob Creaser
      who was effectively a Sector Commander under
      Superintendent Marshall.

      I made various suggestions for alterations to
      their statements, the principal change being that
      in respect of A.C.C. Jackson, who had not included
      any of the details of the planning of the match.
      It was agreed that he would be dealing with this
      overnight and that I would attend at Sheffield
      again on Wednesday to go through this.


(4)   I looked through the statement of Inspector Hans
      Davis, in charge of mounted Officers.  Although
      there were one or two minor changes which I would
      have suggested, he was away on leave and it was
      felt appropriate that his statement should be
      handed ov e r .


(5)   I then had further discussions with Terry Wain
      and with Stuart Anderson.   The team have assembled
      two sets of photographs dealing, respectively,
      with the situation on both sides of the Leppings
      Lane turnstiles and inside the Leppings Lane
      terracing.   The latter photographs were
      particularly instructive because, in a time
      sequence, they appeared to show various people
      standing at or around the mouth of the tunnel
      during the whole period from 2.45 p.m. to 3.05 p.m.,
      which would cast serious doubt on the suggestions
      that there was some sort of a surge through the
      tunnel as the result of a gate or gates being
      opened.   I was not able to take away copies of
      these photographs but I was supplied with a set
      of copies of Police videos.   Later that evening,
      I watched video number 14 which, interalia, shows
      the situation inside and outside the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.   The film goes into what is referred
      to as elapsed time mode during the critical
      period, so that there are effectively a series of
      single shots with a gap of one to five seconds
      between them.   This is not particularly helpful
      but, insofar as anything can be made out, there
      again does not appear to be a surge towards the
      outside entrance of the tunnel, which has been
      implicated in the disaster.


(6)   I asked various of the Officers about leave
      commitments.   Superintendent Murray indicated
      that he had leave booked from 11th to 26th June
      and Superintendent Greenwood from 19th May to
      2nd June.   I promised to bring these matters to
      the attention of the Treasury Solicitor, although


                                           /. . . contd.
                   - 3 -



1 ^°uld 9 ive n° promise that they might not be
called during indicated periods.




              P . C . Metcalf




         v
ATTENDANCE NOTE


DATE:    9th May, 1989


RE:     HILLSBOROUGH




Attending (1)     K. S. Anderson on telephone.

            (2)   K. G. Holmes on telephone.

            (3)   Don Denton on telephone.


(1)   He telephoned in response to m^K fax and said that
      they understood there may be a need for editing.
      He was concerned as to whether he would actually
      be called into the meeting this afternoon and I
      said that he should proceed with his existing
      -arrangements and that we would fit in if we
      needed to consult him.   He said that he would be
      providing some sandwiches at 5.00 p.m.

      So far as the report/proof is concerned, the
      basic version is about 2" thick, but there are
      a very large amount of appendices.  I said that
      this was not too bad and that if we could cut it
      down to 1" thick, with just a few crucial
      documents included as appendices to the report
      itself, then I would be really quite satisfied.

      He was a little concerned as to whether the work
      would be done by ourselves or by the Police and
      I said that we would wait and see the size of the
      task before going any further.


(2)   He telephoned to mention his concern about the
      overall financial cost of the operation.  He was
      referring to the MMI involvement on behalf of all
      parties and wanted to send out a letter suggesting
      that it should not be necessary for Leading and
      Junior Counsel, a Partner and Assistant Solicitor
      to be present all the way through the hearing.
      I reassured him that I already had this point on
      board and, whilst it may be difficult to cut down
                                      - 2 -



            on the representation as reqards rn„n                 i
            intention was that there should on?                        °Ur

           whicSSS?gStXbI S s e l ^ T e U n d f o ^ L t e " 60!11^ ^
           that, nevertheless, there would Ho             u
           putting the position on record          * "° harm in

           I mentioned that we had a conference this
           afternoon and also there was the

                                         as-

           " « " i « i s e ? h « e i q^ ° ? r ? £a s us r 1 , s f e e s - r t
          by way of telephoning up people who hart ^esearch'
          concerned in th<- n              , ^ ° P i e .wno had been
          to discovering what Brief f e e s ^ f d ' b e ^ a .Yiew
          this particular                         f        been Pa id.        In

*         ought to s S           i a n “ “ ' " e b o t h a 9 ^ e e d t h a t he
          it was agreed and that ^,F f o v e .t^e Brief fee before
          the approval of Steve w ^ k l r . 1" tUr"' ” l9ht need


    3)    He told me that they had now received th» f „
          request from the West Midlands for I f l f t J
          statements for some 120 Of “ r “ f i f l f
          already had Minutes or accounts of eveSts
          re-spect of 100.                   events in

         Obviously, no problem was presented in r p i a f
         b   ^   f   t   h   ^  l   °               -    n     t     s       .
         for the west Midlands rjqufst               As “ o r ^ h e 1^       117
         e x i s t i n a ^ ^ need t0 be S°me s c r u t r n f o f the
         to be handedUonr'withoutnfurthehem(imi9ht b ~ suitable
         which included c o m m i t or m ^ l e r f o f sne ^
         would probablv havp i-o           j           speculation
         might b ^ a b l e to      „ > h redone - . 1 said that *e
         afternoon, depending o n ^ h e ^ x J e n r L ^ ^ V ^ 3
         was taken up with other matters.               whlch time




                            P. C. Metcalf
*1 -
                                                                                                                                               2 P ark Lane
  H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                                                                    Leeds
                                                                                                                                               LS31ES
                    S O L I C I T O R S
                                                                                                                                               Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                               DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                               Fax (0113) 284 7001


        The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
        The Hillsborough Scrutiny
        Room 1106
        50 Queen Anne’s Gate
        London
        SW1H9AT



        Our Ref:                                                             Your Ref:                                                        Date:
        PCM.SB.MMI. 1-103                                                                                                                     20 January 1998


        Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

        I am most grateful to you for the opportunity to comment on the section of your draft report dealing
        with my firm’s vetting of South Yorkshire Police officers’ statements before their submission to the
        West Midlands Police. I should say that I have consulted Mr. Michael Burton QC and the
        submissions which follow are based on his advice.

       By way of background I understand that there is no criticism of the fact that these statements were
       vetted. It is accepted by you that the Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were well aware that the
       statements were being vetted by solicitors and in some cases altered (para 12 draft report), that other
       parties to the Inquiry had statements vetted, or in some cases drafted, by solicitors (para 13) and that
       the removal of certain matters cannot be the subject of criticism (para 8).

       Given that it is accepted that vetting by solicitors was appropriate then the question arises as to the
       basis upon which any criticism can be made as to the manner in which it was carried out. The
       drafting or vetting of witness statements is a very uncharted area, in which I believe there are no
       reported decisions or authoritative conclusions, and this was all the more so the case in 1989, the
       time when my conduct falls to be judged. I would respectfully submit that any criticism of the actual
       vetting process ought to be made (if at all) by reference to appropriate Rules or guidelines for the
       preparation of statements.

       Whilst there are and were no specific rules promulgated by the Law Society, the Bar Council has
       helpfully produced, but only in 1997, guidance for members of the Bar when instructed to prepare or
       settle a witness statement for use in civil proceedings. I attach a copy for reference.

       I would readily accept that no lesser standards should apply to solicitors than to members of the Bar
       and respectfully submit that this is the Guidance which should form the basis for any judgment as to
       whether material was wrongly edited out of the self-taken statements of the officers. However, I
       would respectfully point out that as my own conduct is thus being tested by a retrospective
       Offices also at:

       7 D evonshire Square              Trinity Court                      P ennine House                   Suite 688 Lloyd’s                        Avenue Louise 250
       London                            16 John Dalton Street              39-45 W ell Street               One Lim e Street                         1050 Brussels
       E C 2M 4Y H                       M anchester                        Bradford                         London                                   Belgium
       Telephone (0 17 1 )6 5 5 1000     M 60 8HS                           BD1 5NU                          EC3M 7HA                                 Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
       Fax (0171) 655 1001               Telephone (0161) 830 5000          Telephone (01274) 734700         Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399           Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                         Fax (0161) 830 5001                Fax (01274) 307239               F ax(0 17 1 )6 2 1 1217

       A list o f Partners can be view ed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investm ent business.
                                                                                                      2

                                                                                  20 January 1998
                                                    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                        The Hillsborough Scrutiny

application of the Guidance and at a time when no such assistance was available, that it should not
be readily the subject of criticism.

Without wishing to put a gloss on the Guidance, I submit that the principles to be derived from it for
the purpose of considering the validity or otherwise of the editing process are as follows:

      (1)     The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but exclude inadmissible
              hearsay, comment and argument.

      (2)     It should be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and unnecessary elaboration, and
               should not serve as a commentary on documents.

      (3)     It should contain all the witness’s evidence in chief: it should not be edited so that it
               no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would be expected to give in
               response to viva voce examination in chief

      (4)     No material should be excluded which might render the statement anything other than
              the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by leaving in fact A while
              excluding fact B in such a way as to render untrue or misleading anything which
              remains in the statement

      (5)     The exclusion of unfavourable material, other than in such manner as to amount to a
              failure to comply with guideline 4, is a matter of judgment.

      (6)     It is permitted and appropriate to draw to a witness’ attention that what he proposes
              to say appears in conflict with other evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to
              accept, but if the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines in 1-5 above
              apply.

The context of the vetting was of course the convening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the request for
the provision of statements. However:

     (1)     The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire had no operational responsibility for
              investigating the events at Hillsborough. This had been passed to the West Midlands
             Police.

     (2)     There were at the time clear indications that there would be major civil proceedings
             arising out of the disaster and calls for, at least, disciplinary action against police
             officers. A Salmon letter had been delivered detailing a number of criticisms to be
             made of the police at the Inquiry. The first civil proceedings had been issued and
             served within a week of the disaster and one member of the public had made an
             attempt to persuade Sheffield Justices to issue warrants for the arrest of the Chief
             Constable and the directors of the football club on a charge of manslaughter. The
             application was refused but only after a formal hearing.
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                    20 January 1998
                                                      The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                          The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It was clear that any statement submitted to the Inquiry would be available in any subsequent
proceedings. In the circumstances I respectfully submit that there was a duty on the part of my firm
to consider these statements carefully and critically in the light of the principles referred to above, as
the statements, once served, would be bound to be used and available in and for the purpose of all
such proceedings.

I respectfully submit that in the light of the principles, and notwithstanding the one case where I do
believe that I may have made an error of judgment, the specific alterations or reconsiderations
suggested to the statements should not be subject to criticism. I propose to deal below with each of
the suggested alterations referred to in your draft report and also to those referred to by Chief
Superintendent Foster. The exception is the alteration in respect of PC Huckstepp. I have no record
of advising in relation to this officer’s statement (to which there is no reference in any of the letters,
copies of which you have seen) and I do not believe that I did so.

 Before dealing with those statements, I would wish briefly to refer to the one respect in which, in
your draft report, you make a criticism which does not relate to a specific statement, namely in para
15. I do not know if in forming your view of the legal advisers (who of course included Counsel as
well as solicitors) you have considered the question of any advice given to the client in relation to its
conduct of, and approach towards, the hearing, but without such consideration the comment seems
to me somewhat unfair.

I turn to the individual statements (for easeof reference Ihavetaken the chronological order in
which the statements were vetted, by reference to myletters and the individualnumbering there
used):-

(1)    Inspector White - 10.5.89 - No 2.1

       The Additional points arising” which I suggested should be removed amount to comment
       within item 1 of the Guidance as summarised above. Moreover it would not have been
       material covered by examination in chief (item 3).

(2)    PS Crawford - 10.5.89 - No 2.2

       I respectfully submit that the suggestion of review of the comment about manpower was
       entirely justified. The comparative manpower available as between the 1988 and 1989
       semifinals and its deployment was a matter of record through the operational orders which
       had been made available to the Inquiry. The officer’s impressions could not add anything to
       these documents. In my submission this was both comment (iteml) and irrelevant (item 2). I
       am not as happy about the suggestion to review the reference to the serial at the centre
       tunnel. I would accept that this may have been either an error of judgment or simply an error,
       the latter being a possibility if I had mistakenly thought (as I may have done) that this was
       another witness mixing up the practice at League games with that at a semifinal (see (6)
       below and what in due course became the findings of Lord Taylor at paras 170 and 171 of
       his Interim Report). Even in this case I would point out that my recommendation was for the
       evidence to be reviewed and thus not necessarily altered. If I had added a comment of the
       type to be found at 1.12 (PC Parkin) in the same fax then I believe this would have been
                                                                                          4
                                                                           20 January 1998
                                             The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                 The Hillsborough Scrutiny

satisfactory within item 6 of the Guidance but I accept that that comment was not expressly
added in this case as it could have been.

PC Walnole- 15.5 8 9 - 10.2

I respectfully submit that what PC Walpole did not hear and the significance if any of that
non event can only have been a matter of comment covered by item 1 of the guidance or
irrelevant within item 2.. It was common ground at the Inquiry and found as a fact by Lord
Taylor (Interim Report paras 53 and 303) that radio communications on the day were both
difficult to make out and unreliable.

PC Groome - 15.5.89 - 10.6

The reference to Control Room paralysis was plainly comment. PC Groome was not in the
Control box and again reached his conclusions on the basis of what he did not hear. Likewise
the reference to supervisory Officers on pp 4/5. One or more BBC cameras were
continuously focused on the pitch from the time that the game was stopped There was no
room for argument as to who was or was not on the pitch. In relation to the other pom s
which are referred to by C/S Foster I think it fair to reproduce what is said in my letter of
 advice:

 “ The n u m b e re d paras o f comment beginning on page 5, are helpful from our point o f view,
 but not appropriate fo r inclusion in a statement o f fa ct

 I respectfully submit that this was the correct approach in accordance with the Guidance.

 This is a statement in respect of which in your draft report there was no criticism, but I
 address it because comment is made upon it by C/S Foster.

 PC Brookes - 15.5.89 - 10.10

 I submit that his comments are a mixture of comment and argument, rightly excluded under
 the item 1 of the Guidance. Further, his reference to “the sliding doors at the back of the
 tunnel” indicated a lack o f direct knowledge of what he was talking about: the doors at the
 end of the tunnel were hinged and could never be safely closed whilst there were spectators
 in Pens 3 and 4 because they swung inwards towards the pens and if closed, would render
 emergency evacuation impossible.

  C/I Creaser - 23 .5 .89 - 20.8

  The point which arose with this statement occurred a number of times. It had been explained
  to me, I think correctly, that the practice of consecutive filling of pens was adopted at
  League games where it was necessary to accommodate both visiting and SWFC supporters
  in the Leppings Lane Terrace. This was done for reasons of segregation rather than safety:
  the central pens could be left empty to allow a gap and a police presence between the rival
                                                                                                  5
                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

        supporters. It was my belief that to leave this passage without comment was to risk raising a
        red herring. My actual advice was:

        ".../ fe e l that the comment about the packing o f the pens on page 4 should either be
        expanded to include detail o f when (in his experience) this had been done, or the entire
        section dealing with this should be deleted. ”

        I did not express a view as to which alternative was preferable nor was I consulted about the
        course adopted.

(7)     PC Woodcock - 30.5.89 - 24.28

        As there is no criticism o f the changes from yourself or C/S Foster I would respectfully
        submit that there is no need for any reference to be made to this statement, nor any response
        for me to make.

(8)     PC Ramsden - 2.6.89 - 26.12

         This statement does not appear in your draft report but only in C/S Foster s letter. I believe
         that the reference to the 1987 semifinal amounts to comment (iteml). Moreover it would not
         have formed part of this witness’ evidence in chief (item3). As to C/S Foster s note I am not
         sure that his interpretation is correct, but in any event I did suggest in my letter that the
         following sentences also amounted to comment, and if they had been removed the possibility
         of error would not have arisen. Whether these sentences were left in because the officer
         disagreed with my view or whether this was an oversight I do not know, for, as with all the
         statements, after sending the letters I neither dealt with nor saw them again before they were
         served.

         I submit that the remaining deletions are plainly comment.

 (9)     PC Eustis - 5.6.89 - 26.45

         Although I accept that the statement about 1988 is factual there had been little or no
         suggestion at the Inquiry that conditions at the 1988 semifinal had been as described by this
         officer. It should be noted that by the time this statement was vetted the fans had already
         given evidence to the Inquiry and conditions at the 1988 game had not been a significant
         issue. In my submission it was properly excluded both as irrelevant (item 2) and as material
         which would not form part of examination in chief (item 3).

 (10)    PC Powell - 14.6.89 - 30.1

          In rejation to the police numbers this was a matter of record for the reasons stated in respect
          of PS Crawford at (2) above. So far as the “cordon” was concerned this was phrased as
          comment but more importantly it was not at all clear where the cordon is supposed to have
          been. This would not have formed part of evidence in chief (item 3).
                                                                                                        6

                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It is obviously a matter of considerable concern to me and my firm that you should have formed
provisional critical views of my performance in relation to the vetting of the statements and I very
much hope that what I say in this response will cause you to re-consider those views. However, I
would in any event respectfully submit the following :-

       (1)   If my conduct is to be criticised it must injustice be so criticised by being set against,
               and if appropriate found wanting against, a specified rule, regulation, requirement or
               standard. I do not believe I am suggested to have been in breach of contract or
              breach of duty to my client, and so I assume it is against a professional standard that I
              would have offended. As I have indicated, I hope and believe you will not consider
              that I have contravened any rule or fallen below any standard of conduct as a
              solicitor, but if such be in your view the case, I believe it to be only fair that you tell
              me in what respect I have in your view breached or fallen below such rule or
              standard, so that I can meet the case and so that if criticism is deservedly made
              against me, its nature can be fully understood by myself and others.

       (2)   I believe you will accept that it is inevitable that there will be a great deal o f media
              and other reaction to your report and thus attention paid to any criticism of me and
              my firm. It is for that reason also that not only do I hope that you will be able to feel
              that no such criticism is justified, but also that if it be justified, the nature of the
              relevant breach can be specifically identified.

       (3)   I do believe that it is only by spelling out the rule or standard against which my
               conduct is being judged that it can be clearly concluded whether or not my conduct
              should be criticised or whether, for example if there were any error, it be an error of
              judgment.

      I would respectfully request that in reaching your final conclusions the following three points
      would also be of material significance:-

      (1)    On the basis of your provisional findings there is adverse comment to be made in
             relation to a maximum of seven out of over 400 statements which I considered.
             These statements were dealt with under intense pressure initially whilst preparations
             were being made for the Taylor Inquiry and thereafter whilst the Inquiry was
             underway. It was not a matter for delegation because of the need to try and maintain
             a consistent approach. If it is your finding that there were errors I would request that
             your report makes clear that they ought to be viewed in that context.

      (2)    On the basis of your draft findings (paras 16 and 17) no alteration to any statement
             made the slightest difference to the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry or any subsequent
             decision of the DPP or those looking into matters of police discipline. Again if there
             is a finding that errors were made I would request that any such finding be placed
             clearly in that context.

      (3)    In each of these cases the product of the vetting process was not a deletion or change
              made by me, but advice given in the letters, copies of which you have seen; such
                                                                                                  7
                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

               advice, as can be seen from those letters, often invited review or in some cases
               offered the option of deletion or expansion and in many cases was not followed, no
               doubt after consideration of it. From that point of view also I would ask you to
               conclude that there has been no contravention of the principles underlying the
               Guidance.

I do hope that you will feel that if there are statements in respect of which no complaint is to be
made they can, like the other 390 or so, be simply omitted from your report; and I of course
particularly further hope that in the light of this response you will feel able to say that my conduct
should not be the subject of complaint. But if, after due consideration you still feel as you express in
para 14 of the draft report, I would invite you to consider whether that in your view amounts to an
error of judgment or to a specific allegation of breach of the (subsequently introduced) Guidance or
otherwise, and if so in what respect, namely so that I and others can understand what if any
complaint is being made against me; in either event I would ask you to give me notice so that I can
make further submissions in respect of any such specific findings.

Yours sincerely



P C METCALF




                                                                               m m i.001 -0103. let1.2001 .pcm.doc
     PREPARING WITNESS STATEMENTS FOR
          USE IN CIVIL PROCEEDINGS

                           D E A L I N G S W IT H W I T N E S S E S

                  G U ID A N C E F O R M E M B E R S O F T H E B A R

Introduction.

1.   The purpose of this paper, which has the approval of the Professional Standards Committee of the Genera]
     Council of the Bar, is to offer guidance to members of the Bar instructed to prepare or settle a witness
     statement and as to dealings with witnesses. Guidance already exists for practice in some Courts, notably
     paragraph 3.7 of the Chancery Guide, Part X IV of the Guide to Commercial Court Practice and the Motes
     to RSC Order 38 Rule 2A in the White Book, to which attention is drawn. The intention is that this paper
     should be consistent with that guidance.

2.   This guidance is not applicable to criminal proceedings.        Attention is drawn to Annex H to the Code of
     Conduct.



Witness statements

3.   The cardinal principle that needs to be kept in mind when drafting or settling a witness statement is that.
      When the maker enters the witness box, he or she will swear or affirm that the evidence to be given will be
     the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. In most civil trials almost the first question in chief (and
      not infrequently the last) will be to ask the witness to confirm, to ihe best of his belief, the accuracy of the
      witness statement. It is therefore critical that the statement is one that accurately reflects, to the best of
      Counsel's ability, the witness’s evidence.

4.   Witnesses often misunderstand the function of those drafting and settling witness statements.             The
     function of Counsel is to understand the relevant evidence that a witness can give and to assist the witness
     to express that evidence in writing. It is important it is made clear to the witness (by reminder to the
     professional client or the witness, if seen by Counsel) that the statement once approved is the witness's
     statement. Ultimately it is the witness's responsibility to ensure that the evidence he gives is truthful. It is
     good practice to remind witnesses expressly of this from time to time, especially where Counsel is putting
     forward a particular piece of drafting for the witness' consideration (which is expressly permitted by the
     proviso to Rule 606 of the Code of Conduct).

5.   It is not Counsel's duty to vet the accuracy of a witness’s evidence1. W e all may doubl the veracity of our
      clients and witnesses occasionally. Counsel is, of course, entitled and it may often be appropriate to draw
      to the witness's attention other evidence which appears to conflict with what the witness is saying and is
      entitled to indicate that a Court may find a particular piece of evidence difficult to accept. BLit if the witness
      maintains the evidence, it should be recorded in the witness statement. If it is decided to call the witness,
      it will be for the Court to judge the correctness of the witness's evidence.

6.   It follows that the statement:

     (i)    Must accurately reflect the witness's evidence. Rule 606(d) of the Code of Conduct slates:

                  “ A practising barrister must not devise facts which will assist in advancing his lay client’s case
                  and must not draft any ... affidavit [or] witness statement ... containing:

                  (d)    in the case of an affidavit or witness statement any statement of fact other than the
                         evidence which in substance according to his instructions the barrister reasonably
                         believes the witness would give If the evidence contained in the affidavit or witness
                         statement were being given viva voce;
                     Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a barrister drafting a [ n j.., affidavit or witness
                     statement containing specific facts matters or contentions included by the barrister subject !o the lay
                     client's confirmation as to their accuracy.”

     (ii)      Must not contain any statement which Counsel knows the witness does not believe to be true. Nor should
               the witness be placed under any pressure to provide other than a truthful account of his evidence.

     (iii)     Must contain all the evidence which a witness could reasonably be expected to give in answer to those /
               questions which would be asked of him in examination in chief. T h e witness statem ent should not be
               d rafted or edited so that it no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would bp expected to give I I
               in response to viva voce examinatjon-ln-chief in accordance with the witness’s oath or affirmation.
               Although it is not the function of a witness statem ent to answer such questions 39 might be put in cross-
               examination, great care should be exercised when excluding any material which is thought to beunhelpful
               to the party calling the witness and no material should be excluded which might render the statement
               anything other than the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. W hile it is permissible to confine
               the scope of examination-in-chief to part only of the evidence which a witness could give, that is always
               subject to Counsel’s overriding duty to assist the Court in the administration of justice and not to deceive
               or knowingly or recklessly to mislead the Court (Rule 202 of the Code of Conduct). Consequently, it would
               be improper to exclude material whose omission would render untrue or misleadlhg anything .which
                remains in the statement. It would also be Improper to include fact A white excluding faqt B, if evidence-
               in-chief containing fact A but excluding fact B could not have been given consistently with the w itn e s s '^
               promise 10 teU the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. W hether it is wise arid'in the c lie n tl^
               interest in any given case to exclude unfavourable material which can properly be excluded is a matter of
               judgment.

     (iv)      Save for formal matters and uncontroversial facts, should be expressed as far as reasonably practical in
               the witness’s oWn words. This is especially important when the statem ent js dealing with the critical
               factual issues in the case - e.g. the accident or the disputed conversation- Thus the statement should
               reflect the witness's own description of events. It should not be drafted or edited so as to massage.or
               obscure the witness’ real evidence.

      (v)      Must be confined to admissible evidence that the witness can give, including permissible hearsay.
                Inadmissible hearsay, comment and argument should be excluded.

     (vi)      Should be succinct and exclude irrelevant material. Unnecessary elaboration Is to be avoided, it is not
                the function of witness statements to seive as a commentary on The documents in the trial bundles. Nor
                are they intended to eerve as another form of written argument.

      Sometimes it becomes apparent, after a witness statement has been served, that the witness’s/eoollectign h ^
      altered. This m ay happen when the witness sees bow another witness puts the facts in a witness s ta te m lW ■
      served by another party. W here Counsel learns that the witness has had a m aterial change o f irecollecfion this
      should be recorded in an additional witness statement to be served on the other parties. W here this is not
      possible because it occurs very shortly before the witness is to be called, the other parties should be informed .
      and the statement corrected in chief before the truth of its contents is established. It would be Improper for the
      other side to be kept in the dark as to a material change in the witness’s evidence especially when settlement
      negotiations are taking place.



Formalities

8.    A witness statement:

      (i)       Should be expressed in the first person;

       (ii)     Must state the full name of the witness and, unless there is a good reason for omitting it, the witness’s
                residential address or, where the statement is m ade in a professional, business or other occupational
                capacity, the address at which he works, the position held and the nam e of the firm or employer. Where
                there is said to be a reason for omitting the witness’s address, the reason should be given;

       (iii)    Must state the witness's occupation (if any);
*        (tv)    Must state if the witness is a party to the proceedings or has a'connection With any party - e.g. is an
                 employee Or a relative;

         (v)     Should be in chronological sequence divided into consecutively numbered paragraphs;

         (vi)    Must include a statement by the witness that the contents are true to the best of his/her knowledge and
                 belief;

         (vii)   Except for good reason (which must be stated) must be signed by the witness;

         (viii) Must be dated.



    Dealings with Witnesses
    Counsel seeing witnesses2.

    9.   The old rules preventing Counsel from seeing a witness, other than the client, have been progressively related
         over recent years. The current position in civil proceedings can be summarised as follows;

         (i)     There is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with any witness. Indeed, in
I                taking witness statements and generally, it is the responsibility of a barrister, especially when the witness
                  is nervous, vulnerable or apparently the victim of criminal or similar conduct, to ensure that those facing
                  unfamiliar court procedures are put as much at ease as possible.

          (ii)   Although there is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with witnesses, a
                 barrister should exercise his discretion and consider very carefully whether and to what extent duch
                 contact Is appropriate, bearing In mind in particular that it is not the barrister’s function (but that of his
                 professional client) to investigate and collect evidence.

          (Hi)   The guiding principle must be the obligation of Counsel to promote and protect his lay client’s best
                  interests so far as that is-consistent with the law and with Counsel's overriding duty to the Court (Code of
                  Conduct paragraphs 202, 203). Often it will be in the client’s best interests that Counsel should meet
                  witnesses whose evidence will be of critical importanoe in the case, so as to be able to foim a view as to
                  the credibility of their evidence and to advise the fay client properly;

          (iv)   A barrister should be alert to the risks that any discussion of the substance of a case With, a witness may
                  lead to suspicions of coaching, and thus tend to diminish the value of the witness’s evidence in the eyes
                  of the court or may place a barrister in a position of professional embarrassment, for example, if he
                  thereby becomes himself a witness in the case. These dangers are most likely to occur if such discussion
                  takes place;

                  (a)   before the barrister has been supplied with a proof of the witness’s evidence; or

                  (b)   in the absence of the barrister's professional client or his representative.

          (v)    Rule 607 of the Code of Conduct provides that a barrister must not rehearse practise or coach a witness
                  In relation to his evidence or the way in which he should give it. This does not prevent Counsel giving
                  general advice to a witness about giving evidence e.g. speak up, speak slowly, answer the question, keep
                  answers as short as possible, ask if a question is not understood, say if you cannot remember and do riot
                  guess or speculate. Ndr is there any objection to testing a witness's recollection robustfy to asoertain the
                  quality of his evidence or to discussing the issues that may arise In cross-examination. By Contrast, mock
                  cross-examinations or rehearsals of particular lines of questioning that Counsel proposes to follow are hot
                  permitted. W hat should be borne in mind is that there is a distinction, when interviewing a witness,
                  between questioning him closely in order to enable him to present his evidence fully and accurately Or,in
                  order to test the reliability of his evidence (which is permissible) and questioning him wfth a view to
                  encouraging the witness to alter, massage or obscure his real recollection (which is not). The distinction
                  was neatly drawn by Judge Francis Finch in In Re Eldridge? in 1880. where he said:

                        “W hile a discreet and prudent attorney may very properly ascertain from witnesses In advance of
            » tt          V            -VlMBj'Me-   »v <%'<*.( %¥■*•<   '   "   » J-   f 'J   v< ” ' ’• -   ■*   •




                   the trial what they in fact do know and the extent and limitations of their memory, as guide for his
                   own examinations, he has no right legal or moral, to go further. His duty is to extract the facts from
                   the witness, nol to pour them into him; to learn what the witness does know, not to teach him what
                   he ought to know.”

            At the risk of stating the obvious, this is a difficult area calling for the exercise of careful judgment

   (vi)    A barrister should also be alert to the fact that, even in the absence of any wish or Intention to do so,
           authority figures do subconsciously influence lay witnesses. Discussion of the subsiance of the case
           may unwittingly contaminate the witness's evidence.

   (vii)   There is particular danger where such discussions:

            (a)    take place in the presence of more than one witness of fact; or

            (b)    involve the disclosure to one witness of fact of the factual evidence of another witness.

           These practices have been strongly deprecated by the courts as tending inevitably to encourage the
           rehearsal or coaching of witnesses and to increase the risk of fabrication or contamination o f evidence:
           R. v. Arif (1993) May 26; Smhi7N ew Court Securities Ltdv. Scrimgeour Vickers (Asset Managem ent) U d
           [1994] 1 W LR 1271.

   (viii) That is not to suggest that it is always inappropriate to disclose one witness’s evidence to another. If
          conflicting witness statements have been obtained from different witnesses or served by the other side,
          it is almost inevitable that a witness’s attention must be drawn to discrepancies between statements.
          Discretion is. however, required, especially where the evidence of independent Witnesses is Involved.

   (ix)    Whilst there is no rule that any longer prevents a barrister from taking a witness statement in civil cases,
            there is a distinction between the settling of a witness statement and taking a witness statem ent. Save
            in exceptional circumstances, it is not appropriate fo ra barrister who has taken witness Statements, as'
            opposed to settling witness statements prepared by others, to act as Counsel in that case because it'
            risks undermining the independence of the barrister as an advocate. Exceptional circumstances would
            include:

            (a)    The witness is a minor one;

            (b)    Counsel has no choice but to take the proof and this is the only practical course in the interests
                   of justice - this would apply, for instance, where a witness appears unexpectedly at Court and
                   there is no one else competent to take the statement;

            (c)    Counsel is a junior mem ber of a team of Counsel and will not be examining the witness.

           The Cab Rank rule does not require a barrister to agree to undertake the task of taking witness
           statements.

   (x)     A barrister should be prepared to exchange common courtesies with the other side's witnesses.
            However, a barrister should only discuss the substance of the case or any evidence with the other side’s
            witnesses in rare and exceptional circumstances and then only with the prior knowledge of bis
            opponent.




If para 3.6(7) of the Chancery Guide suggests otherwise, the PSC respectfully disagrees.
 This is largely taken from Annex H as recently am ended by the Bar Council and approved by the Lord Chancellor's
Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct and the designated judges.
New York Court of Appeals; 3 7 N Y 161, 171
