                                                           IV^r   '




  From:     D B Webb                             cc    Mr Turney
            G2 Division                                Mr Miles
            Ext 3650                                   Mrs Moody^(F2)
                                                       Mr Hppiey (F8)
            23 January 1992                            Mr Wilson




  Ms Rae,


  ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY:  GEORGE HOWARTH MP (LAB)
  ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

  Further to Roger Miles' note of      22 January covering a draft
  speech and background notes for Mr    Lloyd1s use when replying to
  the debate, please find attached      additional briefing on the
^^requirement for football clubs        to move toward all-seated
  accommodation (as recommended in     Lord Justice Taylor's Final
  Report).

  The briefing has been provided in the light of a report in
  today's Evening Standard that the Opposition are proposing 'a
  complete revision of the Taylor Report in so far as the 3rd and
  4th Divisions are concerned'.




                                            D B WEBB
                                            Fire and Emergency
                                            Planning Department
  ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY:  GEORGE HOWARTH MP (LAB)
  ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

  ADDITIONAL BRIEFING ON TAYLOR'S ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENT


  "Whv should grounds go all-seated anyway ?"


  Lord     Justice   Taylor   commented    in    his     Final    Report    on    the
  Hillsborough Stadium disaster:


  11 There is no panacea which will achieve crowd safety and cure
  all    the problems of behaviour and crowd control.                    But     I am
  satisfied that seating does more to achieve these objectives than
  any other single measure."


  He also recognised that moving to all seated accommodation was
^^consistent    with   the    policies    of    both    FIFA     (the   world    wide
  governing body of football)        and UEFA          (its European governing
  body).    From the start of the 1993/94 football season spectators
  at 'high risk' matches, as defined by UEFA, will be admitted to
  seated acomodation only.        This will include all matches in the
  later stages of the European club competitions.                 This means that
  our biggest clubs, which would expect to qualify for the later
  stages of these competitions, would need to go all-seated anyway.



  "But I've stood on the terraces all my life and so did my father
  before me.    The tradition of the terraces is as important as the
  footballI"


  Lord Justice Taylor said in his Final Report:


  "I am not convinced that the cherished culture of the terraces
  is wholly lost when fans are seated. ... The communal spirit is
  still there and finds ready expression.                To such extent as the
  seating limits togetherness or prevents movement, that price is
  surely worth paying for the benefits in safety and control."


  This is a view with which the Government is in agreement.
  "But the capacity of grounds will be reduced if they are all­
  seated and not everybody who wishes to will be able to get in."


  Lord Justice Taylor pointed out in his Final Report that of all
  the teams in Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League in the
  1988/89   season only   at Liverpool   did   the average   attendance
  exceed the projected all-seated capacity for the ground.       Indeed
  at 21 of these 44 clubs the projected all-seated capacity was not
  exceeded at any time during the season.


  Consequently the problem of over-demand for tickets may not be
  as serious as some people envisage.



  "But it costs more for a spectator to sit than it does to stand
^ ^and many people will no longer be able to afford to go.


  Lord Justice Taylor commented in his Final Report that clubs may
  well wish to charge more for seats than for standing but that it
  should be possible for them to plan a price structure which suits
  the cheapest seats to the pockets of those presently paying to
  stand.



  "What about Arsenal and West Ham's proposed bond schemes which
  will cost the supporters between £500 and £1,500 and offer them
  very little in return ?"


  It is not for the Government to comment on the individual pricing
  policies adopted by individual clubs.



  "But the costs of converting a ground to an all-seater might
  drive some clubs out of business."


  The Chancellor's 1990 Budget released to the Football Trust the
  proceeds of a 2.5% reduction in pool betting duty to provide
  grant aid towards work carried out by Football League clubs in
  line with the Taylor recommendations.    The reduction is expected
  to yield about £20 million a year for each of the five years that
  the current agreement covers.                  Projects      for which     the Trust
  awards grants include cover, seating, new stands, ground sharing
  and relocation.


  Receipts from this source in 1990/91 amounted to £18,730,000 and
  the interest received was £906,000.                     Allocations to Football
  League clubs and Scottish Football League clubs during the year
  for major projects from this fund amounted to £10,589,000.


  In addition to the money made available by the Government The
  Football     Trust   expects       to    provide   clubs      with   a   further   £75
  million    over     ten   years,        in   addition   to    almost     £26   million
  provided     each     year     by        television     and     pools     companies.
  Consequently there is a considerable ammount of money available
™ t o football clubs to make the necessary ground improvements.



  "But any cost mav be too much for certain smaller clubs, such as
  Aldershot. who are already on the verge of bankruptcy."


  The cost incurred by some clubs, particularly those in the lower
  divisions,    may be lower than is expected because the current
  attendances at many of these grounds are well below the maximum
  capacity of the ground.             Lord Justice Taylor commented in his
  Final Report that a small scale redevelopment, possibly involving
  only part of the ground, might be sufficient in some cases.


  Grounds do not neccessarily have to provide seated accomodation
  on all    four sides but       (once the deadlines have been passed)
  spectators will only be admitted to areas which do.                             Leyton
  Orient, for example have an average attendance of 4,000 and their
  ground already has over 7,000 seats.                  Consequently they may not
  require to carry out large scale development.
  "I can understand the need for the big clubs to go all-seated but
  why should those in Divisions 3 and 4 have to as well ?"


  (The    Home      Affairs     Select       Committee      on   Football       Hooliganism
  recommended that the all-seater requirement be abandoned                               for
  clubs in Divisions 3 and 4.                 It also appears from recent press
  reports that the Labour Party support this idea and intend to
  make it an issue at the General Election).


  The    Government       is    not     at    present       convinced      that    any   re­
  examination        of   its   proposals        on   all    seated      accomodation     is
  necessary.         Lord     Justice      Taylor     recommended        the    progressive
  removal of standing accomodation at all sports grounds designated
  under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.                           We have received
  advice from the Association of Chief Police Officers that the
^^all-seated requirement does not yet need to extended to rugby
  league or rugby union grounds.                    Our major cricket grounds are
  already predominantly all seated.


  We    are   not    convinced        of   the   need    to      relax    the    all-seater
  requirement for clubs in Divisions 3 and 4.                       Indeed, some clubs
  in Divison 3, such as Birmingham City, regularly attract larger,
  more vociferous crowds than some clubs in Division 1 and many in
  Division 2.
