MEMORANDUM

 From:      Mike Ward                        Your ref:
            Operational Policing Policy Unit File ref:     PW/98 110/145/2
            Room 528
            Queen Anne's Gate
 Tel:       0171 273 3612

 Date:      12 May 1998

 To:       Andrew Englefield                   CC:
           Parly Section
           Room 864
           QAG


                WHITSUN ADJOURNMENT DEBATE

Further to your note of 7 May, please find attached a briefing note on the
Hillsborough Scrutiny for the debate on 20 May.

Please let me know if you require anything further.




Mike Ward
BRIEFING FOR WHITSUN ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - 20.5.98

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER: INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY OF
NEW EVIDENCE

Line to take

On 18 February 1998, the Home Secretary published the report of Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny of evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. The Home
Secretary announced in the House that he accepted Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s
recommendation that there was insufficient evidence to warrant either a further public
inquiry into the disaster or the re-opening of the inquests into the deaths of those who
died. The matter was discussed fully in an adjournment debate on 8 May.

Background note

In the course of his scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith met the families and their
representatives in Liverpool where he listened to representations. He also met with
other interested parties who wished to make representations, and considered a large
amount of written evidence.

In his response to the Home Affairs Committee recommendations on complaints and
discipline, the Home Secretary announced his intention to reduce the standard of
proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double
jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts.
He also endorsed the Committee’s recommendation that forces should show greater
commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion
of disciplinary proceedings. This would prevent a repeat of the frustration of the
victims’ families that those criticised by the inquiries into the disaster have not faced
disciplinary action.

The Home Secretary undertook to place, in the library of the House, as much of the
documentary evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible. This has
now been done. All original and amended statements made by police officers on duty
at Hillsborough are among the evidence which has been placed in the House libraries.

The Home Secretary met with a delegation of family representatives in Southport on 7
March, and has indicated his willingness to meet the families again in Merseyside.

Contact point for additional briefing: Matthew Pyne (tel 273 2433)
                      CK \ \ v o i   crv^                 'K'tK* v        0    V^.C*-t<*~
                                                                                       t~vP
From: Andrew Englefield                                              cc     Private Secretaries
      Parliamentary Section                                                 Directors
      Rm. 864                                                               Mr Granatt c d
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                                     Mr Warner
      Tel: 273 3705 (fax 3429)                                              Mr Owen


       7 May 1998



All Heads of Units and IND Directorates

REQUEST FOR BRIEFING:
DEBATE ON THE MOTION FOR THE WHITSUN ADJOURNMENT ON
WEDNESDAY 20 MAY 1998

The House of Commons debate on the Motion for the Whitsun Adjournment will take place
on Wednesday 20 May and will run from approximately 9.30am to 12.30pm.

This debate is an occasion for backbenchers to raise subjects of current interest. The Leader
of the House (The Rt. Hon. Ann Taylor, MP) will reply to the debate and, as on previous
occasions, we have now been asked to provide briefing for her use in winding-up.

Briefing must be limited only to those issues which may be raised during the debate;
issues which, for example, are currently high profile, controversial, or of concern to a
particular MP.

The President’s office have requested that contributions be kept as short as possible - a
maximum of one side of A4 per subject, which should include a background note and a line
to take. Each piece of briefing should also include the name and telephone number of an
official who will be standing by throughout the debate, in case any additional briefing is
required.

As our briefing package needs to be with the President’s office by close of play on Monday
18 May, I would be grateful if all contributions (including nil returns) could reach me by
3.00pm on Wednesday 13 May. I will then arrange for them to be cleared by Ministers and
forwarded to the President.

Briefing should ordinarily be sent ‘Immediate by Hand’ but fax and email may be used if
necessary. Please alert me by phone if you intend to use fax or email.




ANDREW ENGLEFIELD
Legislation Clerk
