                                                HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273 3 7 4 3
                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:    POL/89 850/4/8
                  LS/G178/LTB/AB
Your reference:




    L T Barnfield Esq LLB
    Solicitor to the West
     Midlands Police Authority
    Civic House
    Great Charles Street
    Birmingham
    B3 3HN                                      13 June 1989




    HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

    Thank you for your letter of 8 June about the power to meet the
    costs of the investigations by West Midlands police into the
    Hillsborough disaster.
    We agree that the assistance being given by your force to South
    Yorkshire police is probably not mutual aid under Section 14 of the
    Police Act 1964 and that this assistance is not covered by the
    Police Act.   However, in the absence of any statutory provision,
    liability for the costs of the police investigations seems to us to
    rest with the body who instigated those investigations.

    On this basis we have suggested that the South Yorkshire Police
    Authority should reimburse the additional costs incurred by your
    authority in investigating the Hillsborough tragedy.       In other
    types of investigations by one force on behalf of another, costs
    are met by the force which requested assistance initially.

     I accept that one difficulty facing us at present is the reluctance
     of the South Yorkshire Police Authority to accept liability.      I
     hope, however, that we can find a solution to this when Lord
     Ferrers meets a delegation from the South Yorkshire Police
E.R.

   Authority on 20 June.   We will write to you again as soon as
   possible after that.

  We are very anxious for the question of costs to be settled as soon
  as possible.   I agree with you that recourse to the courts should
  be avoided : it would clearly be better to sort the matter out in
  the further discussions to which I have referred.




                                           M J ADDISON
                                         cc.   Mr Storr
                                               Mr Yates
                                               Mr Chilcot
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                               Mr Nagler
                                               Mr Malone Lee
                                               Miss Edwards
                                               Mr Sandiford
                                               Mr Nagler
                                               Mr Whalley
                                               Mr Archer
                                               Ms Ransford
                                               Mr Durbin




Hr Addison


Tm.T^ROPOPGH;   COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


In your note of 7th June 1989, you asked from me as full a
recollection as I was able to make of the events which led up to
the establishment of the West Midlands Police inquiry into the
Hillsborough tragedy.

My first discussion about the tragedy with Mr Peter Wright, Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, was at around 5pm on Saturday 15th
April 1989. This followed a telephone call to my home by Philip
Mawer, Principal Private Secretary to the Home Secretary, who
sought my assistance in arranging for the Home Secretary to speak
with the Chief Constable as he had been unable to get through to
Sheffield. Very shortly afterwards I made contact by telephone
(via a circuitous route) with Mr Wright who very briefly outlined
to me the circumstances as he knew them then but we did not have
any other discussion apart from arranging for him to receive the
Home Secretary's call.

During the course of Saturday evening I had telephone
conversations about the provision of a police report with Russell
Yates, Private Secretary to the PUS and Russ Watts, Assistant
Secretary in G2.

On the morning of Sunday, 16th April 1989, again at home, I spoke
with Mr Wright, Sir Clive Whitmore and Mr Chilcot.

My discussion with Mr Wright centred on the up-date on the
situation and on action which might be taken by the Chief
Constable. Mr Wright believed that because (a) of the serious
criticisms which were being made of police competence and (b) he
was anxious that there should be seen to be an independent and
objective professional scrutiny of the policing arrangements and
actions, it was desirable for inquiries to be undertaken by
another force. I wholly endorsed the Chief Constable’s
assessment. We discussed which force would best be equipped for
this task and it was mutually agreed that West Midlands Police
met this requirement. As Mr Wright had other preoccupations I
undertook to ascertain whether Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable
of West Midlands, was willing to take on the task. As the Home
Secretary was to visit Sheffield on that day (Sunday) Mr Wright
said that he would mention the independent police investigation
to him.
Shortly after this conversation with Mr Wright I spoke with Mr
Chilcot and Sir Clive Whitmore. A decision had already been
made, in principle, for a judicial inquiry to be held and it was
necessary to identify the police assessor. I was authorised to
ascertain whether Mr Dear would take on this responsibility if
this was the Home Secretary's wish.
I eventually made contact with Mr Dear at around 1pm. I asked
him whether he was willing either (a) to act as assessor to the
proposed Inquiry if requested by the Home Secretary or (b) to
carry out the investigation work which the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire had indicated to me, should Mr Wright request
him to do so. Mr Dear said that he was prepared to accept either
commitment.
Mr Wright drafted a statement about the proposed police
professional investigation and discussed this with the Home
Secretary during his visit (with the Prime Minister) to Sheffield
on Sunday 16th April. I understand the Home Secretary suggested
some minor drafting amendments.
Subsequently that day the following statement was issued by South
Yorkshire Polices
    "The planning and operational decisions of South Yorkshire
    Police officers will form a major aspect of the inquiry to
    be held into the events which led to the tragedy at the
    Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground. The Chief Constable,
    Mr Peter Wright, judges it essential that the gathering and
    assessment of evidence in relation to these matters should
    be carried out by officers from another force. He has
    therefore asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of the
    West Midlands Police, to nominate a senior officers to lead
    the inquiry.11.
At a press conference at Police Headquarters, Sheffield on the
Sunday evening Mr Stuart Anderson, Assistant Chief Constable,
announced the invitation but declined to answer questions about
it.
The wording of the announcement clearly ruled out Mr Dear as a
potential assessor. Consequently at the meeting with the Home
Secretary at 9.45am on Monday, 17th April, it was decided that Mr
Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of Lancashire, should be invited
to act in this capacity. I was asked to secure his agreement in
time for the Home Secretary’s statement in the House of Commons
in the afternoon, which I did having traced the Chief Constable
to Vienna.
Briefing material was being assembled by various divisions to
assist the Home Secretary respond to questions on his Commons
statement. I discussed the proposed comments on the professional
police investigation arranged by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, with Hr Wright and Mr Dear. The Chief Constable of
West Midlands was anxious that any statement made by the Home
Secretary should clearly state his responsibilities.
Subsequently Mr Chilcot was also consulted and the following was
included in the Home Secretary's brief, with the endorsement of
both Mr Wright and Mr Dear.

     "EMBARGOED UNTIL H.S. ANNOUNCEMENT

    Mr Peter Wright, Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
    Police, has requested that inquiries into the planning and
    operational decisions of South Yorkshire Police be
    undertaken by another force and has asked that the results
    of their work should be given to the Inquiry. Accordingly
    West Midlands Police will conduct these enquiries and will
    report them to Lord Justice Taylor.”.

It is clear from the South Yorkshire Police announcement and the
comments included in the Home Secretary's brief, that the
invitations to West Midlands Police came directly from the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire.
In the days immediately after the tragedy Mr Wright did not
indicate in any way during several conversations that he wished
to avoid his responsibility for requesting the West Midlands
Police involvement. On 24th April the Chief Constable spoke with
me about the costs; his message is recorded in my note to Mr
Chilcot of that date (copy attached). Again there is no
indication that South Yorkshire Police repudiated responsibility
for the cost of the inquiries; the concern was about the level.
Being mindful of the situation which developed in the setting up
of the Guildford and Woolwich Bomb Inquiry I was most careful to
ensure that I did not make any specific request of either Chief
Constable which could be construed as a formal request or demand
by or on behalf of the Home Office. My role was that of a
facilitator and adviser.




                             HMCIC        ^
                         12th June 1989
