                                           Reference.   iljw

             1
             )kw IWAwli ftW Lv^Viiv
                     A '    lA tW 'V fr,




CODE (8 77
    West Midlands Police



 INTERIM
REPORT (2)
Hillsborough Stadium
       Disaster

  Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Ground

Saturday 15 April 1989
                        TABLE OF CONTENTS



                                                PAGE(S)

MAJOR INCIDENT ROOM SUMMARY                     1 - 2

STATISTICS                                              2

SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS                                     3

EMERGENCY SERVICES AND PROCEDURES                       5

THE DECEASED                                            6

HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE                             7

VIDEO AND PHOTOGRAPHIC SECTION                          8

ANACAPA PRESENTATIONS                                   9

TRAFFIC DELAYS                                  10-11

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OPERATION MATCH ORDERS       12
FOR 1989 AND 1988. BRIEF REPORT

GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE                          12

FOOTBALL TRUST                                       13

FOOTBALL GROUND IMPROVEMENT TRUST                   13

TICKET ALLOCATION                                    13

COMMUNICATIONS                                       13

INTELLIGENCE                                         14

MAIN FEATURES                                   15 - 20
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                             MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                      Watery Street
 H I L L SB O R O U G H I N Q U I R Y T E A M                  Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                               Telephone: 074 2 726105
                                                               Fax: 0742 726247
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                         KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway                                       Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                    IM'- ■'
                                                               Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025                            Telephone: 051 -4 49 3871
Fax: 021-233 3256                                              Fax: 051-449 2976
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                  Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                               Our Ref :    JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 021-359 3332
Fax: 021-359 6735
                                                               Date:         12 October 1989




            R M Whalley Esq
            Secretary to the Inquiry
            Room 662
            Home Office
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            London
            SW1H 9AT




            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT II

            I have pleasure in forwarding for your information and that of Sir Peter,
            a revised version of the interim report we prepared in June.

            You will see, apart from the provision of more detail and improved
            identifications of the deceased, nothing new has emerged.

            I have sent copies of this report to the Director of Public Prosecutions,
            the Police Complaints Authority and the Coroner at Sheffield on a strictly
            private and confidential basis, given that it cannot yet be considered
            the definitive statement.

            Please pass on my regards to Sir Peter and best wishes to you both as
            you proceed with your difficult and sensitive task.




  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                 Llo^d House^Birmingham
                          APPENDICES




LIST OF QUESTIONNAIRES.

CATEGORY TEMPLATE

STATISTICAL SURVEY NON TICKET HOLDERS

INJURY ANALYSIS

POSITIONS OF INJURED IN PENS 3 AND 4

CHART SHOWING LOCATION OF DECEASED AND METHOD OF IDENTIFICATION

CHART ILLUSTRATING LOCATION OF DECEASED IDENTIFIED BY VIDEO AND
PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIAL WITH OVERLAYS SHOWING IDENTIFICATIONS BY
PLAN/STATEMENTS.

SCHEDULE OF DECEASED ENTERING VIA GATE ’C ’ WITH CHART ILLUSTRATING
LOCATION IN PENS 3 & 4 WHERE THIS IS KNOWN

COPY OF H.S.E. REPORT BY DR NICHOLSON

MAP OF TRAFFIC ROUTES - LIVERPOOL/SHEFFIELD
MAP OF TRAFFIC ROUTES - LIVERPOOL/SHEFFIELD, SHOWING LOCATIONS OF
WHERE DELAYS LIKELY

1989 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MATCH ORDER

1988 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE MATCH ORDER

POLICE REFRESHMENT TIME CHART AND SCHEDULE

REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH GROUND SAFETY CERTIFICATE

DOCUMENT RELATING TO FOOTBALL TRUST

REPORT ON FOOTBALL GROUND IMPROVEMENT TRUST

REPORT ON TICKET ALLOCATION

METROPOLITAN POLICE REPORT(S) ON MERSEYSIDE CLUBS

STATEMENTS OF METROPOLITAN POLICE RELATING TO APPENDIX R.

REPORT BY CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT MELLOR WEST MIDLANDS POLICE ON
EVERTON, NORWICH SEMI FINAL

RESONSE BY CHIEF CONSTABLE NORFOLK RE 1989 MATCH NORWICH V LIVERPOOL

INFORMANTS INFORMATION REPORT.

ANACAPA CHARTS - NUMBERS 1 - 7
                           1.   MAJOR INCIDENT ROOM SUMMARY


Documents

The Holmes Computer System processes a number of document types. Those, which
are of significance to this Investigation are Statements, Questionnaires, Other
Documents and Messages. At the time of registration the system numbers each
new document consecutively based on type. All counts shown in this section are
true as at 0900 hrs, Monday 11 September 1989 .

    Counts    Statements             4187
              Questionnaires         7584
              Other Docs             3002
              Messages               1819

Questionnaires have been used extensively, to promote structure and quality in
terms of information content. Various types of questionnaire were prepared to
satisfy different aspects of the Investigation, e.g. Supporters, Stewards,
Turnstile Operators. A full schedule by type may be found at Appendix A.

Actions

The information contained within a document is read and tasks which require
some further enquiry are identified. The task or work to be done is recorded
in some detail on an ACTION which is raised and allocated to an Enquiry
Officer. When the task is completed the ACTION is suitably endorsed and
returned together with any generated documentation to the Incident Room.

    Counts    Actions                6999
              Still Live              320

Nominal Records

The details of every person coming to notice are recorded on the system.   A
separate index is created for Personal and Descriptive Details, Address,
Telephone Number and Vehicle Details, (where these are available).

    Counts     Nominals              11015
              Streets                 6525
              Houses                  8613
              Tel Nos                 9298

Categories

Information which does not readily fit into one of the four main indices, may,
nevertheless, be important and require recording. The Category Index offers a
facility whereby similar or associated information may be grouped for later
retrieval. The nature of the Index provides a structured or hierarchical
presentation.

To assist the mammoth task of recording and indexing the vast amount of
information within the Hillsborough Inquiry, a Category Template was brought in
to use to flag important aspects of the Inquiry. Examples are PENS 3 & 4,
BARRIER BREAKING, SURGES INSIDE & OUTSIDE THE GROUND. A copy of the template
may be found at Appendix B . Other titles have since been added, such as
Traffic Problems, Opinions etc. There are a total of 697 categories on the
system.
Map 1, Appendix E .
Records the single position as given. In pen 3 the injured persons are
clustered towards the front with a concentration around D7-F5-G8. In pen 4 the
clustering is towards the front, with concentrations around K5-M5-L8 and J1-M3.

Map 2, Appendix E .
Records the first position. In pen 3 the clustering is in columns E & F with
some heavy concentrations towards the rear, particularly at position HI. A
similar pattern emerges in pen 4, with clustering in columns K, L & M, towards
the middle to rear, with a heavy concentration at Jl.

Map 3. Appendix E .
Records the second position. The pattern is markedly different to that shown
on MAP2. The clustering is towards the front in both pens, with concentrations
in columns D,E,F and G and K,L,M & R and rows 5,6,7 & 8 in pen 3 and 4-8 in
pen 4.

Map 4, Appendix E .
The heavy concentrations shown at positions HI & Jl were plotted as individual
second positions. In pen 3 the movement is to the front with concentration in
columns F & G and rows 6-8. In pen 4 there is more of a spread with a some
clustering in columns J-M, rows 4-8.

Stage 3 sought to identify those injured persons who may have entered the
ground via gate ’C ’ at the opening at 1452 hrs. This correlation assumed
importance with the identification of 21 of the deceased persons entering the
ground through gate ’C* at this time.

It is brought to notice that not every person was able to identify gate ’C* in
their respective statement or questionnaire. In some cases the person was
unaware of passing through a gate being an involuntary agent swept along by the
pressure and movement of the crowd.

A benchmark was established by initially researching those persons who did
positively identify gate ’C ’ as their point of entry. A picture then emerges
which assists in the classification of those persons who were unable to be
specific about their actual point of entry.

In preparation of the statistics three samples of approximately 150 cases were
taken, based on the original test sample. The majority of these persons
responded to the Police ’phone in’ and came forward to volunteer information.
The percentages realised were 37,38 & 39 respectively. The consistency may
invite some level of credibility.

                             3.   SUBSEQUENT ANALYSIS

               INJURED PERSONS ENTERING VIA GATE ’C ’ AFTER 1452 HRS

Since the publication of the original interim report in June 1989, some further
research has been undertaken

As at 11 September 1989, there are 741 persons believed to have received
injuries. Of these some 56 cannot be researched further, for example, in
twelve cases there is a refusal to give information, 16 cannot be traced.
Sequence of Events

This index deals with events associated with time and date parameters. It is a
useful mechanism for recording related events in a chronological order. At
present 23 such sequences have been created, dealing with events such as
Leppings Lane, Gate ’C ’, Crowd Surges, Visual Evidence and Traffic Problems.

Notepad

The system provides   a Notepad Facility by which documents may be tagged for
later retrieval via   Free Text. It has been used in this Inquiry to highlight
material Statements   and other documentation. Examples are South Yorkshire
Police Officer - ON   DUTY, Liverpool Supporter in PEN 3.

Deceased and Injured Persons

95 persons have been identified as deceased. 40 persons have been identified
as injured OUTSIDE THE GROUND.   741 persons have been identified as injured
INSIDE THE GROUND. Of these 2 remain in hospital and are seriously ill.

Liaison with South Yorkshire Police reveals that a total of 23 officers were
injured at the Hillsborough Stadium, though none of the injuries suffered was
of a serious nature.   In addition 53 officers have reported unfit for duty
since that date due to stress/nervous debility. At the time of this report
only one of those officers remains certified sick, suffering from nervous
depression. It should be realised some Police officers have reported sick at
different stages one as recent as 2nd October 1989.
                                  2. STATISTICS

Research has been undertaken into some aspects of the Inquiry. Simple
statistical analysis and graphic presentation have been utilised to complement
the information contained in statements and other documentation. Samples of
questionnaires and/or statements were taken on 8th June 1989.

Ticket Survey

The number of fans arriving at the ground without tickets (based on a sample of
1699 questionnaires) has been identified. The full results of that survey may
be found at Appendix C . The projected figures suggest that some 2,000 fans
arrived at the ground without tickets and may be a contributory factor in the
over-crowding situation at Leppings Lane. This section should be read in
conjunction with the same topic heading referred to on page 19 of this report.

Injured Persons

This research was carried out in 3 stages.

Stage 1 sought to establish the type and frequency of injuries. The findings
are detailed at Appendix D . The predominant injuries were associated with
Chest/Ribs/Legs being fractures and/or bruising. Other relative symptoms
include shock and breathing difficulties.

Stage 2 sought to plot the position of the injured in pens 3 & 4. The grid
positions were retrieved from the statement or questionnaire registered to the
injured person. That information was then plotted, either as a Single Position
(Green), or as the First Position (Blue) and Second Position (Red). MAPS 1, 2
& 3, record this information respectively.
On 11 July 1989 and 13 September 1989 two further samples were taken. It
was realised that the nature of these recent additions differed, in as
much as a number did not volunteer to give information directly to the
Police, but had been mentioned by other parties who had volunteered. A
number of these could not be traced on the details given or would not
co-operate. In consequence, although there is some certainty as to
injury, it is difficult if not impossible to evaluate entry via gate *C’.

The following schedule sets out the full results of samples taken:


       Date         Sample     Population   Gate C    2     Gate

       June 89        SI          137        52       38       6
       June 89        S2          147        54       37      10
       June 89        S3          185        73       39       0
       11.07.89       S4          112        32       29       9
       13.09.89       S5           22         8       36       0

       TOTAL        Gate C        603       219       36

                    Gate C +      603       244       40
                    Gate c?


In conclusion a reasonable inference is that of those persons entering
gate C after 1452 hours, at least one third received injuries inside the
ground.
                       4.   EMERGENCY SERVICES & PROCEDURES



One aspect which may well have significant implications for Major Public Events
in the future is that of Major Contingency Planning; Emergency Procedures;
Emergency Equipment and Inter-Service/Agency Co-operation and coordination
relevant documentation has been obtained, namely:


         South Yorkshire Police    -   Extended Incident Log.

         South Yorkshire Police    -   Operational Order.

         South Yorkshire Police    -   Major Incident Plan.

         South Yorkshire Ambulance Service      -   Major Incident Plan.

         South Yorkshire Fire Service -     Disaster Contingency Plan.

         Safety at Hillsborough.

         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club      -   Instructions to Match Staff.

         St Johns Ambulance Service     -   Emergency Equipment.

         Sheffield Scheme for Major Peacetime Disasters and
         Emergency Evacuation Procedures.


A review of this and other relevant documentation is being undertaken,
hopefully to identify any lessons to be learned and those recommendations which
must follow. ANACAPA Charts - Chart 5 Extended Incident Log, Chart 6 Operation
Support and Chart 7 Major Incident Plan have already been prepared.
Appendix W .
                                5.   THE DECEASED


A total of 95 files in relation to deceased are in the course of preparation
for the Coroner. In almost all cases these include statements of friends/
associates of the deceased who last saw them alive, statements from Police
Officers for continuity, statements from doctors certifying death and the
Pathologist’s report.

Blood alcohol tests were carried out on 94 of the 95 deceased. 72 (76Z) had
traces of alcohol in the blood, 21 of whom were above the legal limit to
drive. It was not practical to take the other blood sample because this
patient was receiving treatment prior to death in hospital.

A total of 88 of the deceased have now been identified within the ground either
by video or photographic evidence or by statements of identification.

Appendix F shows the total number and method of the identifications (note,
the figure 3 or 4 in a black circle indicates the Pen in which the visual
identification was made. The same numbers on an orange square indicates the
Pen in which a deceased is located by the statement of a witness).

Appendix G illustrates the approximate locations of the deceased inpens 3 or
4, where this can be established by the three methods. It will be seen that
all identifications within the ground are shown on the illustrations and
therefore the same deceased may be shown in more than one location.

Analysis of the enquiries to date suggest twenty one of the deceasedappear to
have entered through gate C after the second opening at 1452 hours. The
approximate location of 18 of these deceased identified in pens 3 and 4 is
shown in Appendix H

Regular searches on the HOLMES computer cross-referring descriptions of
deceased and clothing with statements will enhance these identifications as the
data base develops.

Relatives and/or friends of the deceased and a number of Police Officers have
also been shown video footage and photographs which has increased the number of
deceased located within the stadium. This procedure will continue.
                                         (7)


                     6.   1TRAT.TH AND SAFETY EXKCPTTVE fH.S.E)



Close liaison has been made throughout the enquiry with Dr Nicholson and his
teams from H.S.E. Initially this comprised of protecting exhibits and the
integrity of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club West Terraces to enable them
to carry out their examinations.

Subsequent contact has been made in relation to co-viewing video and
photographic evidence in our possession and providing ’clip’s and ’blow ups’
from that, mainly to do with gate openings, crowd flows/capacity and surges.

Other directed enquiries considered outside their sphere of operations have
also been carried out ie with independant firms of Safety Engineers in regard
to their interpretation of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.

Dr Nicholson submitted a report of his findings to Lord Justice Taylor’s
Inquiry. That report is shown at Appendix I . Dr Nicholson has stated his
willingness to continue to assist our investigation.
                         7.   VIDEO/PHOTOGRAPHIC SECTION

VIDEO

In terms of video footage we are in possession of 71 hours of footage relating
to the 1989 game taken from the BBC, South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club, and other sources. A further 33 hours of material has
been obtained in relation to games in 1981, 1987 and 1988.

All of the video material has been viewed, scheduled for content, indexed and
copied.

PHOTOGRAPHS

The section presently has possession of 2,411 photographic prints or slides
drawn from a total of fifty eight sources. A total of 663 of these originate
from South Yorkshire Police, with the remainder coming predominantly from local
and national newspapers.

Each photograph has been individually examined, numbered and scheduled for
content, and indexed.

The manual schedules created for both video and photographs have now been
recorded on an ’Apple’ computer.

AUDIO

The South Yorkshire Police Force command and control tape covers a 24 hour
period and has 25 separate sound channels which have been copied in their
entirety onto 900 individual 40 minute cassette tapes.

Of these a total of 22 hours and 40 minutes covering periods of particular
relevance have been transcribed.

95 Individual folders containing visual and photographic evidence are being
prepared in relation to each deceased for use at the Coroners Inquest.

Having had confirmation of our responsibility for the Criminal and Disciplinary
aspects of the investigation additional work is required in relation to the
copying of video and photographic material, for use by the Director of Public
Prosecutions, Counsel acting on his behalf and by the Police Complaints
Authority. Further work concerning analysis of this material will also be
required, although at this stage it is difficult to project the extent of this.
                            8.   ANACAPA PRESENTATION



A number of Anacapa analysis charts have been prepared and are contained in
Appendix W .

Chart 1

Video Analysis Chart.

Chart 2

Analysis chart of surges and opening of gates A, B and C.

Chart 3

Broken barrier in Pen.

Chart 4

Communications.

Chart 5

Extended Incident Log.

Chart 6

Operation Support.

Chart 7

Major Incident Plan.


In addition, a chart is being prepared for each of the 95 deceased, showing
progress to the ground and continuity for coronal purposes.
                               9 ..     TBAFFTC DKT.AYS



There is some suggestion that Liverpool fans were delayed in traffic.
Before itemising the delays, it is important to clarify that the motorway road
system around Manchester, which now provides a complete bypass to the south of
the city was not complete on 15 April. At that time the M63 finished at
Portwood Roundabout, to the east of Stockport at the junction with the A560.
The final part of the M63 providing the last link to the M67 at Denton was not
opened until 28 April.

Routes

The recommended route published in the Liverpool Programme advised supporters
to follow the M62 east out of Liverpool, north of Manchester, across the
Pennines to Jet 42 of the Ml. It was then suggested that they travel south on
the Ml, leaving at Jet 35 for Sheffield. Supporters who followed that route
have not reported any great delays.

It is clear that many Liverpool supporters chose to follow the M62 or M56 east
out of Liverpool, then joining the M63 to the west or south of Manchester.
This motorway terminated to the east of Stockport and supporters were then
required to follow the A560 to Mottram in Longendale, where they could join the
A57 over Snake Pass to Sheffield. Supporters who chose this route were
subjected to long delays.

There is some conflict of evidence between Greater Manchester Police and that
contained within the statements and questionnaires completed by supporters and
coach drivers, many of whom talk of lengthy delays. However, some of the
accuracy of this evidence has to be viewed in the context that many people are
confused as to their correct location when they were delayed and also, they
were frustrated by the hold-ups and may have understandably felt the period of
delay to be longer than it actually was.

Factors

M62. Vest of Junction 15 Eastbound Carriageway

At 1106 a damage only road traffic accident occurred between a motor cycle and
a saloon car. The motorway which at this point has four lanes, was reduced by
two lanes for only about 15 minutes. No reports of serious delays.

M62 Junction 15 Eastbonnri Carriageway

Between 0830 and 1345 hours, the      three lane motorway at this point was reduced
by one lane, due to a third lane      closure for essential central barrier
renovation. During the closure,       traffic was flowing slowly through the road
works and was only delayed for a      maximum of 10 minutes.

M62 Between Junctions 21 & 22 Both Carriageways

Contraflow, two lanes in each direction.       Long term work relating to widening
scheme. No serious delays reported.
M63 Between Junctions 2 & 3 Eastbound Carriageway

The three lane motorway at this point was reduced by one lane to direct traffic
into a suitable configuration for approaching contraflow.
Delays reported no time specified.

M63 Between Junctions 3 & 6 Both Carriageways

Contraflow, two lanes in each direction. Long term work relating to widening
scheme. Long delays reported by supporters and coach drivers.

H63 End of Motorway Portwood Roundabout

At that time the motorway terminated at a roundabout, at the junction with the
A560. Heavy congestion reported due to volume of traffic. This delay varies
between a % hour and 1 hour 10 minutes between 1215 and 1325 hours.

M67 End of Motorway Mottram in Longendale

This is a traffic bottleneck caused purely by the combination of heavy volume
of traffic and the geography of the road layout. At this location the motorway
terminates into a single lane carriageway, close to a cross roads controlled by
traffic lights in a small village centre. The A560, which carried traffic from
the M63, joins the M67 at a roundabout at the terminus of the motorway, just
prior to this point and this further contributes to the bottleneck.
Unspecified delays reported.

A57 Approaching Sheffield

There is one report of an unspecified delay at this location.


Conclusion

While there were no significant delays to supporters using the recommended
route M62 and Ml coming off at junction 35 for Sheffield, there was clearly
delays for those using the alternative routes via M56 and M63 east out of
Liverpool onto either the A57 Snake Pass or the A560 and Mottram in
Longendale. The major delays being on the M63 between junctions 3 and 6 and at
its end at Portwood roundabout and on the M67 end at Mottram in Longendale
where, depending on time, the delays varied anything between % and 1% hours.

No long delays were experienced in Sheffield and parking arrangements for all
types of vehicle appear to have been adequate.

Maps illustrating the various routes are shown at Appendix J .
             10.   A COMPARISOH OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                   OPERATIONAL MATCH ORDERS FOR 1988-1989


A rather unusual situation occurred in respect of this incident in that
the same teams had met in a semi-final setting at Hillsborough in April of
1988.

The two operational orders are included, 1989 Appendix K and 1988
Appendix L .

A comparison of the two reports highlights a reduction in man power of
approximately 19Z on 1988 manpower levels. The specific reductions are
confined to ranks below Superintendent and are as follows:-

         Rank                        1988     1989
         Chief Inspector               8        6
         Inspector                    47       37
         Sergeant                    109       84
         Constable                   731      596

There is no evidence to suggest this reduction in itself was a primary
factor in the alleged failure by South Yorkshire Police to properly police
this semi final football match.

During a tour of duty covering the period of events such as a football
semi final it is normal practice because of the length of time on duty to
ensure all Police officers are given a refreshment period.

A number of Police forces feed the Police officers before they actually
commence their outside duty. South Yorkshire policy was to provide
staggered refreshments throughout the afternoon to their officers with
pre-determined times and places to eat. Hence it is important to realise
(when reading the operational orders) that Police officers may not always
be at the appointed posting because of this particular system.

To assist the reader at Appendix M a small illustration has been completed
which provides a useful pen picture of the names of Police officers
policing the perimeter track together with their refreshment times as
identified. In addition a schedule has been included at Appendix M
giving the identified refreshment times of certain serials and the
location of where they were to eat.

                      11.   GEHEBAT. SAFETY CERTIFICATE

A brief assessment of the Hillsborough Stadium General Safety Certificate
has been prepared. Appendix N .

The documentation which supports the certificate and to which reference is
made on the assessment exceeds 6000 documents, 1745 of which have been
catalogued on a personal computer (PC). The document reference numbers
shown are related to that PC and do not form the basis of the report for
the Director of Public Prosecutions or the P.C.A.
                          12.     THE FOOTBAT.T. TBTTRT

A further assessment outlining the formation and the involvement of the
Football Trust at Hillsborough Football Stadium, has been prepared and is
included as at Appendix 0 .

Documentary references made in the assessment again relate to the personal
computer. In this case the eventual file of evidence will contain agreed
document numbers in conjunction with other documentary evidence. In this
instance and that relating to the General Safety Certificate the
documentation will only be included if necessary to substantiate offences
disclosed.

                13*   THE FOOTBAT.T. GROUND IMPROVEMENT TRUST

The ’Football Ground Improvement Trust’ is a body set up some 10 years ago
having responsibility for grant-aiding safety measures at League Grounds,
and also for the benefit of supporters.

This is expounded upon in relation to the purposes of the Trust, and in
particular its involvement with Hillsborough Football Stadium, in a brief
report, Appendix P . The report is supported by three documents which
again will be provided in evidential format if later required.

                           14.    TICKET ALLOCATION

In consequence of the same fixture having been held at Hillsborough in
1988, a comparison study has been undertaken. Appendix Q .



                            15.     COMMUNICATIONS

Effective communication is essential to good management and particularly
to the policing of a major football event as with the FA Cup Semi-final.

The Investigation will address the quality, availability and effectiveness
of existing equipment, and respond to the question of whether the crowds
inside and outside the ground, could have been adequately warned by some
effective form of audible communication.

Similarly could Police Officers, Stewards and ground staff on duty also
have been audibly informed and deployed prior to the gates being opened.

This is a current topic of investigation and a report will be completed in
due course if this area is deemed to be of evidential value to the current
enquiry.

An ANACAPA chart has been prepared as a means of illustration - Chart 4,
Appendix W.
                                     (14)


                               16. INTELLIGKHCE

Football has become a focal point of police intelligence in recent years
specifically in relation to crowd disorder. In association with the
suggestion that a number of non-ticket holders attended this semi-final,
intelligence has been sought to try to identify any contributory factors
which may have influenced the over-crowding in Leppings Lane.

To assist   in this area the following action has been taken   and where
available   at this time relevant documentation obtained.

      (a)   Metropolitan Police Report on the 1989 Cup Final between
            Everton and Liverpool and other Liverpool or Everton games..
            Appendix R and witness statements Appendix S.

      (b)    A report by Chief Superintendent R Mellor, West Midlands Police
            relating to the other semi-final the same day featuring another
            Merseyside Club, Everton. Appendix T .

      (c)   A response from the Chief Constable, Norfolk
            Constabulary relating to the suggestion that a number of
            Liverpool supporters went to Norwich in 1989 without tickets
            and were allowed in. Appendix U .

      (d)   An informant has been found from Liverpool who has provided
            information relative to some of the issues being addressed.
            Appendix V .

      (e)   Four ticket touts were arrested at this semi final. Because
            their presence attracts non-ticket holders an evaluation is
            being made from statements and questionnaires in an attempt to
            show the extent of the problem at this game.

      (f)   Forged tickets can represent a problem at occasions such as
            this. The informant (see (d)) has indicated there was no plan
            known to him to produce forged tickets at this game. A sample
            batch of 100 tickets from those recovered has been sent for
            forensic analysis. No forgeries have been found.

            The evidence suggests that forged tickets have played no
            significant part in this disaster.
SA172                                 (15)

                                INTERIM REPORT

                               (17) MAIN FEATURES


INTRODUCTION

The final part of this report is a brief pen picture of the issues most
closely associated to the crux of the matter, the 95 deaths.

There are numerous factors that have a bearing on the events of the day,
Saturday 15 April 1989, but each whether standing alone or linked cannot
be said to be so closely related as to have a significant bearing on the
cause of the disaster. These factors are in the main referred to in the
sub headings to this report and are contained in over four thousand
statements to varying degrees of relevance.

It has been decided, therefore, to be brief and to the point in
addressing the main issues but it is emphasised that the matters
highlighted in the following text are not exhaustive but are those
generally agreed to be of prime importance by the Investigating
Officers.

(i)     Gate *C*. The Perimeter iron railing gates and the crowds in the
        vicinity of Leppings Lane.

        Gate ’C ’ was opened a number of times but the opening at 1452 hours
        has attracted the main interest. This opening is recorded visually
        and shows a constant flow of supporters passing through until 1457
        hours. The main issue here is that once allowed into the ground
        the supporters, in the main, went through the tunnel and entered
        pens 3 and 4 which were already overcrowded. There was no
        reception inside the ground by Police Officer or Stewards to
        prevent overcrowding.

        The policing and control of the crowd at this time is identified as
        a major contributory factor. In essence it is important to take
        into account surrounding problems of crowd control or the failure
        to properly control the mass of supporters outside Leppings Lane.
        Prior to the opening of gate ’C* at 1452 the Police using horses
        closed the outer iron perimeter gates thus preventing further
        crushing in the area between these gates and the turnstiles and of
        course gates ’A, ’B ’ and ’C.’ The visual evidence clearly shows
        that for a short time this was successful. In effect this area
        almost cleared as those supporters were released into the ground
        proper via gate ’C ’.

        However at 1453 it is visually shown that the perimeter iron gate
        closest to the River Don was ’forced’ open and an endless flow of
        supporters attached themselves to the tail of those already being
        taken through gate ’C ’. Inevitably far more people entered gate
        ’C ’ than would have been the case.

        The perimeter iron gate was forced either deliberately by
        supporters desperate to enter or by the pressure of the mass of
        people from the rear.
                                     (16)


        The question arises therefore;

             If the Police control had been adequate
             to prevent the ’forcing’ of this gate
             would the flow of people have been
             reduced and controlled by a filter
             as opposed to what actually happened?

        In any event Superintendent Marshall in particular may need to
        answer questions on this area in more depth than he has already
        done so.

(ii)    Deceased entering through Gate *C’.

        It is probable that 21 of the deceased entered through gate ’C ’
        after the 1452 opening. A number of them may indeed have been in
        the first groups to enter through the gate. If the perimeter
        gates had held the question must be asked;

              Referring to the ’forcing’ of the iron
              perimeter gate. Would those supporters
              have been subject to the surges and pressure
              from behind if the numbers entering gate ’C ’
              had been restricted to those between the
              iron perimeter gates and the turnstiles?

        For these 21 deceased this factor could have a considerable
        bearing on their later deaths. The failure of the Police to
        control and prevent the ’forcing’ of the gate or otherwise hold
        back the crowd could be viewed a primary factor.

(iii)   Other Surges in the Crowd.

        Equally it is important to note that visually at 1507, 15 minutes
        after gate ’C ’ opened and 14 minutes after the ’forcing’ of the
        iron perimeter gate there are still strong surges in pens 3 and
        4. It is a known fact that football supporters on terraces tend
        to surge to and fro in excitement or anticipation.

        There must be a distinct probability that a considerable number
        of supporters in pens 3 and 4 were totally unaware of the
        problems of those at the front. Quite unwittingly supporters may
        therefore have contributed to the disaster and the deaths by
        normal football behaviour.

        This would have been aggravated by some supporters again
        oblivious to the problem no doubt pushing and struggling to reach
        a viewing point from the tunnel area having been allowed to enter
        the ground freely and enter the tunnel without police or steward
        control.

(iv)    The Breaking of Barrier 124A in Pen 3 .

        Barrier 124A breaking must be a primary factor for the high
        proportion of deaths in pen 3 compared to pen 4.
                                    (17)


      The history of the barrier is well documented and the report by
      Dr Nicholson provides the main evidence concerning the most
      relevant factors of this barrier, its construction, safety value
      and position based upon the force required to result in the
      eventual break.

      In particular Dr Eastwood, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
      the Council, all bear some responsibility to varying degrees. A
      number of supporters statements are available as previously
      described which assist in identifying the time this barrier most
      likely broke. Appendix W contains an Anacapa chart of witnesses
      who refer to the barrier breaking.

(v)   Overcrowding Pens 3 and 4 .

      Perhaps the most attributable feature of the disaster in itself
      there is ample evidence to show that both pens were full to a
      capacity well above that each pen was designed for.

      The fact is there was no method of control available to count in
      the supporters to there, or indeed other pens. The only counter
      system was that employed by the turnstiles which gave an overview
      for the Leppings Lane entrances but no individual control for
      each standing terrace pen.

      Again Dr Nicholson and others provide the evidence to show how
      overcrowded the two pens were and quite simply the method of
      control of overcrowding was visual only.

      The responsibility for visual monitoring has been an identified
      area of disagreement between the Police and the Club.

      The section on refreshment periods may be of interest in this
      aspect particularly with the change of officers on the perimeter
      track outside the pens at about 1450 hours (See Appendix N).

      Host importantly and aligned to the overcrowding is the question
      of the tunnel access from the turnstiles to the terraces of pens
      3 and 4. It is known that no attempt was made to control the
      influx of those persons released into the ground via gate C. It
      is fair to say that certainly in the case of Chief Superintendent
      Duckenfield he states that in his view there was sufficient room
      on the terraces to accommodate those entering. Indeed the
      computer count of those who came through the turnstiles added to
      Dr Nicholson "Head count" of persons entering is still below the
      total figure of terrace capacity approved.

      Two issues are further raised at this point. Firstly a number of
      supporters who attended the same game in 1988 stated the tunnel
      access was at one point subject of a blockade by Police Officers.
      If this happened it is not documented and was not a decision made
      by the Senior Officers present at the 1988 game. Enquiries have
      found just one retired officer who recalls this happening. He,
      it must be said, is vague in his recollection but the probability
      is that some officers acting on their own initiative turning
      supporters away having recognised that part of the terrace was
      full.
                                   (18)


        It is perhaps worth stating here that again supporters have
        referred to, in 1988, a filter system using barriers to reach the
        turnstiles. This is in dispute and again is a factor unclear to
        those who policed the 1988 event as well as the 1989 match.

        Without doubt the fact that access to the tunnel was not
        controlled aggravated the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 and is a
        significant factor in the deaths of the 95 people.

(vi)    Reaction/Realisation

        It is evident the reaction and realisation of the developing
        tragedy by both supporters and Police Officers varied immensely.
        Perhaps even more significant was the very noticable differences
        in how some people actually responded to the disaster. It is an
        unfortunate fact Police Officers at Football Matches have become
        conditioned to prepare for public disorder. The behaviour of
        some supporters in pen 3, visually recorded jumping off crash
        barriers hardly assists those observing to think other than that
        disorder is the likely reason for any crowd problem.

        Supporters, Police, and many others alike, responded in ways
        which can be viewed as heroic, whilst some of their colleagues
        either in shock, frustration or helplessness appeared later to
        others to be failures in the height of this tragedy.

        The visual evidence available shows supporters at the rear of
        pens 3 and 4, to be totally oblivious to the unfolding events as
        their fellow supporters died. The same pictures show Police
        Officers apparently frozen or helpless to assist those trapped in
        a small noisy, crowded area of a large theatre of over 50,000
        people, the majority cheering and shouting during the build up to
        a major sporting spectacle.


(vii)   Previous History

        The Leppings Lane end of this football ground has a history of
        crush problems. There is evidence of injury to spectators in
        1956, 1981 and very importantly 1988.

        There must therefore be a question asked as to the lessons taken
        from these previous incidents. The Club the Police and others
        may bear some responsibility for not recognising or attempting to
        assess the potential danger to the crowd especially after the
        1988 incident. It has to be stated that there is a possibility
        neither the Club nor the Police were made aware of the problems
        at the time.

        It is this current disaster that has led to the above disclosures
        although certainly one supporter did write to both the Minister
        for Sport and to the Football League showing his concern for
        crowd safety after the 1988 semi final.
                                         (19)


            These facts will be of relevance and may need to form the basis
            of further questions to those involved in the 1989 Semi Final.

            OTHER FEATURES

     (viii) ALCOHOL

            Alcohol was a feature at this semi final. The behaviour of some
            supporters is well described by local residents and it is evident
            much of it was drink related. In itself that is a normal feature
            of footballing events and this special occasion obviously
            attracted a higher degree of drink related problems.

            The evidence it must be said cannot in any way suggest that
            alcohol was a primary factor to the cause of the disaster.

^           Nevertheless it is important to remember that of the 95 deceased,
            72 had traces of alcohol of which 21 were above the legal drink
            drive limit. It may be of interest to note that of the twenty
            one deceased who entered through gate ’C ’ the proportion is as
            follows;

            (a)   10 of the 21, had traces of alcohol.

            (b)   8 of the ten were above the legal drink drive limit and 6
                   of those 8 had a reading of more than double the limit.

           It is also worth considering that the blood samples taken for
           analysis were taken many hours after death at the time of Post
           Mortems. There is every possibility, therefore, that the
           readings provided could be lower than if the sample had been
           taken immediately. This of course was never possible in these
           circumstances.

           It may not be unreasonable, therefore, to conclude that the
           proportion of late arrivals to Leppings Lane were those who had
           been drinking in local public houses.

           If that is the case, and it is speculative, there is every
           possibility a high proportion of those outside Leppings Lane
           after 1445 were drink affected. In that case both the control by
           the Police would have been made more difficult and the supporters
           so affected less likely to respond to authority.

           It will not be possible to take this further but it is felt only
           right to put forward one very real possibility which could have
           had an effect on the overall policing at the crucial time.

    (ix)   TICKETLESS FANS

           There is evidence of Liverpool supporters travelling to the match
           without tickets. It is an impossible task to accurately assess
           the true number of supporters in this category. It is reasonable
           to assume that whatever the number they would have congregated or
           mixed with the Liverpool supporters at the Leppings T.«rip end.
A supporters questionnaire survey conducted in the early part of
this inquiry estimated a potential 2000 Liverpool supporters
attending without tickets. It must be said the survey was based
on certain questions not originally intended to answer that
actual point.

In any event the presence of non ticket holders is not unique to
Liverpool and intelligence available to the Police provides early
notification of the potential problem. Hence the Police ability
to control the crowd is aggravated by the fact a proportion have
no tickets but the issue perhaps is if this should have been a
factor to address before the game to ensure control.

The conclusion must be that even if non ticket holders entered it
is the overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4 which caused the problem
because there was sufficient space on the other terraces to
accommodate all those who entered the ground legitimately or
otherwise.

South Yorkshire Police have expressed concern over this aspect
and produced a file of evidence to support their view. This
evidence should be viewed and taken into account perhaps with
interviews of the Senior Officers present at the ground.
SA/49


                                    APPENDIX A

                               LIST OF QUESTIONNAIRES


1.       Coach Drivers


2.       Coach Owners


3.       Emergency Services


4.       House to House


5.       Licensed Premises


6.       Licensed Premises Staff


7.       Other Alcohol Outlets


8.       Press Photographers


9.       Selected Persons


10   .   Stewards


11.      Supporters


12.      Telephone


13.      Turnstile Operators
                                            (Version IV )     <170309)
                                          ,        , ir .h ip for indexing-
P L a * . tick those category b o , « -hieh are appl.cab!.
                                              MEDICAL
STAflOS                                       Doctor
Spion Kop                                     Police Surgeon
North Stand                                   Surgeon
South Stand - Seated                          Pathologist
              Standing                        Nurse
WEST STAND                                    St Johns Amb
pen 1*2
Pen 5-7                                       SUPPORTERS
PEN 3                                         Liverpool
PEN 4                                         Notts Forest
                                              Other
POLICE OFFICER ON DUTY.
                                               ehersencv services
South Yorkshire
Merseyside
Nottinghamshire
                                               Fire Brigade
                                               Ambulance                 0
police officer     OFF DUTY                    recognition
Merseyside                                     Bravery Acts
Nottinghamshire                                Awards
South Yorkshire                                Appreciation
Others                                         Adverse Comments
                                               Complaint
 MEDIA
 Press                                         PUBLIC BODIES
 TV                                            Local Authority
 Radio                                         Health & Safety
                                                FA
 GROUND STAFF.                                  Football Trust
 Steward
 Turnstile Operator                             CONSULTANTS 1. FIRMS
 Catering                                       Safety
 Other                                          Construction
                                                Other
 LOCAL     residents
 House to House                                 SURflES IN AROUND
 Shopping                                       Team on Pitch
 Other                                          Hanson*s Name
                                                Kick Off
  PUBLIC                                        Ball hits X-Bar
  Letter                                        Barrier breaks
  T fflffP ^ o n i    .
  JTsit to Police Station                        CBOUD SURGES O / S S R O U ®
                                                 Metal Gate forced
  ANY     category not specified                 Gate *C* to eject
                                                 Gate fC f crowd »n

                                                 PREVIOUS MATCHES
                                                 Semi Final
                                                 Semi Final 1956
  WITNESS CALLED TO INQUIRY         Q            £ . 1 Final 1988
                                                 Other State*
   COACHES - Alcohol
              - Disorder                          investigation
              - Police                            Forged Tickets
                Check                             Forcing Sates
              _ Traffic       *■*                 Unauthorised acc
                Delay                             Alcohol
                                                  Disorder
      LETTER REQUIRED     Y/N □
ANALYSIS OF LIVERPOOL SUPPORTERS QUESTIONNAIRES



INTRODUCTION:


All Liverpool Supporters Questionnaires which have been received into
the Inquiry have been researched.

The information contained therein in relation to the purchase of tickets
has been evaluated.


ASSUMPTIONS:

The supporters most likely to come forward, are those genuine supporters
who were in possession of tickets.

The evaluation of a number of questionnaires, where the supporter
arrived in Sheffield without a ticket, shows tht other persons were in
the group. In some instances it is not possible to identify whether or
not these pesons had tickets.

The numbers identified without tickets refers to conclusive cases. For
these resons, the statistics may be accepted as the absolute minimum and
it is reasonable to anticipate that in reality the numbers are higher.


POPULATION

In total 1699 questionnaires were researched.

NO TICKET B7 CLASSIFICATION                PERCENTAGE

No ticket whatsoever    -   36             136/1699 - 8.00
Purchased from a tout   -   42
Purchased at or near    -   46             INFERENCE
the ground
Paid at turnstile             5            IF A TOTAL OF 1699
Notts Forest Tickets          7            SUPPORTERS, 1563 WENT
Went to Leppings Lane   -                  WITH TICKETS & 136 WENT
Forged Tickets          -     (3)          WITHOUT TICKETS, THEN
(Included in figures                       OF 24000 SUPPORTERS WITH
for touts)                                 TICKETS, THOSE WITHOUT
                                           - 24000/1563*136
TOTAL                       136            - 2088 SUPPORTERS
ANALYSIS - INJURED PERSONS

PART 1 - TYPE & FREQUENCY OF INJURIES BY TYPE.


The survey researched the injuries received in two groups, those
received outside the ground (Leppings Lane Turnstiles) and those
received inside the ground in Pens 3 & 4.

The population for outside the ground totalled 20 cases, the population
for inside the ground totalled 549 cases.


TYPE OF INJURY                OS GROUND                INSIDE GROUND
(PERCENTAGES IN BRACKETS)


HEAD                                                    15    (2.7)
NECK                                                    23    (4.2)
CHIN                          1                          2
NOSE                                                     4
CHEST                         2   (10)                 140   (25.5)
ABDOMEN                                    2     (10          23 (4
PELVIS                                                  17    (3.1)
PS                            1                         29    (5.3)
SHOULDERS                     1                         27    (4.9)
ARMS                          3   (15)                  76   (13.8)
ELBOW                                                    6
WRIST                         2   (10)                   9
HANDS                                                    9
FINGERS                       1                          5
BACK                          1                         61   (11.1)
RIBS                          9   (45)                 167   (30.4)
LIPS                                                     2
FACE                                                     4
THROAT                                                   1
SPINE                                                    4
COLLAR BONE                                              3
LEGS                          2   (10)                 102   (18.6)
KNEES                                                   15    (2.7)
ANKLES                        2   (10)                  13    (2.4)
FEET                          1                         12    (2.2)
TOES                          1                          1
EYES                                                     7
EARS                                                     1
LUNGS                                                    9
KIDNEYS                                                  4
SPLEEN                                                   2
LIVER
BLADDER                                                  1
NERVES                                                  17    (3.1)
HEART                                                    2
BLOOD VESSELS                                            3
MUSCLES                       1                         13    (2.4)
TYPE OF INJURY                  OS GROUND            INSIDE GROUND


INSOMNIA                                               4
LOSS OF MEMORY                                         2
STOMACH                                               12     (2 .2 )


SEVERITY OF INJURIES


FRACTURE                         6 (30)               53     (9.7)
RUPTURE                                                1
BRUISING                        12 (60)              393    (71.6)
SPRAIN                                                 4
STRAIN                                                 9
CUT                              2 (10)               12     (2 .2)
SCRATCHES                        1                    28     (5.1)
SHOCK                                                 49
(8.9)CARTILAGE                                                2
LIGAMENTS                                              5
TEAR                                                   3
BREATHING                                             43
(7.8)CONCUSSION                                               1
UNCONSCIOUS                                            31    (5.6)
FEINTING                                               19    (3.5)
REDNESS/BLUENESS                                        6
BLINDNESS                                               3
SORENESS                                               14    (2.6)
BITES                                                   1
STRESS                                                  6
CRUSH INJURIES (NON-SPECIFIC)                          42
(7.7)BURNS                                                    4
DISLOCATION                                             1
NUMBNESS                                                1
PAIN                                                   28    (5.1)
ACHE                                                    8
SWOLLEN                                                 3
PUNCTURE                                                2
PARALYSIS                                               2



EVALUATION

IN GENERAL THE INJURIES RECEIVED INSIDE THE GROUND WERE MORE SEVERE THAN
THOSE RECEIVED OUTSIDE THE GROUND. THE MOST COMMON INJURY INVOLVED
FRACTURE/BRUISING TO THE RIBS.
ANALYSIS   - INJURED PERSONS

PART II - WHERE WERE THEY INJURED?

METHOD

The Nominal Records of the registered injured persons were researched
together with their respective questionnaires.

The grid positions were recorded and plotted on a Master Grid as
follows J-

Single position indicated or a specific position indicated where the
injuries occurred - GREEN KEY

No specific grid reference indicated as the position where injuries
occurred, then POSTION 1 is marked on a Master Grid - BLUE KEY.
POSITION 2 is marked on a Master Grid - RED KEY.

INTERPRETATION

The Green Key suggests a concentration in the areas of E7, F7,
in pen 3 & K6,K7-L6,L7 in pen 4.
In both pens there is a spread at the perimeter fencing, location 8.
Some of these injuries were caused in an attempt to escape by climbing
etc., over the perimeter fencing.
There are some injuries indicated in location 1, some were caused by
being pulled up into the West Stand seating area.
Pen 4 shows some further injuries towards the middle rear at K2,L2,M2.

The Blue Key marks the first position taken up by the injured person.
The concentration is towards the rear in positions HI,J1,G2,K2,L2,F3,K3
& L3.  The inference is a part of the surge through the tunnel.

The Red Key marks the second position taken up by the injured person.
The grid shows a very different     picture from the Blue Key.
Here the concentration is to be     found at E6,E7,F5,F6,G6 in pen3.There
is a further pronounced concentration at the perimeter fencing,
particularly at positions E8 & F8.

There is some spread towards the side fencing and the bottomleft hand
corner (facing the pens from the pitch).
Again, some injuries at the perimeter fencing were caused in an attempt
to escape by climbing etc., over the fencing.

Pen 4 shows a similar concentration at L6,L7 & M5,M7 & N6.
There is a concentration at the perimeter fencing & a marked pattern at
the side fencing at positions R4,R5 & R6.
Again some of the injuries at the rear of the pen were probablycaused
by pulling persons up into the West Stand seating area.

A comparison of the Blue & and Red Keys suggests a redistribution of the
crowd in pens 3 & 4, compounded     by a surge through the tunnel.
INJURED


Method

The Nominal Records of the persons, registered as injured were
researched together with their respective questionnaires.

The grid positions were recorded and plotted on Master Grids as
follows

Single position indicated or a specific postion indicated where the
injuries occurred - Map 1.

No specific grid reference indicated as the position where injuries
occurred, then POSITION 1 is marked on Map 2, POSTION 2 is marked on
Map 3.

Interpretation

Map 2 shows the FIRST POSITION occupied by the injured person
immediately on entering the PEN. The High Numbers in GRID POSITIONS
HI & J1 tend to suggest that those persons had just entered their
respective pens via the TUNNEL. The higher concentration in individual
GRID POSITIONS are towards the MIDDLE and REAR.

Map 3 shows the SECOND POSITION occupied by the injured person.
This indicates a MARKED redistribution of the injured towards the MIDDLE
and FRONT of both PENS 3 & 4. This may be considered consistent with a
large number of people entering the two pens from the rear and causing a
forward movement/pressure, i.e. the surge from the tunnel at 1455. At
this stage further research is necessary to correlate the injured with
entry at Gate ’C ’.

To some extent Mapl, in Pen 3 confirms this.

A factor which should not be discounted is the possibility of some
injuries being caused to people at the front by the perimeter fence in
climbing, or being dragged over the fence and to others at the rear of
the Pens in being pulled up into the West Stand.

FOOTNOTE

We have read many other statements of persons entering the ground
through Gate ’C ’ at or after 1452, who describe, how after entering the
Pens, they were propelled forward by sheer weight of numbers of the
crowd behind to within feet of the perimeter fence.
AN EVALUATION OF THE DECEASED & INJURED IN PENS 3 & 4.

DECEASED

Method

The 21 Deceased entering the ground through Gate ’C ’ after 1452 hrs were
identified as a result of analysis of the Body Folders. In each case
there is one or more statements from someone knowing the deceased,
confirming this.

Interpretation

The majority of the 21 seem to be in the first part of the crowd
entering the Gate, as distinct from the middle or rear. The figures err
on the side of caution and there are a     number of other deceased     whocan
quite clearly be identified in the crush outside the turnstiles in
Leppings Lane, at or about, 1445 hrs. They became split up from their
friends, who did enter by Gate ’C ’, but there is no person able to
identify the deceased entering through Gate ’C ’.

In other cases, there are one or more persons who died, who went to the
ground unaccompanied. In consequence, it is not possible to identify
their point of entry.

It is suggested that 21 deceased in relation to the total number of 95,
is a significant number.

Examination of Video/Photographic Evidence reveals only one positive
identification at this stage, that of Body 76 ANDERSON, who is being
passed over the heads of spectators in Pen 4 towards the front of the
ground at 1512 hrs. Obviously, having     been seriously injured. The
other possible identification, Body 19    COX, is questionable andat this
stage, it does not merit further comment.

The 21 deceased entering the Pens at the front of the crowd, could be
allied to the surge which can be seen on Video Map 1, at 1455.49, coming
from the tunnel into Pen 3 along the dividing fence and in Pen 4, along
the left hand side.
                                             TH  U MB I
                                             1 VJNHlSla                                              wnrt   4
                                                                                                     MAP 1




    A   B   C    D         E       F   G    H             I   K      L     u   n    p    Q      R

I                2             /   /                  2       2
2                          /       /   2                      2
3           /        /                       /                2      b 3
4   3                /     2       /                  2.      2

5                    /     /       2   /              /       2     I 3         1
6   I   /   /        i     2       2   /                      3     1     2
7 3     /   2              7 5         2. /                   2.    3
6 /     /   1    2         2       2         /        2.             2.    I    /    /    /     2.




            K it .       Siii&Lt Pil4 f o S m o r f       tiJtte A T ft   0(4 QofciY.orfKAi**
                          TUNNEL
                                       •i                           MAP 2.




                      G   H                      ft!   N    P       Q        R

                 z ~5~    n   59  3 L /                         /
                 ti­ lb   3   4- 2o It  /
                 ll   7   4   2 /© © t 3                    3        /
                 II           3     4 5 3                   /
                 f    3   Z   /    s        /   5      2                     2
                 7    2 3                   i   5      1 3          /
                 1    2.                               /
                 z    3            I            /      4-
      PEN S
                                        PEN 4

M r   ,   fntf                     OK       Qa€iTf*§IAt*£
                                   TmfHKT
                                                     *
                                    lunnsi.                                 mAP   3.




    A   B   c   D    E    F    G H           J   K        L   M ■       p    0         E
1                    3              /    z       if           X     /   /     ;        2
2           ;             1              /       I        i   /   /     2    /         /
3   I   J 2.    /              I         /       Z        J   I   1     2    z
4 I     3   )        4    2    1   2     z       1            3   1     J              4
5 5     3   2   5             1    3     3       3   7 )  3             3              5
6 3     2   1        <? *3 7        /    )       Z & Z 1                /       7
7   3   <f f>   I    JO 4 3    t          1 5                     3     3    4- 3
• I     4- 3    7 /« 17 U 7              *m
                                          > 5                 7              /
                                         £                7                            7



                KlV> S<cc*t> N xi-nnj m»K&TCft       oh
            m
                                            TUNNEL
                                                           •*                        m AP




                    E               G   H          J       *            M    N
                                              fegjg
1
                                                    B
2
                                                        1               J*   2
                                                        1
3
                                               i jl J
4
    1           1                              i                        1    Z
5
                            i   1              £       2        1   4

6           2       i   4       3
                                                       1        I            £
7
        1           i           3       I                       I
                                                                                            l
0
            i       1   1
                                I       1              1        1            i   2          i
            PEN 3
                                                               PEN 4
                             HILLSBOROUGH         INQUIRY VISUAL EVtDFN ri-         DATE: 11-Q9-89


BODY
                     NAME                                                         PITCH           MORTUARY

            HOWARD T. A
            SHAH I. S
            HARRISON G
                                                                t» Q a
            RIMHER D
            ASHCROFT C
                                                                •• ©
            WHELAM I.
            HENNESSEY J
            HAWLEY D
            ASPINAL J. G

            BROWN D. S.
                                                                          3
            HARRISON P. A
            HAMILTON R

            WAFER C.
            CHURCH G.
            RIW4ER C. W
                                                                    01    a
            HURRAY P
            DEVONSIDE C. B
            SMITH P

            COX T
            McCABE H.
                                                              # • 0 . 3
            FITZSIMMONS V. M
           MATTHEWS B
           BURKETT P

           ROGERS H
           CLARK J
           MCALLISTER F.

           Mc Carthy j
           ROBINSON S. J
           HANKIN E.

           JOHNSTON
           BURKE H
           McGRATH K
           DELANEY J
legend

ti,(   Identified Alive                                                       V
                                                                                       P® Photograph
41     Identified opparertly Dead                                                      V= Video
                                      Identified Alive and apparently Dead
                                      i n trv o   c n m o In rn iin m                  PURan
                               HILLSBOROUGH       INQUIRY VISUAL EVIDfcNPi-              date:   n.og.eg



                       NAME             OUTSIDE                        PEN              PITCH             MORTUARY'

              OWENS J.
              JONES C.
              TYRRELL K.
              GLOVER I.
              EDWARDS C.
              TOOTLE P.
              McDONNELL P.
              HUGHES E.
                                                                     idZL
^<3
              HEWITSON P. A,
              WRIGHT G. S.
                                                                   j£l
              HEWITT C. D.
 Jt5_         JOYNES N.
 46           BROWN C.

             BIRTLE D.

                                                                              tH I
             THOMPSON P. J.
                                                                                                  m
             BROOKES A.
                                                                                  -f:
 51          WILLIAMS K. D,                                                                       Hilfe
                                                                              #   #
 52
                                                                              #
             THOMPSON S.
                                                                              m i l              iM
             KELLY A.
                                                                              m m r n
             HEWITT N . M.
                                                                                                  1*
 56          MATHER D. W.
57                                                                                                •
            TRAYNOR M. K.
            CLARKE P.
59
60          TRAYNOR C. J
61          SEFTON C.
62          glover b .
63          JONES R. W.
64          HICKS S.
65          PEMBERTON W. R.
66          FOX T. S.



        Wenlif»d Alive
                                                                                            P * Photograph
        Identified apparently Dead   & Identified Alive and apparently Dead
                                         m rh o     ( n r n t i n rt
                                                                                            V * Video
                                                                                            PI*Han
                                HILLSBOROUGH   INQUIRY VISUAL EV IDE N O     date: 11 . 09.89


BODY
 REF                     NAME           OUTSIDE                            PITCH
  No.
                                                                                         MORRJAR'
              CHAPMAN R
              McBREIN J.
              BARRON G.
             McGLONE A
             CQPQC S
             KELLY M. D

             CARLILE P
             ba ll k . r . m   .
             GODWIN D
             ANDERSON J.
             WILD M. K
             THOMPSON P. R

             ROBERTS G

            BENSON D
            HOWARD T
            STEELE P. J
            GILHOOLEY J
            BRADY P. D
            LEWIS C. J
            JONES G. P
            O'NEILL S. F
            BENNETT B
            HICKS V. J.
           THOMAS D. L.
           HARRISON S. F
           HORROCKS A.

           HAMMOND P
           SPEARITT A
           NICOL L




LEGEND

il>   Identified Alive
                                                                               P * Photograph
41    Identified apparently Dead                                               V * Video
                                                   and apparently Dead
                                              LOCATIONS OF DFCEASED
                                          IDENTIFIED BY MEANS J F A PLAN




                                                            Tunnttl




 Oaf 2                                    Oat* 3                      G«f«4                         QitmS
S H O P -A -C H E C K   STANLEY TOOLS   PANINI      C l-S                 FLY THAI   TENNANTS L A
                                      LOCATIONS OF DECEASED
                                   IDENTIFIED BY S T A T E ^ N T ONLY




                                                              Id e n tifie d b y S ta te m e n t o n ly


                                                   Tunnet




SHOP-A-CHECK   STANLEY TOOLS   PANINi                                                             TENNANTS L A
                                    APPROXIMATE LOCATIONS OF I^N TIFIC A TIO N S
                                  FROM ^/IDEO AND PHOTOGRAPHI~MATERIAL TO DATE
                                                                                  LEGEND
                      Concourse
                                                                                  Id e n tifie d A liv e

                                                                                  Id e n t if ie d a p p a re n tly D e a d



                                                                           ( £ Id e n tifie d A liv e a n d a p p a r e n tly D e a d In th e s a m e Lo ca tio n




                                                         T un n e l

                                                                               N B . A n u m b er o f th a d e c e a s e d a re
                                                                                     in dic a ted on m o re than one
                                                                                     oc c as io n in d iffe re n t locations.




 Gate 2                                                               Gate 4                                                              Gate5

S H O P - A - CHECK   STANLEY TOOLS       PANINI                           FLY THAI                                       TENNANTS L.A
                                      LOCATIONS OF DECEASED
                                  'DENTIFIED BY MEANS OF, PLAN

SHOP-A-CHECK   STANLEY TOOLS   PANINI     C IS        FLY THAI   TENNANTS LA.
                                                                                  Mt't'tfUA iiVJM I C                  L U U A IIU N S   U t ID b N T Ih / U A I I U N S
                                                                            FROfcQVIDEO AND PHOTOGRAPH!^ MATERIAL TO DATE
                                                                                    tsx          -
                                                                                                 tUBT
                                                                                                   f-      |t|g
                                                                                                              m|                                     “
               . S M Q P -A -   check               STANLEY TOOLS
                                                                                        ,iP B L N 1       ____________C I S               FLY THAI                 TENNANTS L.A.




                                                                                                      2




                                                                 A'
                                                                 ■
                                                                 -iSS'




                                                                                                                                                                     Direction o f     ^
                                                                                                                                                                     Spion Kop




     LEGEND

     Id e n t if ie d A liv e

     I d e n t if ie d a p p a r e n tly D e a d



4P   Id e n tifie d A liv e a n d a p p a re n tly D e a d in the sam e L o c a tio n


       N B - A n u m b er o f th a deceased are
             in dic a ted on m ore than one
                                                                                                                                                                       %      « ~* m
                                                                                                                                                                                       m


             o c c a s io n in d iffe re n t locations.
                   SCHEDULE OF 21 DECEASED ENTERING VIA GATE C
                                 1452 HRS/15.4.89
                              - NUMERICAL BODY ORDER


     NAME                         PEN 3     PEN 4    S ’MENT’S REFERRING


16   Paul Brian MURRAY            YES                S1203

19   Tracey COX                   YES                S520

21   Vincent FITZSIMMONS          YES                S1154

22   Brian MATHEWS                YES                S181, S2341

23   Peter BURKETT                YES                S184

24   Henry Charlies ROGERS        YES                S554

26   Francis Joseph McALISTER     UNKNOWN            S520, S600

34   Johnathon OWENS              YES                S554

39   Peter TOOTLE                 YES                S648

42   Paul Anthony HEWITSON        YES                S140

45   Nicholas Peter JOYNES        UNKNOWN            S600

59   Gordon HORN                            YES      S1214, S2076

62   Barry GLOVER                 YES                S1550, S572, S573
                                                     S594

63   Richard JONES                 YES               S520

68   John McBRIEN                 YES                S344, S1288, S2020

71   Stephen Paul COPOC            YES               S337, S1306

74   Kester BALL                   YES               S245

76   John ANDERSON                          YES      S9,A & S238

77   Martin WILDE                  YES               S272.A S571, S1052

     Graham ROBERTS                YES               S289, S975, S1466
                                                     S1599

     Paul BRADY                    YES               S1936
                                                        LOCATIONS OF DECEASED
                                             #      KNOWN TO HAVE COMEMHROUGH GATE C
                                        Concourse




                                                             =o.




 GatB 2                                                            S            Gate 4                            Gate 5

S H O P -A -C H E C K   STANLEY TOOLS               PANINI             C I S.        FLY THAI   TENNANTS L   A.
                                                               Incident Report


                          HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE

                   RESEARCH AND LABORATORY SERVICES DIVISION

                          Broad lane, Sheffield S3 7HQ




                    The Hillsborough Incident 15 April 1989:
                    An Investigation into Various Technical
                   Aspects prepared for the Gcurt of Inquiry

                                      by

                          C E Nicholson FhD CEng MIM

                                            JR/l/ME/WS/89/1




Distribution                                 Issue authorised by: Dr A Jones
                                                            Date: 13 June 1989
The Court of Inquiry (25 copies)
Mr J D G Hammer
Dr J MoQuaid
Dr A Jones
Mr A Barxell TD
Mr M S Nattrass PAID Area 14
Mr J P Giltrow HFS (N)
Mr M R Stephenson NE PCS
Mr M Fountain TO3
Dr J H Foley
Dr C E Nicholson
Mr P F Heyes                                 TO RLSD/DIAS STAFF CMLY: NOT TO
Mr D Waterhouse                              be c c m m c x i m erasbob hse
Mr G A C Games                               WTEHOOT THE AEEKJWAL OF THE
Mr M James TO3                               AUTHORISING OFFICER
Mr C J Pertee NE FOG
Mr J B Hibbs NE FOG
RPS                                           SMiy343/235/01
Library (2)
Registry File                                 S80.02.0IH.814
i   introduction

1.1 Following an incident on 15 April 1989, I visited Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club's (SWPC) Hillsborough Stadium on 16 April 1989 at the
    request of Mr M S Nattrass, Area Director of South Yorkshire and
    Humberside Factory and Agricultural Inspectorate of the Health and Safety
    Executive (HSE). Subsequently I was appointed to head the HSE team
    investigating the incident following correspondence between the Court of
    Inquiry and the Deputy Director General of the HSE, Mr J D G Hammer.

1.2 This report contains details of examinations performed on site and in the
    laboratory. The work was carried out by me and by other staff of HSE
    working on icy instructions and under icy general supervision.


2 SURVEY OF FENS 3 AND 4

2.1 Using the drawings prepared by Ralph Brade & Associates, 1340/02 and 03,
    and comparing with figures stated in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
    1986, the following assessments were made.

2.2 The heights of crush barriers should be 1.02m to 1.12m with a preferred
    hei^it of 1.1m. In Pen 3 four out of five barriers do not conform. In
    Pen 4 six out of nine barriers do not conform.

2.3 The alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace should
    form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. Of the four 'paths of
    gaps' in Pen 3, two do not conform. Of the eleven 'paths of gaps' in Pen
    4, one does not conform.

2.4 Gaps in the line of crush barriers should be at least 1.1m and not more
    than 1.4m in width. In Pen 3, four out of five gaps do not conform. In
    Pen 4, nine out of ten gaps do not conform.

2.5 For a terrace slope of apprconmate!y 14° the interpolated maximum
    horizontal          between barriers is 3.9m. In Pen 3 only one spacing
    does not conform. In Pen 4 only two spacings do not conform.

2.6 Gates or other access points should have a minim alwidth of 1.1m. The
    gate to Pen 3 has a clearance width of 0.81 to 0.82m and the gate to Pen 4
    has a clearance width of 0.77 to 0.79m. Both therefore do not conform.

2.7 The aim is for every spectator on the terraces to be within 12m of a
    gangway or exit. If the perimeter gaps are not considered as exits then
    approximately 40% of the spectators in Pens 3 and 4 will not be within
    12 metres of an exit.


3 EXAMINATION OF THE BROKEN BARRIER - NO 124A

3.1 Barrier 124A was examined by HSE staff at Hillsborough Football Gnxmd cn
    17 April 1989. Various parts of this barrier and 3 core sanples of
    concrete were taken to the Sheffield Laboratory on 24 April 1989 for
    detailed assessment.

3.2 It was deduced that barrier 124A had consisted of a gyrtdnucus horizontal
    tube,      frcm wrought iron, and four vertical supports each xtetde from
    two lengths of steel angle section joined at the top by a steel gusset
    plate. Five of the eight support feet were reinforced by additional angle
    sections which appeared to be let into the concrete terrace steps. Two of
    the rear support legs were braced by further angle sections. A __
    reconstruction is shown in Figure 1. Ohe barrier
    rvwtnai collapse and fracture of supports 3 and 4, and by fracture of the
    horizontal tube at supports 2 , 3 and 4, as shewn in Figure 2. 'I£®J*3F^°n
    of the tube which had been located between supports 2 aid 3 had been bent
    uniformly to give a maximum permanent deflection of             at mi^an. ®ie
    portion of the tube which had been located b e t a ^ s ^ p o r t s 3 and4 had
    been bent uniformly to give a maximum permanent deflection of 200mmat
    midspan. Barrier 124A was estimated to be approximately 60 years old,
    although it had received a number of modifications (fearing its lifetime.

3.3 The tensile strength of the wrought iron tube material w ^ m ^ s u r e d at
    365MPa (23.6 tenf/in ) with an estimated elastic limit of 15(*»Fa
    (9.7 tonf/in2). The tensile strength of the mild steel angle used for
    the supports was measured at 36CMPa (23.3 tonf/in2) with a yield stress
    of 288MPa (18.6 tonf/in2).
3.4 Hie tube fractures had occurred in areas vihidi had be^located und^tiie
    metal straps designed to retain the tube. At these locations
    had not been painted, and the tube wall thicknesses, nomnally 4.5mm, had
    been reduced significantly by corrcsion. A t ^ fract^e ^ f ^ e
    corresponding to support 2 the residual thickness of the tube wall was
    found to vary fraa 0.4mm to 4.4nm around the cuxamiferenoe. Similarly at
    the fracture surface corresponding to sn?ort3 ^ v ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ S S c T t h a t
    the range 1.6mm to 4.5mm. At support 4, however, there was
    the      wall had been perforated by corrosion at two locations producing
    holes which would have been approximately 10mm and 20m m :m dfam^ ; bf£°
    the collapse. Elsewhere, around the fracture corresponding to support 4,
    the m u thickness was in the range 1.1mm to 4.Sam.

3.5 In general the appearance of the tube fractures ^
    iron which had fractured in a single-stage baidiiig/t^ne mc^. F r ^ a r e
    of the tube adjacent to support 3 appeared tohaveanitiated cntiie^gill
    side of the barrier at a position approximately 90 from tcp dead centre.
    The other tube fractures had suffered some post-failure damage and the
    origins were not readily identifiable.
 3 6 The        supports had been corroded, particularly at the juncticxiwitii
     S                  ar^ar i^oroOTsnt argles. In these               residual
     thicknesses in the range 3.Urn - 5.9mm were measured cxnpared with
     nominal thickness of 6.3mm.

 3.7 Large amounts of metal had been lost by corrosion from         j 3
     near, what would have been, the original junctions between_the support
     feet and the terrace. In one case (rear leg support 4) a
     metal 8nm wide was all that remained of the anginal angle section (50 x
     50mm). on two of the four feet this
     addition of a length of metal angle vMch had b ^ i boitod on top t
     original angle from which the support had been a®**• .^            Pdthe
     S S S e tSrace had been raised at some stegeand this ^oor oea led the
     previous corrosion damage. Hie ^Pfrance of ^      o o n ^ co^es,
     extracted from near the support feet, was consistent with this
      observation.

 3.8 Calculations to establish the fora miiirad t o o r o e                 «*
     barrier 124A, and the collapse sequence are currently underway.

                                           2
3.9 One of the remaining barriers in the Central Pen will be tested to
    destruction in the near future in order to validate the calculations.


                •COTTON OF TOENSTTrrc V TffF TKPPTNGS LANE IMP

4.1 On 25 April 1989 USE staff made tests on turnstiles at the ^ppings lane
    end of the stadium to investigate how the application of a forceto a
    'gate' affected the release of a turnstile. On 28 April 1989 tests were
    made to assess the accuracy of the oaqauterised system
    recording the admissions through the turnstiles. OikulatjaM^were made
    to ccnpare the average admission requirements of taimstiles^s^viJTg^^e
    designated zones of the stadium. Ocunts of people passing through the
    turnstiles A to G were made from video recordings.

         THE KKKfrrT OF A HORIZONTAL FORCE HEH3HG CN THE 'GATE' OF A TORNSHLE
a    O Turnstiles c to G appeared to be of the same pattern, whilst turnstiles A
                  o f ^ S i ^ T p a t t a m . In the testsa known f o r o e ^ a ^ s d tv
       a load cell was applied to the 'gate' of the turnstile.standard test
       ueiahts were then pi **"*** gently on the pedal until the spindle was
                                             t u r r e t E ^ C to G were lltely to be -ore
       difficult to release than turnstiles A and B.

4.3 A turnstile operator having a weight of 750 N (12 stone) or l«*s might
    have difficulty in releasing turnstiles in the group C to G if a force of
    480 N (110 Ibf) or more was applied         'gates'. The S3me c*^tx>r
    might have difficulty in releasing turnstiles A and B if a force of 1340 N
     (300 Ibf) or more was applied to the 'gates'.
             THE ACCURACY OF TOE CCMFUIERISED SYSTEM FOR OCUHEING AND RBCORDDIG
             ATMISSICNS
 4.4 Turnstiles were checked by rotating the 'gate' a Known rMmber of times and
     then recording the count measured in the control rocm. Tests of
     turnstiles in the group 9 to 16 indicated that they recorded the correct
     number of admissions.

    4.5 Tests indicated that turnstiles A, B, C, D, .E ."dff                 r! f f
        the correct rater of admissions. In ny OP™**}                      ?i
        groi%>, would indicate the correct nuntoer of admissions to within l*.

    4.6 Tests indicated that there could be a persistent e r r o r ^
        nuntoer of admissions through turnstile G. It is ny opinion th^ thl^
        turnstile might continuously register less than the cxrrecA: runtoearof
        admissions during a period of operation. It was concluded thatthe error
        was probably attributable to the roller of the roller-plunger micro-sa^tch
        fitted to this turnstile only just making contact with the upper boss of
        each 'gate'.
    4.7 Additional detectors were installed across
        positions above the gates. Examination of these Prices i ^ a ^ that
        gr^no a p p e a re d to be disconnected and in seme cases the wiring had been
        cut.
              jyinyparag MUTfifiTCMS MBOUIRED fSOH THE HJRK&xli-ES

    a   r>       reference to          & Partners Drawing No 8945/lA^dafced W W
              figures were obtained for their estimates of the capacity of the varieMS

                                                    3
   zcnes of the stadium. On 28Aprill9^HSE staff a i r v e ^ t t e ^teide
   Derineter of the stadium to identify the nuntoers of turnstiles useacy
   S i zone. Six groups of turnstiles served the six zones of the stadium.
   These are summarised in the following Table.


                                                      Turnstile          Number        People
                                    Capacity         Designation           of            per
        Zone of ground                                                  Turnstiles    Turnstile


                                                       A to G                              1443
     West Terrace                    10,100
       Standing                                                            10              988
     North Stand Seating                9,882          1 to 10
                                        4,465         11 to 16              6              744
     West Stand Seating                                                    10              557
     South Stand Covered                5,567         23 to 32
       Seating                                                             42               500
     Spion Rop Standing              21,000           37 to 78
                                                     (19 to 22              8               413
     South Stand                      3,310
       Uncovered Seating                             (33 to 36



4.9 The three groups of turnstiles having the high^t                                              west
    requirements^*^ sited at the                                                       ’
    ^^race Standing, North Stand Seating and West Stand Seating.

4.10 The average admission requironent of ^                  ^ ^ £ r ^ 3 . 5
     Terrace was the highest for any. zone of.^stadium. I t ^ a i m o ^ - o ^
     ■hitnor- thp 1nuest ayaraop. admission rstjuiididit which is uia
                                                        t l ^ the average admission
     requirement for Spion Kcp.
     COUNTING OF PB0PIE AEMTTTED TORCOGH TOBNSmES A TO G m M VIEE0
     RECORDINGS
4.11 Hie video recordings used for the
      Polios aid were identified B B W W t ^                                   <rf'
      KJH2/F/Bart 1, KJIB/F/Mrt 2, RJH2/F/Fart3. Th*V A w e d
      turnstile booths A to G frcm approoamately             until
      15 April 1989. The continuous reference                        to British
      werewith respect to the start of each recording, and not to
      Sumner Time (BST), but the relationship between the r i d i n g
      S w s determined from the observation of s p e c i f i c events in conjunction
      with West Midlands Police.

 4 .1 2 -me method of counting used a m i c r o ^ p i t e r ^
               -J t S   l ^   i e   T    ?   ^   S    r t X     L   ^     c ^ ^ c o    n    «     th e
      5 ^ 1 and i t s tin e . Pecple emerging fro . tu m sti las A ^ B j j a r e c o unted
      together because it was not always possible to differentiate between
      people emerging from these individual turnstiles.

 4.13 Hie analysed datafnxwided                                                                   ^
       S S g a d ^ i g u r e 3 shows the total lufcor of ]pacple that had anerged trot
       turnstiles A to G over the relevant period of time.
4.14 I was i r f o r - d by west
      before the start of the video r e c o r d ^ .                 had risen to
      over 2,000 pecple had been counted and a t 2 .Mpn this nuroer
      ^c«iinate^6,000. The final total count was 7247 pecple.

      The HSE count totals are
      with the SWFC ocnputer print-out, taken on 15 April i»t«, a
      was provided by West Midlands Police.



            Turnstiles          HSE           SWFC       Difference
                               Count        Oonputer


                               1930           2004           -3.7%
             AfB
                               1168           1206           -3.3%
             C
                               2130           2196            -3.0%
             DfE

             F+G               2019           1632*

             TOTAL             7247           7038*


            * See paragraph 4.15
                           - R n and E amj p and G had ccranon exits, and hence the
                                       ’o    f ^ a l r s      o f t u r ^ i l e s have ^   c c * ^ .


  4.15 m a g i ^ ' 4.6                                                                         18e^ at °
            obtained frcm turnstile G.               'imsj         --- ^ thxourti the turnstile and
            J S ^ ’E S E t 'S                                b e t i d e HSE ccwnt o f 2019 fo r F plus
            G and the SWFC count of 1632.

  4.16 Based c n t h e              « •                                          '
       recorded A to E and ttot            p — a G by a          percentage to that
       number who actually                 for the total nuntoer of people that
       obtained f r m A to E^the ^ t ^ t e ^ t h e                   t£ ^ ctual
                                                 —       «     th is value b / nor® than 2%, i .e . 7644.

   4 .1 7    **    ra te a t   ^                       SSSS                                        ^
             1.40(11 and raoalns f a irly ^ U * ^ ^ „ ^ , 1o „              t u m t i l e p er hour. BetMesr
             n t e t a ; th is p arted                                                           rtxM t 1150
             2.55m          2 ^ 2 S u S r j ? t a S ^ S » Ino® **4 I *te c o ird dM w ith th e
                                                       th erefo re be a r e « l t o f decreased crc*J
                          .n a d i ^ T S s t e r flow th ro u » th e to m s tile s .

    4.18 i f th e
         had been opened I                                                                     K ^

                                                             ^           ™                   “ ~   )
                                                               5
5 ESTIMATE OF PEOPLE ATMTTTED THROUGH XGME C' TftKEN HCM VXCBQ KECTPO<g>
5.1 A video recording labelled KJH2, delivered by West Midlands Police, was
    lyarf for this analysis. It was copied by HSE photographers and a tuning
    reference added. This copy was given the identification DF1/B. It stowed
    the sprits of turnstile booths A to G, Gate C and the general area on the
    Vfest stand side of these turnstiles. The continuous reference tunings on
    the video recording related to the start of the tape and not to BST.

5.2 I was told by West Midlands Police that, following scrutiny of        ___
    synchronised video recordings, the 'First (Opening' of Gate C had occurred
    at approximately 14.48pm for a duration of ~30 seconds. I was also told
    that the 'Second Opening' of Gate C had started at ~14 •52pm and finished
    at ~ 14.58pm, a duration of ~ 5h minutes. A 'Third Opening7 then occurred
    approximately one minute later when the gate was opened for approximately
    8 minutes, sufficient to allow the entry of pecple in single file.

5.3 The wyrt-frnri of assessment for the first two openings was to countthe
    nuntoer of people passing a reference line for a period of 3 secondsand
    then to repeat this process at intervals of no greater than 15 seconds.
    At          when the rate was seen to vary rapidly, and for the whole of the
    'First Opening', samples were taken more frequently than at 15 seconds.
    Figure 5 shows a graph of the nuntoer of people who entered through Gate C
    during the 'Second Opening'.
5.4 Estimates of accuracy are based on the possibility of missing one in ten
    of the people passing the reference line and the unlikelihood of missing
    more than two in ten.
5.5 The estimate of the nuntoer of people passing through GateC during the
    'Second ooeniixi'      on the counting was 1800 tut this should be
                            The bestestSate wculd be 10% higher than 1800
    i.e. about 2000, and in my opinion the actual nuntoer was unlikely to be
    greater than 2200.

 5.6 The estimate of the nuntoer of pecple passing
     'First Opening' baa5*** on the counting was 130 tut this should again be
     regarded as a minimum. The best estimate would be abcut 150, and in ray
     opinion the actual nuntoer was unlikely to be greater than 180.

 5.7   In the 'Third Opening' entries were nudi slower and a more aooorate count
       was Dossible. A total of 90 were counted over a period of abcut 8
       minutes, and in my opinion the actual nuntoer is unlikely to be greater
       than 100.
 5.8 The following table is a stannary of the estimates of both Gate C and
     turnstile A to G entries.
                                       HSE Count     Best      Maximum
                                                   Estimate


                                          130          150        180
         First Opening Gate 'C'
                                         1800         2000       2200
         Second Opening Gate 'C'
                                           90           90        100
         Third Opening Gate 'C'
                                         7247         7494       7644
         Turnstiles A to G
                                          9267        9734      10124
         TOTAL



6     TCfTTMATRS OF THE CAPACITY OF THE WEST T%KE$gB

6.1 Efcaving 1340/02A by Ralph
    and 4. Both Pens are shewn as being 13.1m deep. Fen 3    s”c*a;J Z7ZJ.
    14.350m wide ard Pen 4 as being 14.645m wide. Based on these damens
    the        are 188. Osq m and 191.8sq m.

6.2 The 1986 "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" states
        "222     The extreme allowances far packing density are as follows:

                 a.   54 persons per 10 scpare metres vtoen th® * e^ ^ _ or
                      viewing slope is in good condition (as set out in
                      Chapter 8); and
                 b.   27 persons per 10 square metres when it materially
                      deviates from the reoonmended guidlines, so as to
                      constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely


        223    It may be necessary to interpolate between these figures where
        conditions fall between the two extremes. When ...
    6 3 If 54 people per 10 sq m is assumed as the allow^le^ckiJTgdensity
        r           Tterrace then the capacity of Pen 3 is 1015 and ttoe
                             S S S S i S J T t * * of 2051 for the cc*bin«i
        area.
    6 5 The above calculations of capacity must therefore be assumed
    6'5 S    ^ T S ^ l e capaS^Tfor this
        gives examples of how this maxanum capacity figure * ^ d t e reduce*
        ^ o e r t a S i factors do not conform to the guide. Examples include

         ai      When the strength of crush barriers conform with the
          ’      5 S L S S ^ t a t ^ » ataoir^ of s o * tarriexs does not .. .

         b)      Mien perimeter wall and crush barriers do not corply with
                  strength or spacing requirements ...
           c) When the positioning and width of gangways do not meet with the
              reccnraendations of Chapter 8. .
            T. _i__ erf-afAR that when crush barriers do not meet the guidelines on
    6.6     S r ^           b ^ L ^ r ^ n s S S t e d , consideration may be given to
            strength        cut are wei           ..        ^   mroose of calculation.
            allowing a lower packing density figure for the purpose


          •pgTTMATES OF TOR PACKING EF^ T i m s OF THE WEST

    7.1

            m i .      Enlargements of photogratteJ W ™ ™ *
            Wtest Midlands Police and these two photographs              a"fr ^ r ,c 03
            ^ t S i w S t i f i c a t l o n narking on both these jtootograsfcs was 15.03.

^   7 2 It** method of assessment entailed                                             of
                                                                                       of each
•       Sctrcnic digitising t*ae                                                       Saed

             enabled the physical points on the fijotog^h tote I ^ o e a ®                   „
             electronic grid whi^ ? ^          g”    ^ S w ^ tter. Actual counting of the
             a VLB screen or p r m t       e    i   . c u t j x i ^   ^ i e a
             nunfcer of those identified within a fP®°                    hidden from
             automatically and no allowance was made for people that were iu«*.
             view.

     7.3     On 22 May 1989 photographs were takenr^ f^ L ^ ^ i]^ ^ #by1S s S S l e d the
             photographer, usiixjthe same camera ® d                         the
             boundaries and barrier locations in F m 3             HO/7A and H 11/8A
             “ T S r ^ r ^                                                  £ £ * of ^ i e
             2 5 ? i £ S t a ? » S        s i S a r to that in the jfcotagratfced area of
             Pen 3.

^    7.4 The estimated headocunt for 016J**?1?'‘reopl*rlr-^ ^ ^ i ^ M d h B a d s in
•        at the front of the                                      ^    aLsaermble
                                              1408 i . ' S S S t . a » ! » » » esti**e.




              illustrate the four rows and the ranters ocuncea in               ,
                                                                    Capacity              Packing
                Distance                                                         HSE      Density
                                         Width      Area            at 5.4
                   to                                                /sq m      Count      /sq hi
               Perimeter                 of rcw    of row
                 Fenoe


 Back Wall       13.1m                                                           268           7.5
                           4th Rcw        2.5m          35.88            194
 3rd Barrier     10.6m                                                            382          7.6
                           3rd Rcw        3.Sn          50.23            271
 2nd Barrier      7.3m                                                            409          8.1
                           2nd Rcw        3.5m          50.23            271
 1st Barrier      3.6m                                                           (517)*       (10.0)
                           1st Row        3.6m          51.66            279
 Pence            0.0m
                                                    188.0            1015       (1576)*
 TOTAL

* H * niter of spectators in the First Bow was                                               ai^
an assumed packing density of M . O sPfct^ ^ ^                                  jj, tests at BSE's
been       to be
Sheffield Laboratories       *^iio«iwTr«ri'riharafbe(^to^crcw^d®fls^y^®®^^^^^®®®^®
                       and has been c»rrcl»!r^d ^ crcwa aens y                     in
a selected area of the first row on photograph HU/1QA.

7.6
      S a S f S S S J S l i S r ’ S ’A                  S S .^ " S S s . “
7.7
      K   E    - s . i r . s 3   s   s    x   s   i &           s    s    —      «        «
      per square metre.

8 TS7TTMATE OF FOfiSTHUS NUMFfRS OJCSIEE TOE lEPPB *fS tfHB TOW*STBfS

8 1 I was asked to make estimates of the rwntoer of p
 *   gathered outside the tumstil^at                                       ^ f S r S n ^ n d
    perimeter gates. Oie area between the                                               is^spd



      SSss
 8.2 Die imfcer of pecple that
                    Area in     Pecple       People
                    square    at density   at density
                    metres    of 8.0 per   of 10.0 per
                               square m     square m


       Area 1         65          520          650

       Area 2        160         1280         1600

       Area 3        260         2080         2600

       Area 1+2      225         1800         2250

       Area 1+2+3    485 ,       3880         4850


9 SUMMMCf
9.1 Various aspects of the crush barriers and perim eter gates in Pens 3 and 4
    did not conform to the 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds 1986'.

9.2       broken barrier, 124A, was made from wrought iron tube and mild steel
      angle section. Both tube and angle sections were heavily corroded in sane
      areas. Calculations on the mechanism and force required to cause the
      collapse of the barrier are proceeding.

9.3 Examination of turnstiles A-G indicated that there was a fault in the
    counting mechanism of G. From assessment of video recordings, a best
    estimate of people entering through A-G was 7494, with a maximum of 7644.

9.4   If Gate C had not been opened, BSE estimate that it would have taken until
      about 3.40pm to admit 10,100 people through turnstiles A to G.

9.5 Assessment of the numbers of turnstiles allocated to various zones of the
    stadium revealed that the average admission requirement of the turnstiles
    serving the West Terrace was the highest for any zone of the stadium, and
    was approximately 2.9 timeg the requirement for Spion Kcp.

9.6 BSE's best estimate of the total number of pecple who entered the ground
    during the three openings of Gate C was 2240 with a maximum of 2480.

9.7 BSE's best estimate of the total number of pecple who entered the grcund
    through gate C (3 openings) and turnstiles A-G was 9734, with a maxiimm
    value of 10124.

9.8 Even if the strength and spacing of the barriers had complied with the
    'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds 1986', BSE's calculations shewed that
    the capacity of Pens 3 and 4 was 1015 and 1036 respectively.

9.9 Since the barriers did not oonply in all respects with the Guide (see 9.1)
    the estimated capacity of Phis 3 and 4 would be less than in 9.7 above.

9.10 ifre best estimate, based on photographs, of the lumber of pecple in Ben 3
     at 15.03 was 1576.
9.11 The number of pecple who could be aoccumodated theoretically between the
     ppT-iTw*-gT- gates and the turnstiles at Leppings lane was estimated to .be
     3880 and 4850 for crowd packing densities 8.0 and 10.0 per square metre
     respectively.
Fig. 2 - Barrier 124A as photographed 17/ 4 /89


                                                  -

                                                  i
                                                  :
li .11




                                              -7 5 .         -6 0 .          -4 5 .
                                                TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm (MINS)

          ■ ■■
         .■_
          3:. .■ TOTAL NUM BER O F PEO PLE EMERGING FROM TURNSTILES A t o G
                                                                                          END
                                                                                          DATA
per TURNSTILE
per HOUR
PEOPLE




                135.       - 120.    105.
                                                         TIME RELATIVE TO 3.00pm (MINS)


                       4   MEAN RATE OF PEO PLE EMERGING FROM TURNSTILES A t o G
                                                                                      1
OJ




                                                   200.                  300   400,
                       100.
                                            TIME in seconds


     5   NUM BER O F PEO PLE EMERGING FROM GATE ‘C* AT THE "SECO ND OPENING
            DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                          A SUPERIMPOSED ON                A
DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTO^APHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED®TC TO MATCH

                                PEN 3
                    OCCUPANTS OF ROW 4 ONLY SHOWN

                            PSBIUhTSR OF P H 1 -7A /P R 1 -B A




                        HEADCOUNT                -          268

                       PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                         FIG.6
                                                                         HSE SHEET PR176C/PP11S
                DIGITISED DRAWING.OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                                 SUPERIMPOSED ON
    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                       PEN 3
                           OCCUPANTS OF ROW 3 ONLY SHOWN
              (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 60 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                  P K B IU E T E B   Of   F B 1 - 7 A /P B 1 -6 A




                              •«
                               *• •
                                  **•/
                                                                                    PEN 4




PEN 2




                              HEADCOUNT                         -             382

                             PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                                    FIG.7
                                                                                    B 3 S B U P I ' P 3 1 7 8 0 /P P 1 1 3 1
                    PEN

                          •r •
                                 •**




PEN




       HEADCOUNT   -      409

      PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03
             tX> H     >
             T    C    I
             p T <5
             o- a tu
             (tun
                  C+
             R° H* O
                M C
             |t> ( t   c+
             09 U      09
             09        H-
             O — O-                                                                                                                          a S iitm o
             n M »
             H- X
             »    r
             Cf T      <5
             <5P 2
             09 O T J
                  c+ w
             O
             t M>Sto                                                                                                                                  2.6 0 m *
             SB T 09
             S O
             h- 3 ir                                   Tumstue
             3        0>
             oq    Ed 3                                  Destinations           Turnstile Labels
                   W       <5/


                                                                   0                TERRACF                                                         Wf:ST S I AND
                                                 y *                    f   \       SIANIVNO                                                            SEATS

                                          ■\ f   S                  \       F
                                 GA1F I




                                                                                                                                                                                                        TumslAc D e r j y t M K V

                                                                                                                                    C*- I                 frrV-
                                                               &M-ZTO               #»*♦-in


                                                                                                                                                                               f-H liO

                                                                                                                                                                    6V         < UK
                                                                £»V-VVf              $ ,<*-*23                                              215
fVrVStl- 4
                                                                                                                   va /?d   G/i7£                                                          fe'* 7.*'4




                                                                                                                                                                                                         UH
                                                                                                                                                                         5oX    uu:<i7't
                                             Wt3B               6<4 7 3 ^            t+l-H**                                         AV 7 3 V
                                                                                                   (= ,(* -7 0 0                                                                                                 •'oN•       \


L
                IIACKPQg'l                                                             ? V,                                                                                              t ^ l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            W JJ£.           JiJ3 3 3
                                                                                                                                                                                         '‘"L^EEjC
                                                                                                                                                                                  ^ibch«5?eri                              5JfcadT'W^Psdtham                                                                            0 *efih op «
                                                                                                                                                             ,5_/Cinm s4rgh                  1?
                                                                                                                                                                                                           h o ^ CUrtan-l*                                                                                                       D@nt':                          DF                                                                                          '^5a r f o r t **'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BURNLEY                                                                                      A lie n
                                                                            g^'M.CTwn
                                                                                . ^ re c k Ie t n
                                                                                                  CllreTiWijpREsroW
                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                                                                       ,^S>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a     _
                                                                                               a art0^ r ^ ^       * ^ H ig h c ^ ^ * *                                                                                                                                                                                                        Qucensbui                                                                                                                                           L ,mih
                                      ’fc                                                                             Penvvortharn                                            BLACKBUR                                                   ACCRINGTOf                                          ftChau«                               tiling w O flh■?
                      L \ ^ H A M - S T - A W N e S Y ^ ham                                                      , „ _H^non
                                                                                                                      H u tto n  i r                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           uHo<1      5E ^ T M o n k lO
                                                                                                                 L o n g to n Q ^ jr B                                                                                          istle
                SCALE 8 m B |j to 1 inch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H # b - t i e ^ Mv{hc>i,,' ' 0vC                                                                                                                                    f^ str
                                                                                               H esketh 8 & n k Q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D T jW E tU , Ca STLEFO
                0             2              4    \      6         8 mis                                                                                                                                                        7                                                                              Bridge
                                                                                                                       I T ' l e y .l a n d                                                                     H ailio ad e r                                                                                     c „ 9 9 L f e S5wi L             ^      v       ^       1 0 li0 u s             (vf’sedge^
                                                                                       Banks                        H #M uch                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            K n o ttin g
                0        2        4         6     8         101                           i^ Q          T a rie to n r                                                        ^      OAR W EN » i i                ^        ^                     RAwrr                                                                                Bridge^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W a ll& e n            _.     4"      .        F ,, ,«—
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ig                  %g           R'PPOnden IHa!yw*f!                                                                DEWSiUflY^                       ^ S W A K E F fE IJ                                   NtEFRACT
                                                 SOUTHPORT^                                                                                                                                                                                                         w o rth trCaide'-brook                                                                                                                      S -<^Q ss*ti
                                                                                                                          ,r
                                                                                                                           °!t*        Tnh7^d^fc8°RLEY                                                          am sb o tto                                                                                                                                                                     M ir f ie l d                                                                                    Darf-ngf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rishvvcytr                                                                                                                                    k.v*nttt'
                                                                                                            flu«ofd]p\^i rj,                   >2                                   Salmon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            T u rto t’                                         U ttfe b o fo a o h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Qt
                                                                           ■l
                                                                            ^®c*r>sbfick to
                                                                            ^/T^rSaav *
                                                                                           ilXj
                                                                                          m * ^
                                                                                                k. I[
                                                                                                    I JVuw,
                                                                                                       A d b g tp 1                                                                               Egen^^^pttlnqton IS^^q
                                                      Amsaale,.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H U H D E R S F iE
                                                                                                  |u r s c o u g h j     g lftf& l f                                                   N orw ich                                ■»                                 CMD                                                                                                                                                                                         ^ ^ ^ ^ H em sw S th
                                                                                               r:w7p»
                                                                                                 ^ ridg« A 1 3 |              1   atarir                                                                                                                                                                                          arth w a rte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ^WQOD                                                                                                                     8#TA,K.irkhurton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Rortlan
                                                                                      T#   u r»CPug                  **>*>
                                                                                 ORMSKiR KfK45??                 bevsngtofr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hon!e>                                       ^ 2LJk&Dartan
                                                                                                                                                             ?%spuH                                                                  OCilFFl                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cudtvorih
  i ©
  „ v                                                                                                C                                                                                                y M ifw .O R T                                                                                                                                                                                                enbrOiie                                                       ~ BroJft
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H o lrtT firth *                                                        ^ N S U Y             ^       T k ttn t£
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                      Lady G'■eeqS^MaghuSi.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   H O I.M l                                     fa      4      _            Dodworthm 42 Womftfr«l
 ^                  _T *'--«*
                         s"v •Cs*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A'           M uss
 ~v                            Siundei'sands^t^v                                           W *k                         » t e inford^                    a    .                        lriiPiRu^or-sley^-'                                                                                                             MoSSlBf 'r                  W godhla^!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pents!on«                                                           i(h-«flbn

                                            X                                                  ^ fjS < { R K B Y ^           ^ B       ^ B   ^           XT^ m         j0 9 iA n - ^ § £              4 *8             ^                                                                                                                                                                                                              W a rH i                                                W a f tr is v .
                                                                                                                         ( tm w       k%   g             b J iM ^ l« R £ L O F J E P                                                                              ORBk “ ASHrOM                                    Ivb-'Uy
                                                                                                                 ___                                                                                                                                                                                                     r ■'>H*y                                                                                                                    x% 2 Ho^ M d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      wimt.'!' ;|
            L“           —            —-Nsw 9ngfiio'n\\                      M - TLE^ « ? f 5 ! r ; . K )
                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                       S T iH E tE N S I^ fia to         __                              Culfheifi . .
                                                                                                                                                                                         _
                                                                                                                                                                                              “
                                                                                                                                                                                                  „
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 /&
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ir la jr^                                                                                                                                                                                 Sto cksb rid g                                                                                 CanillKiug
                                                                                                                      fc , f ' 4 ^ p ^ TDY T F 1 M F iE . .                                                                                                       $ ^ m T S * T E R H,”" S r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ''Mpelro              ;^ T R a w m m h W tf
                     - -          -         WALLASEY*                                                                                          ^    IU 0 W S C                ^     r^ L          ^ ^ p ! ^ ^ T H                        E   T ? 3 S                                     Derrt                                                                                                                                14 K c c ie s ^ c i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO TH ERH AM ; H r . ,
        h o v l a k e             _                                                                                                        ” ,IW' * *                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S ram le ^L .^         £


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TOGKPORT                                                                                                                                                                                                          M a ft b v


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 *A^"e                         Grove

                                                                                                            « 0 ^ RUNCORK                                                                                                                                                                    **                                         M ills                                                                          SHEFEvfE!
                                                                                                            Speie                                                                                                                                                                             '            ^     Otsley
                                                                                  ^ronibo'-ougf                                                                                                       ^ M,                                                              H in d ln fd ^    M P ;*>y f 1t o r
 f"   -             'v                                                               East^a                                                        3 /i-= 3                         k-Hve?
                                                                                                                                                                                   Stretti
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   M-iL,>f :(' WIIMSLOW                                                                        W haley
            ^feen^fttd        j£                                   ft NI^fcu"~A‘ 3                                                                                                                                                                                   Von-ai
                    V ’stkga'p1                                                            _                                                                                                          8b33?.v                                AldeMev                STAf’ dr#^

                ^H plvw eflI                      N e s to n ^ t L L E ^ M E R t                    ,\2                                F rtx J s h a m       13                                                            Knut                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WORKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               c        ^                                                                                                                                        i!m -Dronfi
                                                                  * V/^.^pA^r ;                                                  !l*ish^                                                                                                                                                 1        B o llin g to n

      4n«J\Hlntp. V               . 1.|\ •*« --k. ~'r*£l \ K : n g ^                                                                                                                         ,Norlhwich I c                  *W L t w                                                                                           B u x to n *                                                                                                                 'S t o r e lev
      Halkyn^j fX^pnnah's^Jk                                      3j) cSbd.nqTc                                                                                                                                                                                    m          M A C C LESFIELD
               k® f                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         *CHESTERFIEL<
                 iNonhop> & l , ' r TP*
                                    E f f l r W
                                            T0V ^|WJ!! yJ 5 * ;te £Jj1   a
                                                                         ’   *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i?v.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S o ls o v e r
            i/'                                              ,S _ - — 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J h H o - ™ * Chap,                                                                                                                                      B a k e w e li                                                                                            W     oT T    yVarsoi

                                                                                                                                               -j j p ^ K H C C S                                                      «    V        S       * ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sonierfo                                                                                 L O r g r t D r ^ jv .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        tCongle ton                                                                                                                                                                 C r o s s R jf w                 P'easle\
                                                                                                                    Iw r * * ^                                     I                     \\ ill S a n d b a c h ^ i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f^ r;             .,( l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       '                                 N«w'>jver                                    M a tlo c M                       is u flr o ^ i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MJtiorK E                                                         A s h b ie l d
                1                                a >>                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B id d u lp h                                                                                                                                           H K .H flR m iS H V
                                            -m \ \ i A                                                                                                                                                                 X A Isager
                         s'                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Leek            v£                                                                                                                     Noemani
                                  j
                                                                                                                                                                   I    nCy           rS /v P -                                                                 iOSGROVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4   )'z ffi rg>               ALFR6 TQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W irk s w o rth                                                                                 K IR K B Y - lf
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            _ .         _.    s                               * ASHFIELD
                rA525 M.ngra A                                                                                                                                    N antvv ich                                                                                                                                     Leektjrook
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             *(
                                             R h osivilen                 yVREXHAM-                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       f^ennv
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BenHes                                                                   Ripley
                                                        w - ^ 5-       - >
                                                                         V - 525
                                                                             v             , ~ A1                                                                                                                                                              in icy
                                                        /flPgB fChwte'                                                                                                                                                      N EW C
          m         l i 6                              f<           * i< ? f I                                                                                                                                              UNDER-LYME                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Viii
          •S'                                   Huabanll                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t o k e -o n           tren
                                                                      5    # ■ -r g ^ S f i f on-Dee                                                                                     A uaie
                     ^ 3 T 'S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             jio u r n e            _ _ '        ij,
                                                 J if4 * '*539                                                                                                                                                                                                              fento                        C h f a rl f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ? w -.'                m          r X
la n g o llsri                                                                              -fr»        ^                                                    8 Buf'^vi)                                           WrKirfi
                                                                                                            !2                               ^ V V h itc h u f c h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               I f fY R S w                                                                                                                                                                             •*•/'■»•Tnuvatja..■

                                                                                                                 RECOKMaNDED ROUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e r n a t i v e routes
LEGE N D
           Recommended Route


            A lte r n a t iv e Routes


            Moto rw ay Junctions




                                                                                                                               M 62 Ju n e 2 1 ~ 2 2
                                                                                                                              C o ntraflow
                                                                                                                              [D o c 459, St 5171




                                                                      M 62 June 15
                                                                      3 r d Lane clo sed
                                                                      0 8 30 - 1 3 3 0
                                                                      W oe 459, S t 515,5171


                                                    M62 W o f June 15
                                                    R TA     11 06
                                                    [D o c 45 91
                                                                                                                                        M6 7 End o f M way
                                                                                                                                        M o ttra m in Longendale
                                                                                                                                                                               AS2B
                                        M 6 3 June 2 - 3
                                        3 r d Lane c lo s e d
                                        [D o c 4 5 9, S t 21^, 5171                               MANCHESTER


  LIVERPOOL
           i. i

                                                                                                                                                                                                          SHEFFIELD
                                                                                                                                              Portwood Roundabout
                                                                                                                                              [Doc 325, St 2 H . 3 3 1 M 0 1          A 57 Approaches
                                                                                                                                                                                       to Sheffield
                                                                                                M 63 June 3 - 6
                                                                                                                                                                                      [ S t 781
                                                                                               Contraflo w
                                                                                               [Doc 301, 326 .4 5 9, S t 252, 5171




 ORG 8 - Recommended and Alternative Routes taken betveen Liverpool and Sheffield,                                                                                                                      U£.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              D   d   C h > o & f» *u u
               showing Locations of Delays                                                                    _______
                  SOUTH   YORKSHIRE   POLICE



                          'F' DIVISION



OPERATIONAL ORCER ,F' 1/89                       6th April 1989




    F A COP SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST

                  SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989



DISTRIBUTION



Chief Constable

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations)

Qiief Superintendent Operations and Traffic

Qiief Superintendent 'F' Division

Deputy Divisional Commander 'F' Division

Detective Superintendent 'F' CID

Superintendent 'F I ' Sub Division

Superintendent 'F2' Sub Division

Superintendent 'E 2 ' Sub Division

'FI' Sub Division, Control Room

'F 2 ' Sub Division, Control Room

Sub Sector Chief Inspectors

Ground Control

*F' Administration

Chief Superintendent 'A', 'B', 'C', *D', *E', and CID
              APPENDICES




Senior Officers Duties

Inspectors IXities

Sector 1 (Ground) Duties

Sector 2 (Liverpool) Duties

Sector 3 (Nottingham Forest) Duties

Specimen Tickets

C IC IX it ie s

Doc Section

Mour.ced Section

Administration, etc.

Traffic Control

Trains

Coacnes - Liverpool and Nottingham Forst

Transit vans - Liverpool

Transit Vans - Nottingham Forest

Sporring Events (Control of Alcohol) Act 1985
and Ground Regulations.

Cones

Route signing

Special Constabulary



Briefing s i t i n g olan

Schedule of rranpover
                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

                                        F' DIVISION

    OPERATION CBDER 'F' 1/89                                  DATE:   6th kpril 1989


                                   F A CUP - SEMI FINAL

                                  HILLSBOROUai, SHEFFIELD



                               LIVERPOOL v NJTTPOPiH FOREST

                                 SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989



    1.        UNFORMATICN

    1.1       Irte F.A. Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and Not tin.mam Forest
              F-ootball Clubs will take place at the Sheffield Wednesday Football
              Stadium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday 15th April -989, kick-off
              st 3.00pm. Ihe gates allowing access to the ground will open at
              \r       and admission will be granted to ticket holders inly.

    1.2       Hn an effort to minimise traffic and spectactor congestion and to
              rTtaximise segregation, the stadium has been divided in acrordance
              vn. th Appendix 'S'.

    1.3        Liverpool supporters have been allocates tickets for the West Stand
               and Terraces and the North Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
               m Leppings Lane.

               ftottingham Forest supporters have been allocated tickets for the
               Spion Kop and the South Stand and access will be via the turnstiles
•   14
               iln Penis tone Road North and at the rear of the South Statd.


    1.5        ZTne tickets have been colour coded and details are showr at Appendix



    1.6        ri sterile area has been created betvreer. the turnstiles t*. the rear of
               — he South Stand and those in Leppings I^ne.

    1.7        1v> further assist in the segregation of opposing supporters within the
               around, tickets have been allocated to ’neutral' supporters (i.e.
               — __^v,-,11               «a*»ffield Wednesday Football Citb) in the North
               cjtand (Penistone Road end) and the South Stand (Leppings lane ena;.

     1.8       r-ne routing of vehicles and spectators has generally bee: designed
               ensure that the approach of respective supporters will present them
               at the end of the stadium appropriate to their particular ticket.

     1.9       Sxtra tine will be played in the event of a draw at full-time.

     1 . 10    Z f , following extra-time, the match rerains drawn, then the replay
               -Rkp place at Manchester United Football Stadium.

                                                                                           a
                                                                                               i
                                                                                    (2)

 2-      U TO fTICN

 2.1     It is the intention of the Police to allow this match tc t±_-:e place and
         to ensure public order and safety both inside and outside tne football
         ground, to segregate and control opposing fans and prevent unnecessary
         obstruction of the highway and damage to property. This *~_11 be attained
         and displayed with a high standardof smartness and professionalism.

 3*     METHOD

         Ctief Superintendent IXickenfield will be in overall corrEni of this
         event.

3-2      ’^ ie operation will be in three phases, as follows

3-2.1   Ftaase   1   - Before the    match (1000 - 1500hrs)

3-2.2   Ftaase   2   - EXirinc the   natch (1500 - 1630hrs) **

3-2-3   Phase    3   - After the match (1630hrs until stand down) **

            Subject to 30 minutes 'extra time'

3-2-4   T^ie operation will be divided into three sectors, each cf «etich will be
        oesignated to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for that
        Sector. Tfte Sector areas are shown on the nap at Apperxl_j ’S' and the
        Senior Officers are:-

        SECTOR                                         OFFICER

        Sector 1      (Sheffield Wednesday              Superintendent I^nsenwood
                        football Stadium)

        Sector 2      (Liverpool Supporters)            Superintendent ?fcrshall

        Sector 3      (Nottingham Forest
                      supporters)                       Superintendent H^pman

3.2.5   Each Sector will be further divided into Sub Sector with = Chief Inspector
        in charge, as shown at Appendices A(i) and A(ii)

3.2.6   Separate (Operation Orders have been prepared by 'D' and Traffic Divisions
        in respect of Policing arrangements for Sheffield City Centre, the Ml
        Motorway and the routes to and from the stadium.

3.3     FEE MATCH BRIEFING

3.3.1   75ie event is being Policed by Officers, some of whom have never visited
        Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium previously and who, therefore, will
        be unfamililar with the ground and locality.

3.3.2   In an effort to alleviate this problem, a pre-netch briefer will take
        place at 10.00am or. Friday 14th April 1989 at Sheffield Iwsznesday Football
        Ground, entry via the 'Gyrmasium' gate in Penistone Road ?crth. All
        supervisory officers of the rank of Inspector and above s i t :id attend.
                                                                                              ■~et
                                                                                                  i
                                                                                          '   %
                                                                                (3)




 3,4      RKKJKT1NS PCJR DLTTY

 3.4.1    All Officers shown in the attached Appendices will, unless otherwise
          stated, attend at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 9.45am on
          Saturday 15th April 1989 and occupy a North Stand seat as identified
          in their Serial Instructions, for briefing at 10.00am prarpt. Entry
          to tne stadiun will be via the 'Gymnasium Gate’ in Penis tone Road North.

 3.4.2   on arrival, each Inspector will report to the Administration Desk
          situate inside the entrance to the gyimasiur and will report his
          serials present.

3.4.3    Polioe Officers attending in their own vehicles must find their own
          parking facilities outside the football ground.

3.4.4    l^e parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane
          w i n ICT be used.

3.5      BRm-'ING - MATCH EftY

3.5.1    After reporting for duty all Officers will be briefed in tte North Stand
          as tr the general requirements of the day an= will carmenoe duties in
          accordance with the instructions of their individual Inspector.

3.5.2    Inspectors will ensure that officers under their command disperse to their
          respective places of duty with a minimjn of delay.

3.5.3    Serasants will brief members of their respective serials as to their
          individual duties as outlined in Appendices E, C and D.

3 .6     OOOM ) SECURITY

3.6.1    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for the
          overrJ.ght (14th/15th April 1989) security' arrangements at the Ground.

3-6.2    Immediately following briefing, two 'explosives' dogs will search the
          stadium assisted by the Serials scheduled for duty inside the ground.

3-7      CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION EEPAfflMEJn*

3-7.1    Members of this Department will be on duty at the ground. A manned
          CID post will be situated in the gyrmasiizr, at the ground and at Hanrrerton
          Roac Police Station and will deal with     1 ccrplaints of crime and arrests
          for criminal offences made in connection with this event which do not
          require immediate attention. Any such oarrplaints will be directed to
          whicnever of the above locations is most convenient.

3.7.2    In addition, teams of officers will operate nainly on foot outside the
          ground, paying particular attention to the problem of pickpockets and
          'aut^-crime'.

3.7.3    Detective Superintendent McKay will have an cr.’erall responsibility for
          crime and CID Operations as a whole and duties of personnel are shown
          at Appendix 'F'.
                                                                                         (4




  3,8         DOG SECTION


  3 '8 '1                    ^ 9„ Sectio" “i11        be used as a d e t e r s - befo.-*
                       u           00 the routes to *** from the stadiu- £- the
              <x*-h parks, transit van parks, railway station, private vsrlcle
              parking areas and escorting supporters to and frtjn the stai^m.


 3 ‘8 '2                                    ^         onJer a c t i o n s        the
             Sector Cormander has the overriding discretion to use docs —         such
             circumstances where he feels a serious public order s i t u t i


             IXLies of the Dog Section personnel are set out at Appendix *G'.

 3*9         MDUNIED SECTION

 3.9.1
             Mergers of the Mounted Section will be enployed outside tas =rounc
             In          °   r * ^ g a t e supporters and escort them frrr~and
             tc their transport.

 3.9.2      IX-ties of the Mounted Section personnel are set out at Apoendix 'H'

 3-10       CQNTTOL ROOM

3.10.1
             A Control Room will be established at Sheffield Wednesday -rotball
             Stadium in the Police Control Box situate between the Sol— and
             **est Stands.

3.10.2      Superintendent Murray will be in overall control with the
            assistance of Officers shown at Appendix 'I'.

3.10.3
            The Control. Room will oversee the entire operation and will operate
            or. both UHF and VHF channels.

3-11        TRAFFIC CONTROL

3.11.1
            Road Traffic Division will be responsible for traffic cor.rr^:
            and will be producing a separate operational order.

3.11.2      *F' Division points are shown at Appendix ’J'.

3.12        TRAVEL AND POLICING AKRANGPOflS
3.12.1
            The routes to the grrxnd and designated parking areas for reaches,
            transit vans and private vehicles are shown at Appendix *5’.

3.12.2      jajffiSIOONG

            Signing of the routes to the ground has been arranged in conjunction
            vxth Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. In the event of rmqestion
            contingencies exist for detours to be inplemented by mentezs of the*
            Road Traffic Motor Cycle Wing.
                                                                                         (5)




  3‘12*3     BY TRAIN - LIVERPOOL

             Broadly speaking. Liverpool supporters will travel on 'special' trains
             arc^a_ight at Wads ley Bridge Railway Station where they will walk the
             he__. rile to the ground under Police supervision. Service trains will
             a-s- be operating to Midland Railway Station and supporters us ina this
             se^-ioe will travel by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses, under
              ^    L * to the ^PPings Lane end of the ground where they vill alight.
 3.12.4
            DE-^ils of the train arrival /departure times and duties relatinq
            thereto are shown at Appendix 'K'.

 3.12.5     BY TRAIN - NOTTDOIAM FOREST

            Nc-r^righam Forest supporters vho travel by train will alicr.t at Midland
                        Station in the centre of Sheffield and travel the'three mile
            D c u m e y to the ground by 'special' South Yorkshire Transport buses
                      escort, and will alight on the Penis tone Road North side of the
            sta.~

 3.12.6     De-
                  s of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto
                  num at
            are shown pt Appendix
                               Av *i/»
                                  'K

3-12.7      BY COACH - LIVERPOOL

            Liverpool supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to use the
            Mc_ > C motorways, leaving the latter at Tankersley (Junction 36).
            IXiiies relating thereto are shown at Appendix 'L'.

3.12.8     Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
            tc the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.9     a-, arrival at the designated parking areas, where practicable, an officer
            vn— l board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
            inposec by law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters will then alight
            anc ^cl_k to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.10    BY POACH - NOTTINCIiAM FOREST

           Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by coach will be encouraged to
           use tre Ml motorway leaving at Tinsley (Junction 34). Duties relating
           thereto are shown in the 'D' Division Operation Order.

3 *12,11   Coaches found approaching the venue by other routes should be directed
            to the designated parking areas and not the stadium itself.

3.12.12    Oi arrival at the designated parking areas, where practicable, an officer
           will board each coach and inform the passengers of the restrictions
           inposec by Law and the Ground Regulations. Supporters will then alight
           arK=     to the ground under police supervision.

3.12.13    BY TRANSIT VAN - LIVERPOOL

           Liverpool supporters who travel b y transit van or s i m ila r vehicles will
           be e n c o u ra g e d to use the M62/M1 motorways, leaving the latter at            |-
           T a rJ-c e rsle y (Junction 36). However, it is not f e a s i b l e to attenpt to   *j£
           channel such vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the duty
           therefore of all Serials outside th e ground to check these vehicles and            ^
           their occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M*.                                            *
                                                                                    (6)


  :-12 -14
                   transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area, where
               s-cporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

 -.12.15       BY TRANSIT VAN - N C H T O C H W FOREST

              Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by transit van cr sirilar
              ver-icle will be encouraged to use the Ml motorway, leaving at Tinsley
              (^-^^tion 34). However, it is not feasible to attenpt tc channel
              such vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and it will be the duty, therefore,
              °"      serials outside the ground to check these vehicles and their
              occupants as outlined at Appendix 'M'.

 -.12.16     All transit vans will be directed to the designated parking area where
              supporters will alight and walk to the ground under police supervision.

 --12-17     SPORTING EVENTS (OGNTRQL OF ALOOHOL) ACT 1985 - AS AfrENHFn

              A precis of the Act is        at Appendix 'O'(i). This legislation will
              ^ £trictly enforced in relation to coaches and transit vans or similar
              ver-icles, as well as persons entering or attenpting to enter the ground.

-•12.18      PRIVATE VEHICLES - LIVERPOOL

              Liverpool supporters whc travel by private vehicle will be encouraged
              to use the M62/M1 motorways leaving the latter at Tankers ley (Junction
              3 6 5. They will proceed to the designated parking areas on the Parson
              Cross/Foxhill estates.

-.12.19      On arrival at the designated parkingareas,supporters will      alicr.t and
              walx to the ground under police supervision.

.3.12.20     It is envisaged that traffic will alsoapproach    the stadium via the
              Flouch (A616). There is a contingency plan should the volute of this
              traffic be such that it is impracticable to direct it to the designated
              parking areas referred tc at paragraph 3.12.18.

3.12.21      PRIVATE VEHICLES - NOTTDKHAM FOREST

             Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by private vehicle will be
             encouraged to leave the XI motorway at Tinsley (Junction 34) arc proceed
             to the designated parking area in the Neepsend area of the city.

3.12.22      On arrival, supporters will alight and walk    to the ground under police
              supervision.

3.12.23      OQftQCS AMD TRANSIT VANS - RETURN JOOWCY

             Coaches and transit vans vill not leave their designated parkinc
             until authorised to do sc by Ground Control.   Hie return journey for
             these vehicles will be tie reverse of that on the incoming journey.

3.12.24      OQAQffS AND TRANSIT VANS - GENERAL

             No coach or transit    van vill be allowed to load, unload or park in any
             area other than the    designated parking areas, nor will they be allowed      ;
             to use routes other    than those designated unless diverted by Police
             Officers, following    consultation with Ground Control.                     ;||§
                                                                                           '■S»
                                                                                         (7)

 3-12.25    PARKING RESTRICTIONS

            Parking of chicles in the irmediate vicinity cf the ground and on main roads
            will re strictly controlled by use of parking canes. These vill be set out
            durir.r the early hours of the day in accordance vith Appendices P and Q.

 3.12.26    The Er y r g ency Services have been informed of all parking restrictions/
            arrangements.

3.12.27    It w:— 1 be the responsibility of Police Sergeant 102 Fidler to ensure
            that tnese cones are in position before 0700 hours Saturday 15th April
            1985.

3.12.28    No officer vill allow any vehicle to park in ooerrravention of these or
           any ether restriction without seeking the authority of Ground Control.

3.12.29    RBtXTM,   of   vramr-Fy;

           Where = vehicle is parked in such a position as tc warrant resnoval, then
           this   11 be arranged by the officer concerned through Ground Control
           following consultation with his supervisory Inspector. Two Brimac recovery’
           vehicles will be available to remove vehicles.

3.12.30    Where a vehicle is parked in contravention of parking restrictions and does
           not n&rit removal, then the driver may be dealt vith in the usual manner.

3.12.31    CAR PfeSKOC

           There vill be limited privately operated car parks in the vicinity of the
           ground. lie assistance will be given in the operation of these catmercially
           run car parks. It is intended that private vehicles will as far as
           practicable, use the designated parking areas shown at Appendix 'S'. This
           operation will be carried out by members of the Special Constabulary whose
           duties are shown at Appendix 'R'. Parking will be permitted on all roads
           where restrictions do not apply.

3.12.32    SOOTH YORKSHIRE TRANSPORT BUSES

           South Yorkshire Transport will operate 'special buses' from Midland Railway
           Station to the ground. At the end of the natch, buses for transportation of
           Liverpool Supporters back to the railway station will be parked in
           Penis-rme Road North fran Wardsend Road North tc Leppings lane roundabout -
           facing towards city. Buses for transportation cf Nottingham Forest
           supporters back to the railway station will be parked in Penistone Road
           North outside the ground and facing towards city.

3.12.33    The renting of the South Yorkshire Transport buses both to and from the
           Stadijrr is shown at Appendix 'K1.

3.12.34    SHEH-'JmZ) WEDNESDAY FQQ1BALL C U B - OFFICIAL CAR PARK

           Only drivers possessing official passes will be allowed access to this part
           of the ground which is situate at the rear of the South Stand. Certain
           coaches cor/caining F.A. and Club officials etc, vill be allowed to enter
           the car park and drop passengers off before driving to a parking area away ;
           from the ground (Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Training Ground,
           Middle-ooc Road).                                                           4
Untfcr no circumstances will any other vehicle, other than Police vticle;
be allowed access.

Ihe gates giving access to the South Stand Car Park will close at 2.:Cpr
anc will not re-open until half an hour after kick-off. Ttiis fact res'
beer, publicised to persons having legitimate access.

Clir: Stewards will be enployed at the access points i n Leppings Lane
and Penis tone Road North to control access and egress.

Vehicles owned by the television conpany providing coverage of the care
will be permitted to park in the South Stand car park at both the
Leppings Lane and Penis tone Road North ends.

PARgJNG - POLICE VEHICLES

Authorised Police vehicles will park in the car park at the rear of the
gyrr*asium accessed via the 'Gymasium gate' adjacent to Gate 'O'. Cr_ly
official vehicles will be allowed access and movement into and out cf the
grtxmd must be kept to an absolute minimim.

OBSTRUCTIONS - OIHER THAN BY VEHICLES

Street Traders, Ticket ’Touts' and any other person causing obstruction
will be moved on. If they persist then they will be arrested and trtuc£-.:
to tne Police Room where they vill be dealt with as outlined in parsrnap!^
4.1.1. to 4.1.8 (Headed 'Prisoner Process').

RAILWAY PROPERTY

Trains will carry Liverpool supporters to Wads ley Bridge Station. I'eese
trains and the Station will be manned by BTC Police who have the
responsibility for policing this property. Officers should only en.ar
the station for the purpose of police duties at the invitation of,
and accompanied by, a menber of the BTC Police. This also applies nr all
other railway property, including sidings, cuttings, lines, etc.

SHEFFIELD WEPESDftY POOTOALL CLUB GROUND REGULATIONS

A precis of the Ground Regulations is shown at Appendix 'O’(ii).

Where an officer seizes property by virtue of the Ground Regulations
he vill:-

A)   Supply the person from whan the article tes been seized with
     his 'collar nurrber'.

B)   Inform that person that the item nay be recovered on caipleticr.
     of the game from the Police Property Post at the rear of the
     Spion Rop, in the case of Nottingham Forest supporters, and the
     Police Property Post at the rear of the West Stand, in the case
     of Liverpool supporters.

C)   Affix a label to the item bearing the owners name and the officers
     ‘Collar nurrber'.                                                       I

D)   Ensure that the item is taken to the appropriate Police Property
     Post and entered in the Property register.                           .-ItJ
                                                                                     (9)



3.14.3.    It is a condition of entry to the ground that persons agree   tc be
            searched. Any person refusing to be searched wall be inbreach of those
            conditions and will be refused entry.

3.15       LICENSED PRH*LSES

3.15.1      The great majority of licensees in the immediate vicinity of the ground
            will either close their premises completely at lunch tire and early evening
            or operate a 'selective door' whereby football supporters are not
            admitted.

3.15.2     It will be the responsibility of all Serials cutsiae the ground to
            identify those premises which remain open and to monitor the behaviour of
            persons resorting thereto.

^ *15.3    Additional at terr ion must be given to 'Off Licence' premises and
           consideration civen to suitably advising proprietors should excessive sales
           of alcohol be evident.

3.15.4    Alcohol is not available to members of the public inside the cround.

3 -16     EMERTOCY AMD EVACUATION PROCEDURES

3.16.1    In the event of an emergency situation arising (ie fire or bac± call)
           which ney require evacuations of all or part of the stadium, the procedure
           outlined will be followed:

3.16.2     Ground control will pass the following message over the P A system and
           this will indicate to Police personnel that a provisional energency and
           evacuation procedure is in force:

                    "THE ATTENDANCE CF MR MEADOWS IS URGENTLY RD^JIRED
                    AT POLICE CONTROL."

3.16.3    Should an emeroency evacuation be necessary then an oral message will be
           passed to Police personnel via Inspectors and Serial Sergeants, giving
           specific instructions as to the action to be taken.

3.16.4    In the event of an 'all clear' situation, the following message will be
           passed to Police personnel indicating that the necessity for emergency
           evacuation has ceased:

                    "MR MEADOWS IS NO LONGER REQUIRED AT POLICE CONTROL."

3.16.5    Evacuation procedures for various parts of the stadiur. are shown on the
           appropriate serial order.

4         AIMPnSTRATICK

4.1       PRISCiey PROCESS

4.1.1     All persons arrested or detained inside the ground will be taken, in the
           first instance, to the Police Roam at the rear of the North Stand. Those
           arrested outside the ground will either be taken to the Police Roan or
           Haimtertan Road Police Station (in the case of Nottingham Forest
           supporters) whichever is most convenient.

4.1.2      Three vehicles will operate in the area for the sole porpose cf
          • transportation cf prisoners in order that mobile units may rerain free for
            normal cuties.
                                                                        ( 1C!




Where a prisoner is taken to the Police Room, details will be obtained,
the prisoner searched, the arresting officer and prisoner prx>tographec
together and Form PACE 19 conpleted. Hie arresting officer vill then
ccr-r.lete the necessary paperwork which he will hand to the Process
Supervisor in the gymnasium, which is adjacent to the Police Room.
O toe the paperwork has been checked, it will be handed to tie Officer
^ ^ a r g e of the Police Room and will accompany the prisorer and his
property to the appropriate station for processing/chargin:.

Where a person is arrested for a criminal offence, the prisoner will
firstly be taken by the arresting officer to the CID point in the
gycr»asium or at the station, where the officer in charge vill decide
on the further course of actior..

The duties of the "Prisoner Process* teams engaged on this operation
arc shown at Appendix "I".

Twt vehicles with detention facilities will be parked adjacent to the
Pc— =e Room for the retention of prisoners and a further attention
velticle will be parked at each of the two Police Stations fcr identical
purposes.

After initial process, persons detained will be transferred to
Harxerton Road Police Station (in relation to Nottingham Fcrest
supporters) and Ecclesfield Police Station (in relation tc Liverpool
supporters).

Inspectors must ensure that officers in serials under their cormend dc
not go off duty without firstly submitting the requisite peperwork.

EJECTIONS

Where circunstances are such that a person is to be ejected from the
stadium for breach of the ground regulations, then he will not be
photographed, etc. but will be taken to the Police Room where his details
will be recorded on an 'ejection slip' for entry in the Police Room
Register, prior to ejection.

COOPT APPEARANCE

Where an arrested person is charged and bailed to Court then the court
dates allocated to this operation will be strictly adhered to. On    T
occasions, therefore, the staff at the Charge Office Bridge Street,
Sheffield will be consulted as to availability of dates before a
prisoner is released on bail following charge.

Provisional arrangements have been rrade should the number cf persons
arrested and kept in custody or the seriousness of offences
necessitate a Special Court being convened on Monday 17th April 1989.
In the event of such criteria being met then Chief Superintendent
IXjckenfield will be informed in order that this contingency can be put
intc operation.
                                                                                 (11)




 4 .2        KISSIN3/FPUND CHILDREN

 4.2.1
             Reports of r i s i n g children will be passed via telephone to Ground Contrc
             in order that the necessary action can be taken.

 4.2.2
             Any child vhc has become separated from his parent /guardian will be
             taken to the gynmasium at the rear of the North Stand. Ground control
                  then      informed via telephone in order that the reo_±red action
             can be taker..

 4.3         FOUND PROPERTY


 4.3.1
            All found property will be taken to the Administration Desk in the qyrmas
            and the register completed.

 4.4        UNIFORM

 4.4.1      All South Yorkshire Police Officers will wear full uniforr, including
            helmet (with chin strap down) and gloves. Anoraks will be worn in
            inclement wither.   Fenele officers should wear trousers ard not
            skirts.

4.5         TRANSPORT - POLICE PERSOTttL


4.5.1       Officers arriving in police transport will alight at Gate 'O' in
            Penis tone Road North and drivers of vehicles already narinated for use
            curing the pi lice operation will report to Inspector Scarfe at that
            location, :^at Officer will give direction as to relocation of
            vehicles. Cr conpletion of the game and dispersal of the crowd,
            drivers will report to the Traffic Administration Desk in the
            c y m a s i u m tc collect the vehicle keys in readiness for the return
            journey.

4.5.2      Police vehicles which are not taken into use during this operation
           will be parked at the Road Traffic Division premises at Claywheels
           I^ne, follcfciing consultation with the officer in charge of those
           premises. Keys for such vehicles will be handed in to the logistics
           officer at that location.

4.6        REFKESWPnS

4.6.1    i Two meals (cne hot) will be provided and these will be distributed
          1 at mealing locations prior to the allocated meal times.

4.6.2    ( Refreshments will be taken as indicated on the individual serial
           crtier at the venues stated.

4.7        »RPS

4.7.1      Maps of the Ground and surrounding area are included in this order
           at Appendix
 OPERATIONAL ORDER - DISTRIBUTION

 -^as Operational Order will be issued to Inspectors and above.
 A Serial Order will be distributed to all Sergeants.

 PRESS AND PUBLICITY

 r-ublicity has been given to traffic routes and parking arrangements
 for the event by the Football Liaison Officer and Press Liaison
 lepartment.

All carments concerning the event and replies to enquiries from
i-ie media will be handled by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
cr through the Press Liaison Office which is under the control of
Superintendent Pratt.

ccM P iA o rrs

Any conplaints agaxnst the Police will be dealt with in accordance
^ t h Force Standing Order 5S. Conplainants who approach Police
C/fficers engaged on this operation will be directed to the Officer
snown at Appendix 'I'. Conplaints received at Harrmertor. Road Police
station and Ecclesfield Police Station will be dealt with by the
Duty Inspector.

CCM*JNI CATIONS

AJJL conmunications relevant to the event will be directed through
Ground Control.

’One following UHF/VHF channels will be utilised in relation to this
operation:-

i A)  UHF personal radio channel 25 will be used by al 1
supervisory officers, both inside and outside the ground.

(3)   UHF personal radio channel 19 will be used by all CID
personnel engaged on duties in the Parson Cross and Neepsend
private parking areas.

(C )   VHF radio channel 1 will be used by mobile patrols.

*F1' Sub Division’s operational functions will continue to be
transmitted cm UHF personal radio channel 35.

Personal radios will be issued at the Adninistration Desk in the
gymnasium to all supervisory officers.

Strict radio discipline will be maintained at all times. Messages
rust be kept as short as possible and, where this is not the case,
Ground Control has the overriding option of cutting short any
transmission, irrespective of rank.

Ground Control can also be contacted on internal extension 3277.
 4.12       VIDEO CWERAS

 4.12.1     lr. addition to the static cameras sited at the Football Stadium,
            rentiers of the Underwater Search Unit vill be operating a hand-held
            ^ d e o camera tc monitor the arrival and departure of sucpcrters.
            IXiring the match they will operate inside the stadiirr,.

4.13        CVERTPC

4.13.1      All overtime claims will be submitted to supervisory officers and
            vtJ.1 be clearly narked "SEMI FINAL - LIVERPOOL v N0ITIN3i\V FOREST".

4.14        g J O R T D C OFF DLTTY
4.14.1     It will be the responsibility of individual Inspectors to report
           tne whole of their Serials off duty, account for any me^oer not
           present and ensure that all radios are returned. He will also
           s-jbmit the de-triefing form previously supplied to hirr.. Serials
           1-21 will report off-duty at the Gymnasium. Serials 22-64 will
           report off-duty at Claywheels L^ne.

4.12.2     Authorisation vill be sought via Ground Control before eny Serial
           i-s 'stood dowr.*.




CHIEF SUPERPfflENDENT

•F’ DIVISIOi
                                                               A P P O t g 'Adi)'


  INSPECTORS (OOfT'D)




  SECTOR 3 A - CHIEF DCPECTOft S L W E R (NOTTINGHAM FOREST)


                                                                            Call Sign
 Sub S e c „ r 21     (Serials 52/53)       Inspector Charles 'C'
                                                                            India 21
 Sub Sec        22      (Serials 54-56)     Inspector Newsy 'C'
                                                                           India 22




 SECTOR ^   - CHIEF INSPECTOR PRICE - NOTTINGHAM FOREST




 Sub Sec^       23    (Serials   57/58)    Inspector Bateman 'C'
                                                                           India 23
 Sub Sect-r 24       (Serials    59/60)    Inspector Burgess 'C'
                                                                           India 24




HDBIL£ U vITS



Sub Sectcr 25        (Serials 61-64)      Inspector Wallace ’E ’          India 25




LIAI9QN
                                          Inspector Sewell 'F'            India 26


aeministraticn                            Inspector Bennett 'F'           India 27


TRANSIT AUJOCftTICW/RESERVE SERIALS/
COACH SUPERVISION                         Inspector Scarfe 'Traffir      India 28
                                                 SUB SECTOR 1                             APPUPIX 'B'
                Serial 1                                                               Inspector Darling
                                                 F E R P t.'l'm TRACK

                PS 454 Chapmar.          'f     leases    1 and 2 (Before and during match)
           1 ) PC 1669 Walpole
           2 ) PC 3151 M arsd er.               Twenty Police Constables - perimeter track (Equidistan*
           3) PC 2988 BurkjLnsh*3v              spread around ground). Ihe Sergeant will remain in the'
        4 ) PC 4 17 I l l i n g h w t r t h     ^ C1^ y of the Player's m n n e l throughout this duty arc
        5) PC 1285 Smith                        the Officers on the track will follow his exanple by
        6 ) PC 4 46 Groome                      standing and facing the crowd at the following tines:-
        7 ) PC 2 3 4 8 Hanson
        8 ) PC 700 H e l l i w e i i
                                                Before kick-off, half-tire and full-tine and also durin-
                                               any stoppage of play or w e n there is any crowd unrest/
        9 ) PC 44 2 Cuckson
                                               H u s will be indicated during the gane and shortly before
      1 0 ) PC 2 0 4 6 Holm es
                                               half and full-time by the sergeant leaving the player's
        1 1 ) PC 1247 S t r e e -
                                               tunnel and standing near the touch line. Particular
      1 2 ) "C 1842 B ro o kes
      1 3 ) PC 2801 Wilsor                     f ^ e^tlon should ** Paio *o prevent any person clinfcinc
                                               the fence to gain access to the ground. H e gates
     14) PC 1402 Lanb
                                               rrust remain bolted at all times except when in use.
    15) PC 2387 C o llin s
                                               NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO TOE TRACK FROM THE
^ ^ 1 6 ) PC 814 F in n e g a r.
                                               TERRACES WITHOUT CONSENT 2? A SENIOR OFFTPTR fpyrrO T
      7)   PC 3034 Richardson                  TO RECEIVE MEDICAL A T T O R N )----------------------- ~ "
    - 6 ) PC 759 B ra d s h a -
    19) PC 1977 Farthir.r                      Phase 3 (After match)
     2 0 ) PC 1079 C ro o t       (Im g )
                                               As the ground clears. Officers of this serial will renem
                                               in location until instructed otherwise.
             Meal - staggered
             before natch ir. gym.             Emergency Evacuation ProoBdure

            SEATING FDR BRIZFING
                                               In the event of such a situation arising (indicated at
            AS PER PLAN (ATTACHED)
                                               item 3.16 in the Serial instruction). PC's at either erd
            APPENDIX 'T'
                                               of the ground will take ir positions at the fence gates.
                                               These gates will only be opened if a specific message *’*
                                               to evacuate is given on the public address system.
                                               ****************

                                               SOUTH STAND LOWER I£VEL

Q           Serial   2                        Rase 1 (Before match)
           PS    2358 Cox      ’F'
      1)   PC   2051 Jackson                  A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 19-22 to
      2)   PC   1302 Pitt                     ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
      3)   PC   1926 McGuinruess              items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
     4)    PC   172 Sinpson                   veapons or missiles) or alcohol.
     5)    PC   3235 Roberts                  B) 2PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 33-36 to
     6)    PC   341 Hall                      ensure items shown above are not brought into the ground.
     7)    PC   157 West
     8)    PC   495 Pursley                   C) Remaining PC's will petrol rear of terraces to
     9)    PC   448 Turner                    maintain order.
    10)    PC   2417 Rotchell                 Ras e 2 (During match)

            PS 2425 Hemning«ay                All officers will be loccted at the rear of terraces
                                              and maintain order as regJ_red.
           MEAL: Staggered                    Phase 3 (After notch)
           during match in Gym.
                                              This serial will take up e position in front of 'these
           SEATING FOR BRIEFING               terraces on the perimeter track to prevent a pitch invasion/
           AS PER PLAN ATTACHED               or ensure the safety of the match officials and players.
           APPENDIX 'T'
                             S O U T H S T A N D UPPER L E V E L
       Serial 3
                             Phase    1 (Before m a t c h )

         PS 577 Gardner     M  tc f C 'S "i11   sltuated at the rear cf fo^stiles
   1     PC 60 Godley             to ensure persons entering these pnmise=
         PC 70 Whiteley     do not possess items prohibited by the ground kiles
  2      PC 591 Tune        (Banners, etc., weapons or missiles) or elcahol.
  f      PC 1317 Bennett
  :      PC 1340 Crookes    B) Tuo PC's will be situated behind turnstiles 29-32
  I      PC 1584 Collier    to ensure items shown above are not broua!~t into the
       PC 1949 Storey       ground.                                  ~
  r      PC 1962 F-Hirst
 ^-      PC 2817 Hudson     C)   Refraining PC's will patrol the stand concourse to
        PC 3341 Mitchell

       PS 2777 Johnson      Phase 2 (During natch)

                            Officers will be located at the entrances tc the stand
                            to maintain order as required.

                           Phase 3 (After natch)

                           Remain until stand clears of all supporters.


   * MEAL - Staggered
     during natch
                           P C R G P C y EVACUATION PRQTmrppy;
     In Gym

    Seating for briefing   In the event of such a situation arising (Indicated at
as per plan attached       3.16 ir. the serial instructions) PC's in the upper
Acpendix 'T'               level of the South Stand will take up positions at the
                           interna^ partition gates and ensure they are ooen.
                           Ihose on duty on the lovasr level will ensure that exit
                           gates at either end of the stand are open.

                           Farther instructions will be as directed bv control
                           or passed over the public address system.

                           Officers will be nominated for individual pcints
                           at the start of this duty.
                                  SUB SECTOR 2
         Serial 4                                                    Inspector Harvey
                                  StXTIH STAND CAR PARK (Penistone Road end)
      PS 266 Jakes       '£'      Phase 1 (Before match)
    1) PC 302 Skidmcr^
   2 ) PC 723 Whitta.-csjr       A) 2 PC's will be located at the players entrance to
  3) PC 385 Walker               maintain order, ensure the safe entry of ire teams and
   4) PC 203 Baines              officials and prevent access by unauthorised persons in
   5) PC 2679 Ast in             conjunction with the Club's staff.
   6 ) PC 1200 Wooriw= — i
                                 B) 2 PC's will supervise queues at turns t_Les 29-36 and
   7) PC 2621 Wood
                                 prevent items prohibited by the ground rul=s (Barriers,
   8 ) PC 1412 McClouzhlin       etc., weapons or missiles) or alcohol beinr carried into
   9) PC 3334 Dudlev"            the ground.
  10) PC 242 Childs'
                                 C) 4 PC's to patrol in the area between t=je gates and the
                                 players entrance (in pairs) to maintain order^
                                 D) 2 PC s will assist club staff between the gates at
                                 Penistone Road to prevent unauthorised across by vehicles.
                                 These gates will close for vehicle access frorr 2 OOtxn to
                                 3.30pm.
                                 Phase 2 (During notch)
                                 Remain on patrol in car park as above ano crevent entry
                                 into this area by supporters without tickets. Cover whole
                                 of car park after half time when Serial 5 =re rrealing.
        MEAL                     Phase 3 (After match)
        After kicrk-off
        in gym
                                Remain in this area until crc**3 clears, prevent noveftent by
    Seating for brier in g as   vehicles until all spectators on foot h a w left the area.
    per plan attached
    (Appendix "I" )
        Serial 5                scum STRTO CAR PARK (Leppings Lane end
        PS 1084 Hodgetrt 'E'    Phase 1 (Before notch)
   1)   PC 596 Smith
  2)    PC 933 Botley           A) 3 PC's will supervise queues at turnstiles 23-28 to
  3)    PC 499 Cartwright       ensure persons entering these premises dc zot possess items
^4)     PC 769 Mutch            as above.
P       PC 3131 Lewis           B)  3 PC's supervise queues at turnstiles 19-22 to prevent
  6)    PC 851 Wicken           items shown above being carried onto the cround.
  7)    PC 1535 FaircJ-oudh.
  8)    PC 2512 Craigey         C) 4 PC's to patrol in the vicinity of tie television
  9)    PC 1564 Mace            control vehicles to ensure their security.
 10)     PC 1177 Devis          Phase 2 (During notch)

                                Remain cm patrol in the car park as above and prevent entry
                                into this area of supporters without tickets. Prior to half
                                time this serial has responsibility for tie whole of the
                                car park whilst Serial 4 are mealing.
    Seating for briefing
    as per plan attacned        Phase 3 (After notch)
    (Appendix 'T')              This serial will be located in the area between the official
                                car park and the exit from the enclosure Et the rear of the
    MEAL                        West Stand to prevent Liverpool supporter* entering the
    After half time             Official car park and supporters who are Isaving the South M
                                                                                           :
    in gym.                     Stand from exiting other than via Fenistcre Road. This will
                                be in conjunction with other serials and teunted Dept.
     Serial 6                 SCXfTH STAM3 CAP PARK (Barriers)

                       ’E'   Phase 1 (Before match)
  - ! PC 28 Drewitt
  - PC 2818 Marshall         TVus serial will supervise the barriers to be erected
  - PC 861 Wadsworth         at either end of the roadway between turnstiles A-G
  L PC 3217 Allen
                             at leppings Lane and the start of the South Stand car
    PC 3162 Pears            park.
 t PC 1159 Long
    PC 142 Long              Hiey will prevent access to this area by all Liverpool
 E PC 99 Coe                 supporters and any other persons without legit irate
 c. PC
        515 Cawkwell         reasons (i.e. with tickets) from entering.
1C PC 1828 Metcalfe
                             Vehicles will be prevented from entering the car park
                             from Leppings Lane.

                             Rase 2 (During match)

                             4 PC's will remain in this area throughout the natch
                             to supervise barriers and prevent access.

                             R a s e 3 (After match)

    Seating for briefing     Ensure barriers remain in position and opposin; fans
    as per plan attached     do not cone into contact.Refrain until area clears of
    (Appendix 'T')           all supporters.

    MEAL
    Meal staggered           Bnergency Evacuation Procedure
    during game
    in gym                   In the event of such a situation arising (indicated
                             at 3.16 cf the serial instructions) Officers or. duty in
                             the car park will ensure that access gates at Leppings
                             Lane and Penistone Road are clear and unobstrurred and
                             no vehicles - except emergency services - move.
                                SUB SECTOR 3
      Serial 7                                                              Inspector Calvert
                                SPION KOP TERRACES

                                Phase 1 and 2 (Before and during match)
       PS 752 Batty ’E ’
 1) PC 815 togiioi              PC's will be located at the entrances to the Spion Kop
 2)   PC   1103 Edwards         terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
 3)   PC   1782 Tenple          entrances remain clear at all tires.
 4)   PC   264 Hirst
                                In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
 5)   PC   2748 Abraharts
                                this end of the ground they will be contained at the
 6)   PC   734 T h o m tor.
                                extreme southern part of the terraces at the rear of Gate
 7)   PC   1183 West
 8)   PC   2080 Nettles'-.ip
                                1 to await transference under escort to their own area.
                                UNU3* M3 CIRCUMSTANCES will ary supporters be transferred
 9)   PC   841 Gillett
                                frcm these terraces to other parts of the ground via the
10)   PC   2321 Willianson      perimeter track.

  MEAL: After kic*. off         Phase 3 (After match)
  in gym.
                                Remain in ground until these terraces are clear of all
                                supporters.

  mating for briefing          * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
 as per plan attacred
 (Appendix'T')
  Serial 8                     REAR OF SPION KOP TERRACED

      PS   1203 Marples 'E'    Phase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   411 Bellamy*
 2)   PC   41 Warmsley         A) 2 PC's will                 be located behind turnstiles 37-42 (Located
 3)   PC   2975 Woodcock       in official car                park) to ensure persons entering these
 4)   PC   1123 Thornhill      premises do not                possess items prohibited by the ground
 5)   PC   145 Tew             rules (Banners,                etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
 6)   PC   3122 Andrews        B) Remaining officers will be at rear of turnstiles
 7)   PC   265 Fletcher        situated on Penistone Road 43-76 to ensure that itene as
 8)   PC   1267 Lougher        shown above are not brought ir.to the ground.
 9)   PC   3200 Grey
10)   PC   2656 Yardy          Fhase 2 (During match)

                               This serial will remain on petrol in the rear of the
  ating for briefing           Spion Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access and
                               ensure security of kiosks, etc.
as per plan attached
(Appendix 'T')
                               Phase 3 (After match)

                               This serial will take up a position in front of the Spior.
                               Kop on the perimeter track tc prevent a pitch invasion/
  MEAL: After half tine        ensure the safety of match officials and players.
  in gym.
                               Bnergency Evacuation Procedure

                               In the event of such a situation arising               (indicated at
                               3.16 in the serial instructicr.) PC's on               Serial 8 will
                               ensure all exit gates are open. Further                instructions
                               will be as directed by control either by               radio or the public
                               address system.
                                    SUB SECTOR 4
         Serial 9                                                       Inspector Booth
                                    P B O S T O N E fOVD TURNSTILES
      PS        -67 Jessop ’E 1     Fhase 1 (Before match)
   i) p ;      2316 Liasides
  2 ) p;       •-768 Goddard
  3) p;                            This serial wi_ll be responsible for turnstiles   43- ^
               -478 Capes
  4) p;                            They will ensure persons entering these pranses
               -303 Slack
  5) p ;                           possess items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners,
               3289 Sutcliffe
  6 ) p;                           etc., weapons. missiles) or alcohol. They will als:
               -73 Holland
  7) p :                           maintain orrJer and ensure orderly queues are forrrec. This
              - 38 McKay
  8) p :                           vail be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers vrc
              *-785 Lowe
                                   are on duty at this location.
  9) p :      190 Firth
 10) p:       t'54 Welsh           Ihase 2 (During match)

                                   This serial will be located at Entrance 'Z' to the Scion
                                   Kop.

  Seau.*: for briefir.r            Fhase 3 (After watch)
  as p=r plan attached (App T)
    ML1!.: After
     ic-Li time                    At the corimenoement of Phase 3 this serial will le=r.= the
    ir. ~.ym                       ground and supervise loading of SYT buses ir. Peni^-cre
                                   Road.




                                  ***




       Se.— .ril 10
                                  PENISTONE ROAD TORNSTHES
        PE 1080 Hoyland
                                  Fhase 1 (Before natch)
 1 ) p : 3142 Webb
 2)     p:   2197 Laverack        This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 55-f-?_
 3)     p:   592 Stokes           They will ensure persons entering these prerises at ret
        p:   1644 Gagg            possess items as shown above. They will also nwir~=- -
        p:   1190 Harris          order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
   /    p:   227 West             be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers wix> ar=
 7) P~       549 Dowling          on duty in this location.
 8 ) P-      2097 Cousins
  9) PI      328 Froggatt         lhase 2 (During match)
1 0 ) PZ     588 Thonpson
                                  This serial will be located at Entrance 'Y' to the Scion
                                  Kop.
Seatnno for briefing
as p e z plan attached            fhase 3 (After match)
{Appendix 'T' )
                                  At the conmenoement of Phase 3, this serial will
             After                the ground and supervise loading of SYT buses in
   k^n; off                       Penistone Roac.
   ir. rvrn.
                              SUB SECTOR 5
      Serial 11                                              Inspector Woodward
                             forim stand   - uppm   ievtt.

      PS 2279 Edwards ’£•
 1'                          Phase 1 (Before
      PC 1074 Tickett
   2)     2857 Turner
   3) PC 873 Oakes           A) Six PC's will be located in the area at the rear of
  4) PC 1529 Friend                               Pf3ingS ^   end) to ensure
  5) PC 2571 Tittertar.      fan® . ® lte5ln9 the ground are not in possession of items
  6 ) PC 2409 Larkin         prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, e—       weapons
  7) PC 2209 B rohpy         missiles) or alcohol.                           ' ^ P 005'
  8 ) PC 1847 Bungay
  9) PC 1479 Wroe            B) 4 P C ’s and 1 Sergeant will patrol on th= upper
1 0 ) PC 1506 Marsh          level concourse to maintain order, paying particular
                             attention to refreshment bars.
*1) PC 3116 Ellis
                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            All Officers will be located on the upper concourse
                            to maintain order, paying special attenticr to
                            refreshment bars as trouble was experienced here last


                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            At the ccrrmencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before
   MEAL: After              end of game) All the serial will take up position at
   kick off                 the upper concourse exit gate (Top of rarrp; to
   in gym.                  Penistone Road to prevent supporters leaving and
                            entering Penistone Road.    ALL SUPPORTERS MUST BE
                            DIRECTED TO I£PPINGS LAIC e x i t
                                       N3KTH STAfO - LOWER LEVEL
       Serial 12
                                       Phase 1 (Before match)
              4:5 McCall *^2 *
  1)    PC    4£3 Miller '£'           A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of Gate 'C
  2)   PC     ,615 Griffiths 1E'       (Penistone Road) to assist the stewanis and prevent
  3)   PC    4.4 Lodge 'F- '           unauthorised access.
 4)    PC    ^ 354 Hague *~1 '
 5)    PC    if S3 Nield '~i'         B) 2 PC's will be located at the gate to the car
 6)    PC    j-54 Roach 'F I '        park at the rear of the gyrmasium (Penistone Road)
 7)    PC    3292 White ’ri'          to assist the stewards and prevent unauthorised
                                      access.
 8)    PC    tS6 Sheerier. *F 2 1
 9)    PC    :?S4 Haywooc 'D*
10)    PC    j.02 n~tnrv>g •£)•       ™  oo PC'S W±11     located at the rear of turnstiles
                                            in Penis tone Road to ensure persons e n t e r s
                                      are not in possession of articles prohibited bv the
                                      ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
                                      alcohol.

                                      D) 4 Remaining PC's will patrol lower level
  atin: for briefir.g as              concourse of North Stand paying particular attention
                                      to refreshment bars.
Pe r     attached See
Appendix 'T' )
                                      Phase 2 (During match)

                                     A) 2 PC's to remain at Gate 'O' for duties outlined
                                     above.

                                     B) 2 PC's to remain at car park for duties outlined
                                     above.

                                     C) 6 Remaining PC's will patrol concourse in pedrs,
                                     paying particular attention to refreshment bars.

                                     Phase 3 (After match)

                                     At the ccnrencement of Phase 3 (10 minutes befcre end of
                                     game) all the serial will take up position at lower
                                     concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to prever.t
                                     supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.

 MEAL; After                        ALL SUPPORTERS MUST BE DIRECTED TO I S ’PINGS UtfC BCtT
 half time
 in cvr.
                                    Bierqency Evacuation Procedures

                                    In the event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                                    at the gates at the end of each level giving acxaess
                                    to ranps leading to Penistone Road will ensure tbese
                                    are open.

                                    Officers will also take up positions at exit gstes in
                                    Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                                    open.

                                    Further instructions will be as directed by control
                                    or passed over the public address system.
                                    Officers Wj.ll be nominated for individual points     -vss
                                    at the start of this duty.                      ~
                                  SIB SECTOR 6
                                                               Inspector Bullas
    Serial 13
                                 WEST STAND
       PS 2001 Burner. 'E'
   1) PC 2592 ShimweU            fhase 1 (Before match)
  2) PC 3088 Coup land
  3) PC 1494 Naylor                  2           68 located e - the North entrance
  4) PC 298 Scholev              gates to this stand to assist stewards in
  5) PC 2167 Frost                                     ^     necessary- preventing
  6 ) PC 360 Schofield           entry of unauthorised persons.
  7) PC 3170 Fairclough
 8 ) PC 1618 Shearwood                          ** located £ - the South entrance
 9) PC 10 Mercer                gates to this stand to assist stewards in
10) PC 2717 Savourv             supervising entry and where necessary preventina
11) PC 928 Parkin               entry of unauthorised persons.                  9
12) PC 1423 Newbolc
                                C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse /oar area
                                to maintain order.

                                D)   6 PC s will be located e: the front of the
                                Stand to prevent missiles being thrown/stand tickets
                                being dropped to the terraces below or persons
Seating for briefing            climbing from the terraces to the stand and to
                                maintain order.
as per plan attached
(Appendix 'T ')
                                Fhase 2 (During natch)

                                PC's will be located at the entrances to the stand
                                to maintain order.

                                Fhase 3 (After match)

                                Remain in stand until clear.
 Meal: After kick off in gym
 when relieved bv Serial 16
                                      C Y EVACUATION PROCEDORE

                               I’? the event of such a situation arising indicated
                               at 3.16 in the serial order. P C ’s will take up
                               positions at the emergency exits at the extreme
                               front comers of the stand and ensure the gates
                                              °ther officer* will take up positions
                               at the entrance steps to the stand and again
                               ensure the gates are open.

                               Farther instructions will be as directed by control
                               or passed over the public aairess system.

                               Officers will be nominated far individual points
                               at the start of this duty.
                                       SIB SECTOR 7
                                                                  Inspector   ttiite
       Serial 14
                                       lEPPINSS LANE TtlHKAOE AND REAR P>CLOSUr£ (SOUTH)
      PS   1341 Crawford 'B'           Fhase 1 (Before natch)
   1) PC   2887 Grant
  2) PC    2819 McManus
                                      This serial will ensure that supporters entering
   3) PC   136 SrjcJJLrTan
                                      through turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession cf
  4 ) PC   1777 Sranstor.
                                      items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
  5) PC    2806 Butler
                                      weapons, missiles) or alcohol.
  6 ) PC   75 Ccr.-
  7) PC    1002 fcJLd
                                      They will also ensure order is maintained on the
  8 ) PC   975 fcshingtor             terraces.
  9) PC    1964 Sewell
 10) PC    3232 rsurton               Phase 2 (During natch)

                                      This serial will be located in the central tunnel
  Seating fcr brief is.z as
                                      to the leppings Lane terraces to maintain order as
 ^per plan attached (Appendix'T' )    required.
      MEAL:
                                      Phase 3 (After natch)
      After kir<: off
      in gyrr,
                                      Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.




      Serial 15
                                      IEPPIWGS IAWE TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (NORTH)
      PS 1757 r u m s   'E*           Fhase 1 (Before   natch)
 1 ) PC 2342 5eard
 2 ) PC 1543 .-.itkin                This serial will ensure that supporters entering
 3) PC 107 Carling                   through turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of
 4) PC 853 Burke                     items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
 5) PC 2191 llewellyr                weapons, missiles or alcohol). They will also ensure
 6) PC 2 654 ru_chardsoo             order is maintained on the terraces.
    PC 78 Bocth

«   PC 1675 rrch
    >C2364 Fzrd
10) PC 2605 »ebster
                                     Fhase 2 (During natch)
                                     This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
                                     North Pen in the leppings Lane terraces, to maintain
                                     order as required.
                                     Fhase 3 (After natch)

      MEAL:                          Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.
      In gym
      after half-time
                                     P1ERGBCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE
      Seating for brief ung
      as per plan attached           In the event of such a situation arising indicated
      (Append-y »T')                 at 3.16 in the serial order, PC's will take up
                                     positions at the exit gates and ensure they are open.

                                     Further instructions will be as directed by contrcl
                                     or passed over the public address system.

                                     Officers will be nominated for individual points et
                                     the start of this duty.
                                    SUB SECTOR 8
                                                                           Inspector Sykes/Inspector Purdy
            Serial 16
                                    LEPPINGS IAfC TURNSTILES
            PS 1288 Payne 'E'
                                    Fhase 1 (Before match)
      1 ) PC 3066 Huckstep
      2)   PC    2980 Wright
      3)   PC    1715 Best         Itus serial will                  be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
      4)   PC                      They will ensure                  that persons entering do not possess
                115 Huckstep
      5)   PC   259 Coney          items prohibited                  by the ground rul.es (banners, etc.
      6)   PC                      weapons missiles                  or alcohol). They vill maintain
                607 Taylor
      7)   PC                      order and ensure                  orderly queues are formed.
                963 Evans
      8)   PC   620 Yates
                                   Fhase 2 (During match)
      9)   PC   2496 West
     10)   PC   2076 Cerrone
                                   This serial will be located in the West Stand and
                                   relieve Serial 13.

                                   Fhase 3 (After match)
           MEAL: In gym
                                  At the cormencement of Phase 3, this serial will
£          after half time
                                  leave the ground and take up a position in Leppings
                                  Lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit of
           Seating for briefing   supporters and prevent disorder.
           as per plan attached
           (Appendix 'T1)


                                  * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




           Serial 17              LEPPINGS LANE TORNSTHIS

     PS 468 Whitlam 'F 2 ’        Fhase 1 (Before match)
  1) PC 2913 Oakland
 2) PC 2933 Wadsworth             This serial will be responsible fcr turnstiles 1-8.
  3) PC 3027 Tagg
                                  They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
     PC 393 Pulfrey               items prohibited by the ground rules (as above).
        809 Elson                 They will maintain order and ensure that orderly
 6 ) PC 880 Whitton               queues are formed.
 7) PC 16 Wilson
 8 ) PC 43 Kirkby                 Fhase 2 (During match)
 9) PC 602 Moore
10) PC 346 Thorpson               This serial will be located in the central tunnel
                                  to the Leppings Lane terraces.

    Seating for briefing          Fhase 3 (After natch)
    as per plan attached
    (See Appendix 'T')            At the corrmencenient of Fhase 3, this serial will
                                  leave the ground and take up a position in Leppings
                                  Lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit of
       MEAL: In Gym               supporters and prevent disorder.
       after half time
                                                                         A P r o t o ’Adi)'



                                            inspectors




 g g g g _ _ l A - CHIEF INSPECTOR BEAL


                                                                                    Call Sityi
 Sub S e c t—r         1    (Serials 1-3)          Inspector Carling 'F'            India      1
 Sub S e c t"          2    (Serials 4-6)          Inspector Harvey 'HQ'            India 2
 Sub S e c t e         3    (Serials 7-8)
                                                   Inspector Calvert 'HQ'           India 3
 Sub S e c t - :   4        (Serials 9-10)         Inspector Booth 'E'              India 4




SECTOR     1tB) - CHIEF INSPECTOR CREASER


Sub Sect”          5       (Serials 11-12)        Inspector Woodward 'F'           India    5
Sub Sec ter        6       (Serial 13)
                                                  Inspector Bullas 'HQ'            India   6
Sub Sec ter        7       (Serials 14-15)        Inspector White 'F'              ind^    7
Sub Sec ter        8       (Serials 16-19)       Inspector   Sykes 'F'             1^ ^ 8A
Sub Sector 9                                     Inspector   Purdy "Trg1           India 8B
                           (Serials 20-21)       Inspector   Delaney 'F'           India 9A
                                                 Inspector   Beresford             India 9B
                                                                                                      APPENDIX 'A(ii)»



  IflSPBCTDRS (GCMT'D)


  ggggg_ZL*. - CHIEF INSPECTOR WARING (LIVERPOOL!


                                                                                                             Call Sign

  Sub Sec—-o r 10            ( S e r ia ls 2 2 - 2 5 )     In s p e c t o r H um phries 'A '                In d ia       10
 Sub S e c -ro r 11          ( S e r ia ls 2 6 - 2 9 )     In s p e c t o r Selwood            'E '         In d ia       11
 Sub S e c r o r 12          ( S e r ia ls   30-33)        In s p e c t o r M i l l e t t      'A '         In d ia    12




 SBCTOK H E          CHIEF INSPECTOR PURPy (LIVERPOOL)


 Sub Sec      "1 3           ( S e r ia ls 3 4 / 3 5 )    In s p e c t o r Townend 'A '                     In d ia 13
 Sub         r   14          ( S e r ia ls 3 6 - 3 8 )    In s p e c t o r E l l i s   'C '                In d ia    14
Sub Sec      -1 5            ( S e r ia ls 3 9 / 4 0 )    In s p e c t o r B rennan 'C '                   In d ia    15
Sub          r   16          ( S e r ia ls 4 1 - 4 3 )    In s p e c t o r Broomhead 'C '                  In d ia 16




OQftCH ES-t^riCM         SEARCH SQUADS

Sub S e c t o r 17         ( S e r ia l 44 )
                                                         In s p e c t o r W a rd le     'E '               In d ia 17
Sub S e c to r 1 8         ( S e r ia l 4 5 )
                                                         In s p e c t o r M o rto n     'E '               In d ia 18



mobile qktts


Sub Secrzjr 19             ( S e r ia ls 4 6 - 4 8 )     In s p e c t o r W a lk e r 'O p s '             In d ia    19
Sub Secrr 20              ( S e r ia ls 4 9 - 5 1 )      In s p e c to r R obinson          'HO '         In d ia 20
                                                                                              APPPOIX 'A(i)»


                                             SENIOR OFFICERS DITTIES



   Chief Inspectors and above will                    not
                                                            use e c a l l s ig n b u t w i l l be id e n t if ie d
   by       name and rank.


   W B t C l OCWtfP
                                                                    C h ie f S u p e rin te n d e n t D u c k e n fie ld

                                                                    L ia is o n - In s p e c to r S e w e ll
                                                                                    C a l l S ig n In d ia 26
  Q Q K ) OCKTHOL
                                                                   S u p e rin te n d e n t M u rra y


  Nectar         1 (Ground)
                                                                   S u p e rin te n d e n t Greenwood
  S e c to r 1A
                                                                   C h ie f In s p e c t o r B e a l
  Serais 1-10

  S e c to r IB
                                                                  C h ie f In s p e c t o r C re a s e r
  S e r ia ls    1 1 -1 9

 R e s e rv e S e r i a ls   20/21



                TWO   (LIVERPOOL)                                 S u p e rin te n d e n t M a rs h a ll
 Sector 2A
                                                                  C h ie f In s p e c t o r W arin c

 S e r ia ls    2 2 - 3 3 and 4 4 ,   46,   47 & 48

 S e c to r 2B
                                                                 C h ie f In s p e c t o r P urdy

S e r ia ls     3 4 - 5 1 e x c lu d in g 4 4 . 4 6 , 47 & 48



SECT.^ THTgE (MJITINGHAM FOREST)
                                                                 S u p e rin te n d e n t Chapnar.
Sector 3A
                                                                 C h ie f In s p e c to r Surm er

S e r ia ls     5 2 -5 6

S e c to r 3B
                                                                C h ie f In s p e c to r P r ic e

S e r ia l s 5 7 -6 4
   Serial 28
                                                      P I E U C ORDER - PENISTONE RQftP/LEPPINGS Utfc

         PS                                           Riase 1   (Before match’)
               2400 Wilsor. *A1'
   :)   PC     2127 Smart                          This serial will be responsible for na^_n= the barriers
  Z)    PC    2846 Smith                           to be placed at the mouths of the foll^enr m a d s to
  :-)   PC    761 Richards                         prevent any supporters gaining access. It'is essential
  -?)   PC    1620 Pattisor.                       that access be prevented to all but re~_der.ts. At
  =■)   PC    40 Tamlinscr                         similar events in the past, considerable danaqe has been
        PC    373 Harbon                           caused by groups of supporters before iefore. durinq
  ■)    PC    2399 Wren                            and after the game:-
  =)    PC    2644 Roberts
                                                   1)    Penistone Road North/Bickerton Roa;
                                                   2)    lappings Lane/Bickerton Road
                                                   3)    Leppings Lane/Leake Road
                                                   4)    Leppings Lane/Famdale Road

                                                   ftiase 2 (During natch)
 S e a tin g f o r b r i e f i n g   as p e r
                                                  Remain at locations given to prevent sxpcrters who
         a tta c h e d   (S e e a p p e n d ix    are unable to enter the ground gaininc scoess to these
                                                  roads.

                                                  Rase 3 (After natch)
 MEALS: Staggered during
                                                  Rerrain until all crowds have cleared ard consent to
 match at Claywhee-ls Lane
                                                  remove barxiers is given by the Sector Inspector. It
 to ensure cover f — points
 in Phase 2.                                      is essential that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings
                                                  I^ne until all supporters have cleared trie area.

                                                                       » ***




 Serial 29
                                                  PUBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS LANE
     PS 1561 Reynolds             1A 21           Fhase 1 (Before natch)
 -) PC 3145 Punton
 2) PC 1169 Kerr
                                                 This serial will be responsible for ma-r -  the barriers
A    PC 114 Bradley
                                                 to be placed at the mouths of the foll>^r>~ roads to
     PC 2668 Fletcher                            prevent access by supporters:-
5/ PC 214 Coulson
 -) PC 2915 Severn                               1)     lappings Lane/Shens tone Road
  ') PC 2840 Pears or.                           2)     Leppings Lane/Eskdale Road
s) PC 1280 Hedxidos
                                                 2 PC's on each road.

                                                 The remaining PC 1s will patrol Leppincc Lene in pairs
Seating for briefuic as                          to maintain order and prevent persons -rriving at the
per plan attached (See                           ground in coaches unloading.
-Appendix " T )
                                                 Fhase 2 (Durinq natch)

                                                 Renaon at locations given above to prefer.t supporters
                                                 who are unable to enter the ground gai— - access to
                                                 the roads and to maintain order.

                                                 Fhase 3 (After natch)
MEALS: IXiring tretch
                                                 Remain until all crowds have cleared arc consent to
Staggered at C la-.-w h eels
                                                 remove barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is
I^ne to ensure cover
                                                 essential that no vehicles be allowed zetc Leppings
for points in P h a s e 2
                                                 Lane until all supporters have cleared trie area.
                                      SUB SECTOR 12
  Serial 30                             ___ ,_____________                       InspectorMillett'A'
                                      K B L I C ORLfcK - UEFPINGS LANE RJUNCftBOUT
       PS 2627 Ashton *A2'            Phase 1 (Before match)
  1) PC 1417 Me Dongle
  2) PC 2967 Frost
  3) PC 900 Dawson                    l^115 serial will be located at the roundabout at the
  4) PC 243 Landers                   junction of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road North/Herries
  5) PC 631 Kitson                   Road. They will ensure that Liverpool supporters who
  6 ) PC 174 Welch                   travel down Halifax Road/Penistone Road North from the
                                     motorway do not gain access to Herries Road or that
  7) PC 2804 Me FarLine
                                     part of Penistone Road leading to the Spion Kop. They
  8 ) PC 2905 C r e a t o r s
                                     wiil also ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters
                                     whose vehicles w in be parked in Herries Road and
                                     Penistone Road do not gain access to Leppings Lane
                                     or Penistone Road North.

                                     Fhase 2 (Durinq match)

                                     Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                                     Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-time when
                                     you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for rreal.

                                     Fhase 3 (After match)

 Seating for b r i e f e r as per
                                     location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters leaving
 plan attached (See Appendix         the ground do not corns into contact.
 'T* )




Serial 31
                                     PIBLIC ORDER - LEPPINGS IANE ROUNDftBOLTT

    PS 2881 Pearsor. *A2 '          Fhase 1 (Before match)
1) PC 235 Blackhar
2) PC 919 Evans                     This serial will have siirdlar responsibilities as
3) PC 2735 Wade
                                    outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
    PC 1900 Kent                    of supporters before the match but will       have
    PC 139 Langley                  responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island
-. PC 1239 RaybouLc                 remains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool
7) PC 1934 Smith                    supporters coaches to round it to gain access to their
8 ) PC 2359 Woodcoc*.               designated unloading/parking places. Unless directed
                                    otherwise, they will prevent such coaches gaining access
                                    to Leppings Lane.
Seating for briefzrvz as
per plan attached (See              Ihase 2 (Durinq match)
Appendix 'T')
                                    Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                                    Catchbar lane for standby duties until half-time
                                    when you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for meal.

                                    lhase 3 (After match)

                                    At the end of the match they win prevent a n traffic
                                    travelling into Leppings Lane and that part of Penistone
                                    Road leading from the ground u n t n directed to allow
                                    traffic to flow again by control.
        Serial 32
                                  R E L I C ORCER PATROL - P E M S T O C ROAD NOPTH
          PS 1295 Potts ’A3'
                                  R ia s e 1 (B e fo r e n a tc h )
     1 PC 2895 Thomas
    I      PC 2103 Frost
          PC 831 Wright           ^                ^ reSp°riSlble for part of Penistone
    4     PC 2298 Cooper          Road North from the traffic island at the Txctionwith
          PC 3110 E dw ards      lappings Lane to the Travellers Rest Public House
    £     PC 201 O ln ey         T m s road will be extensively used by Liverpool
          PC 1968 Tams           supporters en route from Kadsley Bridge Station and
    £     PC 3087 Kennar,        coach parking areas in Claywheels Lane artz Fenistone
                                 Road North/Halifax Road. They will maintain order
                                 and ensure that supporters do not possess items prohibit*
    Seating for briefing as      or                            <Banners* etc., missiles, weapons
    per plan attached (See
    Appendix 'T' )
                                 A) 2 PC’s will be located at the top of Nisaara Road
                                 to prevent access into this road by foothall' supporters
                                 or any other unauthorised persons who tries to qain
                                 access to the Niagara Sports Ground.

                                 B) Rerraining officers will be located on static points
                                 at the kerb edge or, if necessary, on the central
                                 reservation (dependant on the volume of traffic) to
                                 ensure public order.

                                 Phase 2 (During natch)

                                Join the S.Y. Police coach in Leppings Lane near to
                                Catchbar Lane for standby duties until half-tine when
                                you will be taken to Claywheels Lane for nee1 .

                                R a s e 3 (After match)

                                Officers will be situated in locations as civen for
                                Phase 1.




l ^ e r i a l 33
                                PIBLIC ORCER PATROL - PggSTJC            RCftD   NJRPi

                                Phase 1 (Before match)
     PS   2228   Atkin *A3 '
1    PC   2576   McEwon
                               This serial will be responsible for the pert; of
2    PC   1858   Griffin
                               Penistone Road North from the Travellers fest Public
~    PC   3282   Peacock
                               House to Wandsend Road North. This road kill be
4    PC   2922   Denton
                               extensively used by Liverpool supporters er. route from
-    PC   2689   Lacey
                               Wads ley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
€    PC   2063   Stevenson
                               Halifax Road. They will maintain order and ensure that
<    PC   2091   Hightor.
                               supporters do not possess items prohibited rv the ground
f    PC   2749   Allen
                               rules (banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).
                               Officers will be located on static points at the kerb
                               edge or on the central reservation (dependant on volute
Seating for briefing as
                                  traffic) to ensure public order.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T')                  R>ase 2 (During natch)

                               Officers will join the S.Y. Police coach ir. Leppings Lane
                               near to Catchbar Lane for standby duties until-half time -
                               when you will be taken to Claywheels lane fzr neal.      ;||
                               Fftase 3 (After natch)                                              J 3

                               Officers will be situated in the locations ss qiven for
                               Phase 1.
                               SUB SECTOR 13

                                                             Inspector Ttfcfnend •
                               PORCH R R ^ i ’lON - CLAYVCEELS LANE
    PS 2248 Sherratt ’A 3 ’
 1) PC 506 Gant                Efoase 1 (Before match)
2) PC 1232 Hood
3 > PC 2718 Wand              Hiis serial will supervise the unloading cf
4) PC 2055 Donnison           Liverpool coaches in Cla\**heels Lane. PC’s
5) PC 2375 Turner             will ensure that supporters leaving the
6) PC 2586 Brair              coaches do not possess items prohibited bv the
7) PC 779 Wheatley            ground rules (banners, etc, weapons, missiles
8) PC 3234 Cobb               or alcohol), ftice Clay«rieels Lane is full,
                              this Serial will be re-located and assist
                              Serials 39 and 40 in Halifax Road.

                              Fhase 2 (During match)

                              Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating for briefing as       At half time will be pi~*:ed up by South
per plan attached (See        Yorkshire Police coach an5 taken to Leppirqs
Appendix 'T ’)                Lane near to Catchbar L s ^ for standby duties.

                              Ehase 3 (After match)

                              Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.
     Serial 35
                                      CQflCH RKfcKriQN - OAYWHra?r.<; IANE

     PS 2936 Lindop 'A3'              Phase   1 (Before match)
 -) PC 2527 Dewey
- ) PC 106 Goss                       Wiis serial will supervise the ur.’na--na Qf
- ) PC 1130 Binns                    Liverpool coaches in Claywheels La.-*, f t ’s
^ ) PC 130 Parkin                    will ensure that supporters leaving iie
- ) PC 1320 Wilson                   ooaches do not possess items prchi£-ec by the
  ) PC 1923 S ta n x f o r t h       ground rules (banners, weapons, Kis-les or
^ ) PC 2848 R o b in so n            alcohol). Oice Claywheels Lane is full, this
-) PC 796 Muir                       Serial will be re-located and assi- serials
                                     39 and 40 in Halifax Road.            ^ials

                                     Riase 2 (During match)

                                     Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, fc half time
                                     will be picked up by the South Yor.csr_ire
^eating for briefing as _     .     Police coach and taken to Leppino=         near
attached (See Appendix  per plan    to Catchbar Lane for standby d u t i ^ .

                                    Fhase 3 (After match)

                                    At the ccxmiencement of Phase 3, this Serial
                                    will take up a position at Leppincrs Lane
                                    roundabout and assist Serials 30 anf " in
                                    maintaining segregation of supporter-"at that
                                     ocation. Once the bulk of supporters have
                                    passed this Serial will join Serial     in
                                                Lane to assist with c o a ~ ’loading




                                   NOTE:

                                   Claywheels lane will be subject tc Tto
                                   marking- cones for its full length - allow
                                   -Liverpool’s ooaches to park - t w e r p M E T BE
                                   HfftRCH). Barriers will also be available to
                                   prevent access fran Penistone Road.

                                   Access nust be allowed for persons working at
                                   the various premises including the rrswery and
                                   bakery which will be open on this dr.-.
                                   SUB SECTOR 14
                                                                    inspector   Rllic *c'

    Serial 36
                              —                OREER - TRAIN RBCEPTION/WADSlg STATION
        PS 1829 France 'C'
    1) PC 2403 Mortar.            Ehase J (Before natch)
   2) PC 13 Rose
   3) PC 72 Lipsky                This serial will work in conjunction *- th Mounted
   4 ) PC 3185 Trcek              Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
   5) PC 3044 Donnell             the trains at Wads ley Station. They v_ll marshall
   6 ) PC 1429 Bashfcrth                         a nd.only      theni tc leave when all
   7) PC 2910 Cannock             have left the station prenises. Wher= necessary
   8 ) PC 1266 Adsheac            searches will be carried out to ensure that items
                                  prohibited by the ground rules i.e. tenners, missiles
                                  weapons or alcohol, are not in their rcssession.

                                  Phase 2 (During match)

                                  Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
  heating for briefing         AL hf Lf~tiine will.be Picked up by the Police coach
      P®r plan attacred        ana taken to Leppings Lane near to Cetchbar Lane
                               for standby duties.
   (See Appendix ’ T ’
                               Phase 3 (After match)

                              Resune location at Wadsley Station tc ensure order
                              is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.




                              * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




 Serial 37
                              R B L I C ORLtlK - MADGLJ5Y STATION/TRAIN ra^ '^TlON
      PS 2407 Venables        Phase 1 (Before match)
^ 1 ) PC 451 Cooper
^ ^) PC 2969 Dunn
                             This serial will work in conjunction with Mounted
  ->) PC 1679 Oxley
                             Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving
  4) PC 3291 Schofield
                             the trains at Wadsley Station. They will marshall
  5) PC 2547 Ramsder.
                             the supporters and only allow then tc leave when
  6 ) PC 2929 Bennett
                             all have left the station premises. *bere necessary,
  7) PC 260 Shiprer
                             searches will be carried out to ensurs that supporters
  8 ) PC 211 Bricklev
                             are not in possession of items prohibited by the
                             ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, nzssiles or alcohol.

                             Ibis serial will fCT escort supporters to the ground
                             but remain static at this location.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (See       R a s e 2 (During natch)
Appendix 'T' )
                             Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
                             At half time will be picked up by thE Police coach
                             and taken to Leppings Lane near to Cetchbar Lane
                             for standby duties.

                             Phase 3 (After natch)L
                             -----------

                             Resune location at Wadsley Station tc ensure order is          7B
                             maintained and queues are formed in e proper nanner.           'It
  Serial 38
                              MINI BUS RBOajTltK ~ WARD G U © IOVD NORTH
     pc 182 1
            Tissincton 'C'    Phase 1 (Before retch)
 1} p - 3136 Sherbuzrr.
2)     3212 Nesbit
                             ITus seraal will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
3) p - 1779 Williarson
                             mini buses in Warrisend Road North. PC's will ensure
4) p~ 1981 Butler
                             that supporters leaving the coaches do not possess
5) p~ 2790 Yarrow
                             items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
6 ) p- 1917 Cooke            weapons, missiles or alcohol).
7) p~ 1477 Hill
8 ) p~ 1723 Bishop
                             Phase 2 (During retch)

                             Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.
                             At half-time will be picked up by the Si' Police
                             coach and taken to Leppings Lane near to Catchbar
                             Lane fcr standby duties.

                             Phase 3 (After match)

 ei'-— ^3 for briefing as    Take ur a position with Serial 20 infront of the
per plan attached (See       North Stand on the perimeter track to prevent a
Appendix 'T' )
                             pitch irr^asion /ensure the safety of match officials
                             and players.


                             NJTE:-

                             •mis road will be subject to 'No Parking' canes
                             and only mini buses, etc. will be allowed tc
                             park. Barriers will also be available for
                             erection at the entrance to this road to ccr.tro
                             entry.
                              SUB SECTOR 15

                                                            In s p e c to r   B re n n a n 'C
      Serial 39
                             C C fiC B R EC EPTIO N - HALIFAX ROftD

      PS   2332 Doyle 'C'
                             Phase 1 (Before matA)
 1)   PC   2662 Shiel
 2)   PC   2560     i
                             This serial will supervise the unloading of
 3)   PC   1927 Taylor
                             Liverpool ooaches ir. Halifax Roed ^Penistone
 4)   PC   2775 Wyer
 5)   PC   126 Bell          Road North. PC's ut_ll ensure that supporters
 6 ) PC 578 R ow ley         leaving the ooaches ac not possess items
 7) PC 14 Quaiyjn            prohibited by the grand rules ie banners,
                             missiles, weapons or alcohol.
 8 ) PC 535 Wain
                             Phase 2 (During match)

                             Refreshments at Clay-reels Lane.
 Seating for briefine as
 per plan attaciied (See     Ihase 3 (After match)
 Appendix 'T')
                            Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




   S e r i a l 40
                            OOftCB RECEPTION - ffiU F A X ROftD

                            R a s e 1 and 2 (Before Match and during match)
    PS   965 Cloke 'C '
1)  PC   2056 Lister        Duties will be identu =al to and worked in
2 ) PC   3311 Baker         conjunction with Sen=l 39 above.
3) PC    1961 Lawrence
4) PC    1149 Nash          Phase 3 (After natch)
5) PC    282 Davis
6 ) PC   3150 ftorsh        At the ccrmencement =f Phase 3, this Serial
7) PC    2338 Wassell       will take up a position at Leppings Lane
8 ) PC   903 Pearson        roundabout and assist Serials 30 and 31 in
                            maintaining segrega-tiar. of supporters at that
                            location. Once the bulk of supporters have
                            passed this Serial *-_ll join Serial 39 and
                            assist with coach loading duties.

Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T')
                                           SUB SECTOR 16
                                                                  Inspector   Brtxntead 'C'
  Serial 41
                                           PUBLIC ORDER - HALIFAX RCftD
          PS 842 Hudson        'C1         Phase 1 (Before match)
  1 ) ?: 2153 Ekvtibiri
  2 ) ?: 2763 Ley
  3}   p;                                  This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wadslev
          635 Gathercole
  4}   p- 3176 Gi I~our                    Station to Southey Green Road. Officers will wcrx
  5)   ?r 443 Stillings                    in pairs to maintain order, etc.
  6)   P2 1779 Watson
       p:                                 Phase 2 (During natch)
  7)      864 Stonath
  8)   p- 3128 Devlin
                                          Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road North
                                          near to SvTC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                                          half-time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                                          for meal.

 S e a tin g f o r b r i e f i n g a s    Phase 3 (After match)
 P6- plan attached (See
 Appendix 'T' )
                                          Patrol location outlined above.
                                          ******* 1>

 Serial 42
                                          PUBLIC C K E R - HALIFAX RCftD

           2171 Keerian 'C'               Phase 1 (Before natch)
 1) p-
       2466 Carkadine
 2) P2 1348 Breexe
                                         This s e n a l will patrol Halifax Road from Southev
3) p; 1925 Suter
                                         Green Road to Browning Road. Officers will wirk
4) p- 104 Bovill
                                         in pairs to maintain order, etc.
5) p- 2458 Mour.tford
6 ) p- 179 Sykes
                                         Phase 2 (During match)
7) p- 3149 WilicLnson
8 ) 15~ 3020 OsboLime
                                         Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                                         Phase 3 (After match)

Se e t m g for briefing                  Patrol location outlined above.
as per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T'

SftriM 43                                PUBLIC ORCER - HALIFAX ROAD

          1253 Graham *C'                This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Broking
1)   ?I   2940 House                     Road to Deerlands Avenue. Officers will work it
2)   PI   2626 Harris                    pairs to maintain order, etc.
3)   PI   3101 Hirst
4)   ?:   2515 Smitr.                    Phase 2 (During match)
5)   PI   314 McCoy
6)   PI   725 Whit tingham               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels lane.
7)   ?r   1170 Drans field
8)   PZ   80 Collar                      Phase 3 (After match)

Seating for bri *=^ing as                Patrol location outlined above.
per plan attached (See
Appendix 'T' )

                                         NCHE: These officers will ensure that Liverpccl
                                         supporters travelling in private cars are direrted
                                         to park in side roads on adjoining estates.
                                   SUB SECTOR 17
                                                          Inspector tiardle *E'

 Serial 44
                                   PIBLIC ORDER - OQftQJ RECEPTIOi/SEARCH SQUAD
      PS    1515 Hughes 'F2'       Phase   1 (Before match)
  1) PC    1042 Braddock 'A l '
  2) PC    710 Adams      'Al'
                                   Thxs serial will work in cor.:,unction with Road
  3) PC    2371 Bairs tow Al
                                   Traffic Officers on the A616 at Oughtibridge on
 4) PC     2216 Hi 1H e r Al
                                   the one-way system to check at random coaches and
 5) PC     2932 Bradley Al
                                   mini buses carrying Liverpool supporters.
 6 ) PC    3323 Ducker Al
 7) PC     1484 Collins Al
                                  Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure
 8 ) PC    1845 Zutmerfield Al
                                  passengers are in possession of tickets, are not
 9) PC     1729 Sudowrth Al
                                  under the influence of alcohcl or in possession
10) PC     2778 Price Al
                                  of alcohol and are considered fit to attend this
                                  event.

                                  Where this is not the case, cr where they are
                                  in possession of alcohol or irner it's influence
                                  consideration should be taker, regarding action
                                  under the appropriate legislation or returning
                                  them to the motorway.
Seating for briefing as
per plan attached (SEE
                                  All coaches/mini buses checked will have a
Appendix 'T')
                                  label,issued to sector conmarriers, affixed to
                                  the windscreen prior to therr being allowed to
                                  leave.

                                  Riase   2 (During match)

                                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                                  Phase 3 (After match)

                                  At the end of the match this serial will join
                                  Serials 19, 30 and 31 at Lepcings Lane traffic
                                  island to assist with the segregation of
                                  supporters.
                                        SIB SECTOR 18
                                                                      Inspector Mortar. *E'

  Serial 45
                                        H B O C O R m R_- OQftCH RECEPTION/SEARCE SQUAD -
       PS 9 6 : M u rra y    ' F2'
   1) PC 2421 Jo n es A 2               Phase 1 (Before match)
   2 ) PC 25p: Redga_rt: A 2
   3) PC 1 2 *£ G lo v e r A2          This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
  4) PC 2 5 ? : H a c k in g           ^faoers on the A61 on the Sheffield side of the
  5) PC 3 2 ." C ra p p e r A 2         ankersley motorway junction (Exit 3f to check at
  6 ) PC 1 6 - r Rogar. A 2                                              buses carxyin, L i v e ^ i "
  7) PC 811 H olm es A 2
  8 ) PC 2 3 5 : Peckcv>=jT A2
  9) PC 2 9 " B a rn e s A2           Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passenoe-=
1 0 ) PC 5 /1 H a re A l
                                      ^ alcohol
                                      of   ^    SeSSi°n ° f U c t e t s - "0t ^
                                                 or on possession      of alcohcl and are
                                      consadered fit to attend this event.

                                      Where this is not the case, or where they are in
                                      possessaon of alcohol or under it's influence
                                      consaderatioH should be taken r e g a r d s action
                                      under the appropriate legislation or ^turning
                                      them to the motorway.
Seating     briefing as
per plan attached (See
Appendix *T')                        All coaches/mini buses checked will hr/e a label
                                     (issued to sector carrmanders) affixed to the
                                     windscreen prior to them being allowed to leave.

                                     Phase 2 (IX ir ln g    match)

                                     Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywh=els Lane
                                     and then return to Tankersley for statdby duties
                                     with a vaew tc deployment as a nubile unit.

                                     Phase   3 (After match)

                                     Rem ain in T a n k s r s le y as a m o b ile u n it .
                                       SUB SECTOR 19
                                                                       Inspector Walker               'Ops*
      Serial 46
                                      MDBLLE PATROL — CALL SIGN ‘T O m (fp*
         PS 1347 Hun t 'F2
                                      Rase 1 (Before natch)
      1) PC 1363 SmyV.
      2 ) PC 30 8 9 W a r r ilo w
                                      I t i i s s e r i a l w i l l p a t r o l th e S to rk s b rid g e a re a
      3) PC 3168 Trier:
      4) PC 2041 HoneT                p a y in g p a r t i c u l a r a t t e n t i o n t o lic e n s e d p re m is e s
                                      and to m a in ta in o r d e r .
      5) PC 782 Hemsw^rth
                                      Rase 2 (During natch)

                                      Refreshments at Claywheels Lane 2.15pr-3.45nm
                                      Resume patrol 3.45pm.

                                     Rase 3 (After natch)
   Seating for briefing as per
                                     Patrol in area as outlined in Pr^ase 1.
   plan attached {See Appendix
   'T')


   Serial 47
                                     MCBIUE PATOOL - CALL SIGN "TAN3D TOO"
        PS   681 Hill *F2 1          Rase 1 (Before natch)
  1)    PC   583 Davis
  2)    PC   2378 Webster
                                     This serial will patrol the Deepcar/Oughtibridge
  3)    PC   844 Rees
                                     area, paying particular attentive to licensed
  4)    PC   300 Hays
                                     premises and to maintain order.
  5)    PC   2628 Churrrs
                                     Rase 2 (During natch)

                                    Refreshments at Claywheels Lane. Traffic Dept.
                                    Meal 4pm-4.30pm, Patrol prior tr 4pm.

                                    Rase 3 (After natch)
 .Seating for briefing as per       Patrol in area as outlined in Psase 1.
^ p l a n attached (See Appendix


  Serial 48                         M3BIL£ PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANTTt
       PS   1948 Miller- 'F2'       Rase 1 (Before match)
 1)    PC   1301 Cherry
 2)    PC   320 Bradshaw            •mis serial will patrol the Wai£ley/Middlewood
 3)    PC   3278 Stage              area, paying particular attention to licensed
 4)    PC   3144 Robinson-Powell    premises to maintain order.
 5)    PC   893 Hague
                                    Ras e 2 (During match)

                                    Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3.15pn.
                                    Resune patrol at 3.45pm in above area.

 Seating for briefing as per        Ras e 3 (After match)
 plan attached (See Appendix
 'T').                              Patrol in area as outlined abcre.
                                           SUB SECTOR 20
                                                                       Inspector   Rabinscn 'HQ Carps
  Serial 49
                                           H3BI1£ PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO PJUR*
       PS 220“ Sr*3v ’T2 '
                                           Phase 1 (Before watch)
  1)   PC 837 Carol
  2)   PC 297c Killians
                                          Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
  3)   PC 333 C c U v i e
                                          licensed premises.
  4)   PC 182Z H.tchinson Dr Sch
  5)   PC 407 jxnso:. Ops
                                          Phase 2 (During watch)

                                          Meal at 3.15ft -
                                                         .at Claywheels lane. Traffic Dept.
                                          Resune patrol at 3.45pm Foxhill/Parson Cross area.
 Seating for srief-ng as
 per plan ertarhec (See                   Phase 3 (After watch)
 appendix '?
                                         Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
                                         * * * * * * * * * * * * * *




 Serial 50
                                         M3BILE PATTOL - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE*
      PS    107r Hf.l ]brook   Dr Sch    Phase 1 (Before watch)
 1)   PC    1614 lund          Pros
 2)   PC    3051 Vt_lkes       Pros      Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
 3)   PC    1141 ruckley       Pros      to licensed premises to maintain order.
 4)   PC    315 rcoerts        Dr Sch
 5)   PC    11CH ZHtlow-       Dr Sch    Phase 2 (Daring watch)

                                        3.00pm patrol Person Cross/Foxhill area.
                                        4.00pm meal Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating fcr oriefuig as                 Resune patrol 4.30pm.
per plan attached (See
appendix *r" -                          Phase 3 (After retch)

                                        Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.
                                        * * * * * * * * * * * * *




Serial 51                               MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO SIX"

      PS   760 2r=rsey Corps            Phase 1 (Before match)
1)    PC   232“ Eiiichcliffe T m g
2)    PC   238" » t.Ison      Ops       Patrol Grenosin= area, paying special attention to
3)    PC   2521 Zlarke        ops       licensed premises and to ne in tain order.
4)    PC   599 >fe*;in D r Sch
5)    PC   2 6Or Jiorgan Dr Sch         Phase 2 (During match)

                                        3.15pm meal - Claywheels lane. Traffic Dept.
Seating fcr briefing as                 3.45pm resune petrol Grenoside.
per plan ettschec (See
Appendix T )                            Phase 3 (After retch)

                                        Resune patrol as outlined in Phase 1.
                                                                                       Appendix 'D*
                                       SUB SECTOR 21
                                                                           Inspector Ovrrlre «c'

  Serial 52
                                       OQftCH REO^p-liOW - HKKk IES ROAD BUS GARAGE/HERRTTC R O M

        PS    969 Hodgkinson 'C'       R a s e 1 (Before natch)
   1)   PC   278 Richards
  2)    PC   1974 Jones               This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
  3)    PC   2196 Smith               Forest ooaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
  4)    PC   1344 Hansor.             ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
  5)    PC   2652 Sapsford            possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
  6)    PC   2946 Daley               banners, weapons, missiles or alccrci.
  7)    PC   1508 Hirst
  8)    PC   3138 Gearing            Any over-flow will be directed to parx on the South
                                     side of Herries Road South and Ravsar Spring Road.

                                     R a s e 2 (During match)
  Seating for briefing as
  oer plan attached (See             Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept. At
  Appendix 'T')                      half-time will be picked up by SY Pclice coach and
                                     taken to Penistone Road North near tc Gate 'O' SWFC
                                     for standby duties.

                                     R a s e 3 (After match)

                                     Supervise loading of supporters or.tc coaches.




 Serial 53
                                    POACH R E C m i O K - HhkKlES ROAD BUS QUW£/HERRTre RQAD

    PS 1073 Bounds   'C'            R a s e 1 (Before match)
 1) PC 953 Mugglestone
 2) PC 947 uul eJ.                 This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
 3)    PC   389 Lawrence           Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garage. PC's will
 4)    PC   243 Lythall            ensure that supporters leaving t±e coaches do not
   )   PC   1851 Spurr             possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
 6)    PC   200 Hoyland            Banners, weapons, missiles or alcoocl. Any overflow
 7)    PC   270 limes              will be directed to park on the socth side of Herries
                                   Road South and Rawson Spring Road.
 8)    PC   520 Hogg
                                   R a s e 2 (During natch)

Seating for briefing as            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, traffic Dept.
per plan attached                  At half-time will be picked up by SY Police coach and
(See Appendix •T '}                taken to Penistone Road North near tc Gate 'O' SWFC
                                   for standby duties.

                                   Riase 3 (After match)

                                   Supervise loading of supporters or.to coaches.

                                   * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


                                   NOTE:- Herries Road and Wardsend Jbad will be
                                   subject to "No Parking" restrictions which will be
                                   strictly enforced in relation to private cars.
                                                                                                      ' M
                                   SYT buses will park on Herries Road an the opposite
                                   side to their garage.
                                      SUB SECTOR 22
                                                                          Inspector   tievey <c.
       Serial ]54
                                     BUS/CQftCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD                   SGCTH
       PS 2934    Doyle    •c'       R a s e 1 (Before Match)
  1)   PC 2177   Kellv
 2)    PC 3097   Al Ip -.            This serial will ensure that Herries fcad South
 3)    PC 1573   Morar.              remains clear of all parked cars to allov the
 4)    PC 3243   Rilev
 5)    PC 1216   Mandes                          ^   bjses carrying Notti.-cr.am supporters.
                                    Coaches will unload on the North side cf this road
 6)    PC 2043   Glerua*:
 7)    PC 3146   N o n or.                                            •t a B PeniSt°ne ^            the       •
 8)    PC 1104   Taylcr
                                    They will supervise unloading and ensure that
 Seating for brii                                         ^            ™ P°ssession of             prohibited
 as per plan atti                  or                                   1,e’ banners'              missiles
 (see Appendix
                                   They will also supervise the unloading c" any
                                   Nottingham coaches who may be directed to unload and
                                   park on the hard shoulder in this road (south side)
                                   as an overflow from other parking locations.
                                   R a s e 2 (During watch)

                                   Refreshments at Ciaywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                  A^ half~tjjTE w m     Picked up by SY Pclice coach
                                  and taken to Penistone Road North near to SWFTT
                                  Gate ’O ’ for standoy duties.
                                  Phase 3 (After match)

                                  Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches /buses
                                  * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



  Serial 55
                                  COACH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD SGUTH
                                  Phase 1 (Before match)
    PS   2467 Carter 'C '
^ P C    1511 Barr=r             This serial will be located at the junction of
 W XT    3332 Tyler              H e m e s Road and Herries Road South to ensure that
3) PC    3051 Wesnood            Nottingham coaches arriving at this location are
4) PC    503 Gougir.             directed to the car parking areas at SYI bus garage
5) PC    1198 Washington         xn Herries Road. Any overflow will be directed to
6) PC    2738 Morat              parking on the South side of Herries Road South and
                                 Rawson Spring Road.
7) PC    337 Bald*tr.
8) PC    732 Yates               Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the
                                 parking area in Rauson Spring Road.
                                 Ihey will ensure that passengers do not unload until
Seating for brisfinc             they are in the appropriate parking area.
as per plan attached             Phase 2 (During Batch)
(See Appendix T ’ )
                                 Refreshments            at Claywheels lane. Traffic Dept.
                                 At i*alf-time           will be picked up by SY Police coach
                                 and taken to            Penistone Road North near to SWFC
                                 Gate '0* for            standby duties.
                                 Phase 3 (After match)
                                 Supervise loading cf supporters onto coaches.


                                 NOTE: - Herries Roadl South will be subject to *NO
                                 PARKINS" cones to allow Nottingham coaches to park.
                                 THE MbS’lKICTICNS WILL BE PffPRCED. Coaches will be
        Serial 18
                                        LEPPIN3S LANE *njRNSTII£S
          PS 758 Mrrgar. 'F'
                                        R a s e 1 (Before natch)
    1     PC 2961 JenkjLnson 1F2'
    2     PC 3116 Crookes
    3)   PC 1639 Mr In tash             This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-11
    4)   PC 1171 Horsfield              They will ensure that persons enterinr do not possel
    5)   PC 513 Francis                 items prohibited by the ground rules manners etc
    6)   PC 159 Hirsh                   weapons, missiles or alcohol). They k_L1 maintain”
                                        order and ensure orderly queues are ferred.
    7)   PC 1834 Schoiev
   8)    PC 2172 Prince
                                        Phase 2 (Curing watch)
   9)    PC 2960 Alexander
  10)    PC 3342 5 lour,t *F1'
                                       Itiis serial will be located in the tnrrel to the
                                       North pen.

                                       R a s e 3 (After Batch)

                                       At the ccnmencerent of Phase 3, this Serial will
                                       leave the grounc and take up a positirr. in Leppina-
    MEAL: Ir. cvm                      lane opposite the turnstiles to await exit of
    after kic*: off                    supporters and prevent disorder.


  Seating for briefing as              ***********************
  per plan atrachec (Appendix 'T' )



    Serial 19
                                       LEPPINSS IAFC TURNSTILES

     PS    323 Froctcr '              R a s e 1 (Before match)
   1)PC   611 Barth
  2) PC   2963 Singh                  ■mis serial will be located at Leppinrs Lane and
  3) PC   1124 Pratt                  ensure that ortierly queues form. They will assist
  4) PC   2902 roberts                other serials at this location as required and in
^^5) PC   324? Jackson                the event of vehicles, coaches, arriving, supervise
^P>) PC   2333 English                their unloading.
     PC   276 Eacinson
  8) PC   2530 Locklev                Rase 2 (During watch)
  9) PC   3135 Strmless
 10) PC   776 Glaves                  Hiis serial will remain outside the t-mstiles until
                                      half time before taking refreshments.

                                      R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                      At the corrmencernent of Phase 3 this serial will le^«=
   MEAL: Ir. cym
                                      the ground and take up a position at Isspings Lane
   after half tine
                                      roundabout and assist serials 30 and 21* in m a i n t a i n :
                                      segregation of supporters at that loc=zion.
 Seating for briefing as
 per plan ar~achec (Appendix 'T' )
                                              SUB SECTOR 9
                                                                    Inspector Del^iey 'F C&V'
                                                                    Inspector Beresford 'E C*V'
           Serial 20
                                              GROUND RESERVES
             PS    1066 Higcins
        1)   PC   2000 Brayfcrd               Phase 1 (Before match)
       2)    PC   1398 Gocxt.-_21
        3)   PC   2551 Billzjngs          Itus serial will act as a Reserve Serial and regain
       4)    PC   2873 Whiteiam           within the gyrmasium unless directed otherwise.
       5)    PC   567 Salway
       6)    PC   2493 Webster            Phase 2 (During match)
       7)    PC   2281 Barker
       8)    PC   684 Nortor              As above
       9)    PC   722 Gee
      10)    PC   2786 Moore              R a s e 3 (After match)

      To have Transit available           ■fins serial will take up a position in front of the
                                          North stand on the perimeter track to prevent a
          MEAL: After kic'-'. off in
                                          pitch invasion/ensure the safety cf natch officials
      i         gym                       and players.
       eating for briefing
      as per plan attacrhed (Appendix *T' )




          Serial 21                       GROUND RESERVES

                                          Rase 1 (Before match)
      PS     2607   Eddison   'E C&V
 1)   PC     1141   Smith                This serial will act as a reserve serial and
 2)   PC     2064   Fairclough           remain in the area adjacent to the Police
 3)   PC     2130   Frost                control box between the South stand and
 4)   PC     2304   Crookes              Leppings Lane terraces.
 5)   PC     2507   Wilkes
 m p c       2577   Tewick               Rase 2 (During match)
 t           2330   Willsmer
 8) PC       2372   Justice              As above
 9) PC       2435   Griffiths
10) PC       1040   Duffy                Rase 3 (After match)
To have Transit available                This serial will take up a position in front of
                                         the West Stand on the perimeter track to
                                         prevent a pitch invasion /ensure the safety of
      MEAL: After haJ_f time             match officials and players.
      in gym.

      Seating for briefing
      as per plan attached
      (Appendix 'T' )
                                                                        APPEJCEX 'C'
                                       SUB SECTOR IQ                    “         "
                                                                 Inspector lUrphries
   Serial 22
                                       PIBLIC ORCER - MIEOLagXP HCftD
       PS   1544 Hoar^tts     'Al'     Phase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC   354 CLirrs
 2)    PC   2966 Caszrrove
                                      P C ’s will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
 3)    PC   1390 Kjsistt
                                      Wads ley lane to Crofton Avenue to rredntain order and
 4)    PC   2667 F^-nerty
                                      prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
 5)    PC   3194 Bee—
                                      to side street parking and maintain security of
 6)    PC   3160 Jocr^SDn
                                      business premises, paying special attention to
 7)    PC   2739 Long
                                      local public houses and shops.
 8)    PC   3337 TYiar^json
                                      R a s e 2 (During natch)

                                      Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
                                      once authorised by match control.

                                      Phase 3 (After natch)

                                      On ccrrmencement of Phase 3. this serial will resume
                                      patrol in location as above. Paying particular
 Seating for bn=.fing as
                                      attention to shops and supernarkets arri prevent
 per plan at tarred (See              any clash of supporters.
 Appendix *T ')




 Serial 23                           PUBLIC ORCER - MnX3LQC)0D H M D
   PS 2305 I/t ^= 'A l '             Phase 1 (Before natch)
1) PC 1698 M a n i n
2) PC 703 Thcrrrton                  P C 's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
3) PC 2862 T— n-                     Wadsley lane to Min to Road to maintain order and
   PC 2158 Crzz
                                     prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
   PC 1889 Brsrt                     to side street parking and maintain security of
6) PC 2993 Hjaent                    business premises, paying special attention to
7) PC 469 Shav                       local public houses and shops.
8) PC 1758 Winfield
                                     Phase 2 (During natch)

                                     Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, once authorised by
Seating for briefing as              match control.
per plan at tarried (See
Appendix 'T')                        Phase 3 (After natch)

                                     Oi commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                                     petrol in location as above, paying particular
                                     attention to shops and prevent any clash of
                                     supporters.
        Serial 24
                                     PIBLIC ORDER - MTDOLEHOOD ROM)

       PS    1628 Dolan *A1'         R a s e 1 (Before natch)
 1)    PC    2508 Mitchell
 2)    PC    1837 Brookshe*-        PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
 3)    PC    905 Butler             Kinto Road to Hillsborough Precinct to maintain order
 4)    PC    2205 Wand              and prevent any clash of supporters, paying special
 5)    PC    1741 Sewertr.-         attention to shops and in particular licensed
 6)    PC    3011 Cliftor.          premises.
 7)    PC    1760 Snowdon
 8 ) PC 552 H a r ts h c r r ie     Phase 2 (Daring watch)

                                    Refreshments in gymnasium when authorised by
 Seating for brief;irjg as pier     match control.
 plan at tached (See Appendix
 •T . )                             R a s e 3 (After watch)

                                    On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume
                                    Patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                                    to shops and licensed premises and prevent any
                                    clash of supporters.




      Serial 25                    PUBLIC ORDER - HILLSaORDUCH PRECINCT

      PS    2640   Perry ’A l '    R a s e 1 (Before watch)
1)    PC    2800   Sirrms
2)    PC    2225   Purvis          PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
      PC    3216   Smith           Hillsborough Precinct to Brad field toad and from
  ,    >C   2909   Wild            Bradfield Road to the Old Blue Ball Public House.
5)    PC    1351   Enwright        Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
6)    PC    2537   Gibson          Precinct, paying special attention to the
7)    PC    3077   Weeks           supermarkets where looting could take place.
8)    PC    1091   Foster
                                   R a s e 2 (During match)

                                   Refreshments at gymnasium when authorised by
Seating for briefing as per        natch control.
plan attached (See Appendix 'T')
                                   R a s e 3 (After match)

                                   On corrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resure
                                   patrol in location as above, paying particular
                                   attention to shops and to prevent any clash of
                                   supporters.
                                         SIB SECTOR 11
                                                                    Inspector Selwood     ’E ’
        Serial 26
                                        g g L I C OROgL r PARKS lit: RQAD/CATCHBAR TAMP
         PS 2620 Croplev 'Al'
   D     PC 1442 Charted                .Phase 1 (Before match)
   2)    PC 1431 Jacksar.
   3)   PC 1882 Rinmejr                 S ; ^ 11rf>3trol ^ p&irs in Parkside Road and
  4)    PC 1734 Foster                  Catchbar Lane to maintain order and prevent any clash
  5)    PC 1789 Flatner.
                                        s L s ^ 8^ ^ '       fHyiJ’9 Special «:entioTto   S
  6)    PC 184 Gees or.                  hops and licensed premises. It is essential that
  7)    PC 2872 Harreti                 vigilance is maintained on this road as it is the
  8)    PC 2354 Plum?— ;-«g                  route bet«en either end of the

                                        Phase 2 (During match!


                                     S t c h b S Larw* r°liC! °°ach “ LePPings lane near to
                                                 ^         standby duties until half tine when
                                     you will be taken to Claywheels Lane far rreal.

  Seating for briefing as per        Phase 3 (After match)
^ l a n attached (See Appendix
                                     S t S H r r * " , ' ° f PteSe 3 - this            resune
                                                  location as above, pavina s i ^    1 aHonti
                                                                  riVal            beJSgT
                                                 \               Park <Partside **>



      Serial 27
                                    PtBLIC ORCER - PaCESTONE RQAD/LEPPINGS L M C
      PS    1684 Mozlev *2j •
 1)   PC    2054 Wilkes             Rase 1 (Before match)
2)    PC   2752 Jowitt
3)    PC   2584 Musk                J!!1L SefiaL Wi11    ^POHSibl-e for manning the barriers
4)    PC   1432 Wright              DrelJn?       atK    rouths of the f o l d i n g roads to
5)    PC   2526 Ayres                       >^CCeSS 7 SUpporters- n is essential that
6)    PC   2042 Drury
                                    events S                311 bUt reside^ -       At similar
ZX    PC   598 Stubbins             hv         ^ past considerable damage has been caused
           2711 Pattiscn            the^Sl^-      SUPPOrter3'               <iuring and after

                                   1)    Penistone Road North/Vere Road
Seating for briefing as per        2)    Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
                                   3)    Leppings Iane/Vere Road
        attaCfied ^Se£ ^PPe™*^-*
                                   4)    Leppings Lane/Fielding Road
                                   Phase 2 (During natch 1

                                   tenain at locations given above to pnrjent supporters
                                   vto are unable to enter the ground gaining a c c e s s to
                                   these roads.

                                   B a s e 3 (After match)
MEALS: During ne-ch
staggered at Clar-wheels           Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to
Lane to ensure ccvsr for           remove the barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It
points in Phase 1.                 is essential that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings
                                   Lane until all supporters have cleared the area.
       Serial 56
                            W Pg BUS RBJfclrriON - RAW90W SPRING JO\D
        PS 2140 Taylor •
                            Phase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC 660 Dexter
 2)    PC 84 Hunt
                            This serial will supervise the nnW - ^ - 0f
 3)    PC 2155 Edwards
 4)    PC 34 0 Waldron      Nottingham Forest mini buses in Ravsrr. Sprinq
                            Road.
 5)    PC 877 Hubbard
 6)    PC 1775 Hurphries
                            PC s will ensure that supporters
 7)    PC 951 Winter
                            the buses do not possess items p r o f i t e d by
 8)    PC 2523 Burrows
                            the ground rules i.e. banners, weapocs, missiles
                            or alcohol.

                            Ffrase 2 (D u rin g m atch)
  Seating for brief inn
                           Refreshments     at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
      plan attached
                           At half-time     will be picked by SY Fzl^ce coach
“    e Appendix 'T1)
                           and taken to     Penistone Road North n = r to SWFC
                           Gate 'O' for     standby duties.

                           B a s e 3 (After match)

                           Supervise loading of supporters ont: coaches.




                           ***************




                           N3E:-     This road will be subject to
                           'No Parking' cones and only mini bises, vans,
                           etc., will be allowed to park. Barriers will
                           also be available for erection at tbe entrance
                           to this road to control entry.
                                          SUB SECTOR 23
                                                                   Inspector Batenin 'C'

    Serial 57
                                          PUBLIC ORDER - HECKLES RCftD
         PS    1771 Johns ttne 1C '
                                          R a s e 1 (Before         )
   1)    PC   1143 Rockett
   2)   PC    271 ]England
   3)   PC                               This serial will be responsible for petrolling
              1513 Reeves
  4)    PC                               ^e n "-^es Road (PC's in pairs) from the railway
              3015 Park? — >->h
  5)    PC                               viaduct to the Five Arches Public Hxse, to
              2694 Pellegz-ine
  6)    PC                               maintain order and ensure that any perking
              2040 F am s w t r t h
  7)    PC                               restrictions are enforced. Direct hcttingham
              1805 Latha-
  8)    PC                               Forest supporters ir private vehicles to
              1539 West
                                         park in locations ir. side roads.

                                         R a s e 2 (During ■etch)

                                         Join SY Police coarr. in Penistone Roai North
                                         near to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby dunes until
                                         half-time when will be taken to Clayvneels Lane
                                         for meal.

                                         R a s e 3 (After match)
    S e a tin g f o r b r i e f i n g
    as p e r a tt a c h e d p la n
                                         Patrol in the area outlined above to maintain
    ( See A p p e n d ix ’ 7 ' )         order.


                                         ********


  Serial 58                              PUBLIC ORDER - HERRIES RCftD

    PS 2928 Willirrson Pros,            Phase 1 (Before Match)
 1)   PC 1966 Mittor.    Trg
 2)   PC 1839 Powell     Trg            This serial will be responsible for petrolling
 3) PC 1709 Spoonezr Trg                Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from the Five Arches
 4)   PC 3237 Hislop     Dps            Public House to the traffic island at the junction
>5)   PC 794 Palmer C                   with Moonshine Lane <Shireclif fe Road to naintain
    PC 2323 Mittor. Z                   order and ensure t±et any parking restrictions
 ;) PC 507 Gilbertrorpe C               are enforced.
 8) PC 1947 Longfcrt3 C
 9) PC 1914 Royale                      Direct Nottingham Forest supporters ir. private
                                        cars to park in locations in side roads.

                                        Rase 2 (During match)

                                        Join SY Police coeer. in Penistone Road North
                                        near to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby duties until
                                        half-time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane for
  Seating for briefing                  meal.
as per plan attached
  (See Appendix '7 ’)                   Rase 3 (After match)

                                        Patrol in the area outlined above to maintain
                                        order.
                                     SIB SECTOR 24
                                                               Inspector   Buny»^   *c'

  Serial 59
                                     H B L I C ORCER - PPQSTCNE ROAD

                            ,E ,     Phase 1 (Before match)-
       PS   2037 Venables
  1)   PC   2343 Gardiner
                             A3     PC s will patrol in pairs in Penistone toad from
  2)   PC   8 McDonnell
                             A3     Parks ide Road to Borough Road to rreint£_r. order
  3)   PC   3325 Gregscn
                            A3           prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
  4)   PC   675 Ley
                            A3      supporters to side street parking and nr— tain
  5)   PC   1952 Wain
                            A3      security of business premises. Special attention
  6)   PC   2917 Baterzn
                            A3      to be given to the enforcement of parkinr
  7)   PC   2783 Vallance
                            A3      restrictions on ftenistone Road.
  B)   PC   2169 Lowry
                            A3
                                    Phase 2 (During match)

                                    Jcir. SY Police coach in Penistone Road I«irth
                                    ne=r to SWFC Gate 'O' for standby dutief
                                    ur.til half-time when will be taken to dr.-wheels
                                    Lare for meal.
 nesting for briefing               Phase 3 (After match)
 as per plan attached
 (See Appendix 'T ' )
                                    O', carmencement of Phase 3, this serial v_Ll resume
                                    petrol in location- as above and prevent scv clash
                                    of supporters.




Serial 60
                                   PUBLIC ORCER - PENISTONE ROAD

                                   Ftaase 1 (Before match)
   PS 2019 Tharpsar~. 'E'
 ' PC 76 Dirham A3                 PC’s will patrol in pairs in Penistone 5cad from
 / P C 2828 Lighton A3             Borough .Road to Burton Street to raintcir order
) PC 2292 Langfield A3             anc prevent any clash of supporters. Direct
) PC 1891 Staniforth A3            s’
                                    x rorters to side street parking. Mairtain
) PC 2593 Russon A3                security of business premises.
) PC 682 Love B1
) PC 1278 Lang B1                  Fhase 2 (During match)
) PC 2012 Eustace B1
                                   Join SY Police coach in Penistone Road 3crth
                                   near to SWFC Gate ’O ’ for standby duties until
                                   half time when will be taken to Claywheels Lane
                                   for meal.

                                   fbase 3 (After match)

Seating for briefing               O'- coimencement of Phase 3, this serial *- ~n resune
as per plan at tacred              patrol in location as above and prevent srry clash
(See Appendix "I”                  of supporters.
                                           SUB SECTOR 25
                                                                         Inspector Wallace 'E'

       Serial 61
                                           MCBI IE PATROL - CALL SIGN “TANQO jgVPT
       PS   870 Chapman Trg                Fhase 1 (Before match)
  1)   PC   904 G a m e r Cos - Driver
  2)   PC   3262 Hallett Ops
                                           Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention
  3)   PC   2923 Dalryrrrle      Al        to licensed premises.
  4)   PC   2497 Serhat-LLc     Al
  5)   PC   2942 Williarson      Al       Fhase 2 (During match)

                                          3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane
                                          3.45pm resune patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.

                                          Phase 3 (After match)
 Seating for briefir>2 at;
                                          Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
     Plan attachec »See Appendix



      Serial 62
                                          m o b i l e patrol   -   call s k u   -t a n g o   eight*

      PS   894 Brown Trc                  Phase 1 (Before match)
 1)   PC   93 Turner Ccs- Driver
 2)   PC   1236 Smith
                                         Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention
 3)   PC   2389 Martin A2                to licensed premises.
 4)   PC   80 Marvin Al
 5)   PC   1414 Gordon A2                Fhase 2 (During match)
 6)   PC   2649 Bashfcrir. A2
                                         3.00pm Patrol Firvale 'Southey Green area.
                                         4.00pm-4.30pm Meal - Claywheels Lane.

 Seating for brief m g                   Fhase 3 (After match)
 as per plan attached
J S e e Appendix ’T ' •                  Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




     Serial 63                           MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIQJ "TANQO N D C *

      PS   982 Beattie Ops               Fhase 1 (Before match)
1)    PC   740 Rowbothar   Dr Sch
2)    PC   3173 Kirk Pros                Patrol Hillsborough/L^ngsett Road paying special
3)    PC   390 Leach Pros                attention to licensed premises.
4)    PC   1940 Pattisar. Ops
5)    PC   1691 Waneck HD                lhase 2 (During matcfa)

                                         3.15pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
Seating for briefinc                     3.45pm resume patrol Hillsborough
as per plan attached
(See Appendix 'T'}                       lhase 3 (After matcfa)

                                         Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
Serial 64                      HCBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO 1 P T
    PS   2737 Halle 11 Ops     Fhase 1 (Before match)
1   PC   56 Firth       Trg
    PC   718 Pont rr->c:
                               Patrol CXderton/Neepsend area, paying sper_al
-   PC   808 Rosevear Ops      attention to licensed premises.
4   PC   162 Gillett
-   PC   3197 Deartier-. Trg   Ria9e 2 (During match)

                               3.0>*prn patrol (>>.’lerton/Neepsend areas.
                               4.Ojpp>-4.30pm meal - Claywheels Lane. Traffic dept.
S=2ting for briefing
£5 per plan attached           Phase 3 (After match)
 See Appendix ’T' '
                               Patrcl in area as outlined in Phase I.
                                                                                                                                                     Appendix




                                                            F A CUP SEMI FINAL

                                                               SPECIMEN TICKET




  i* ti5 ? m ■ ' -          THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
    i i : Mv ;' M - i j « i; c h a l l e n g e c u p s e m i - f i n a l ;
  ^ M ^ r r u r ^ v ^ - : W r - 0 - U V ERPO O L1*i ' f i T M
                     ^            !   V   ;..J   f   t i   i   C V i :' ' i i
                                                                                                        V V:. '               1 ft ; ’
                                                                                                                                   - C I      r .•   r-
  *ow<ri.r^ 1 .3 .v ... - jl avi--.. ;
                     *’ ^ < r T - r . (          V         V ' J "p I.          NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                         tv L % 'i : j t l ? * 1 j                     ^ :-         wftT HILLSBOROUGH STADfcJK 4 ; .' { t.i ’h s '
   ;    ; i -T -   r i   " =   ~; •          *-r i |                  , S a t u r d a y i s t h a p r r . i a e s - k i c k o * ? 3 .0 0 p m . ~ J £
  TMTfiLAMTMt                   ^ :         ~ ■ i f        '- t i i                       -i- -                  ' —-   - ■ —     ~ - J . v - . 7‘ ‘
                         i        = r”!~1>X r i :                               JL-T                     ?•;. ’ 'i . r J .•

  _GANGWAY'il
            |^ f                .
                                1-i              .
                                                 T-i:fGANGWAY■
                                                             =f = k f i R O W :                                                       ’
                                                                                                                                      •Syvi?;




                                                                                          52S lB 3 TO BERET,



OOLCUR CODING - LIVERPOOL

BHCWN        -     MDRm STAND

RED          -     lCST STAND

PURPLE -           LEPPUGS LANE TERRACES
                   (also overprinted "LIVERPOOL AREA")

ODtflUR CODING - KJTTTNQiAM FOREST

ORANGE -           SPICK KOP
                   (also overprinted "NJTTINCJiAM AREA*)

BLUE         -     SOUTH STAND

GREEN        -     SCWTO STAND (UNCU/ERED)
                                                            APPENDIX 'F'



                       c m DOTIES


 inside the ground
                       Detertive Inspector TbwEll - i/c
Gynnasium
                       DS 727 Lindley
                       DC 2r68 Hall
                       1DC 570 Stoker
                       DC 2569 Blake
Pickpocket Squads      DS   517 Sfriith
                       DC   2540 Lindsay
                       DC   45 B Hallam
                       DC   4-1 LAlley

                       DS   457 McSloy
                       DC   — 08 locking
                       DC   1209 Askew
                       DC   2 El2 Lawrence
OUTSIDE THE GROUM3
                      De-e_ _ive Inspector Scaife - I/C
Mobile Respcnse Car   DS EI 5 Buxton
                      DC 1~88 Hirst
Motor cyclists        PC 410 Davies    ) Motor cycles to be cell
                      PC r_5 Bevington ) free. 'FI* Garage
Foot Patrols
                      EXT 16 00 Jones        Herries Road/Halifax Rcai
                      DC "35 Tuke

                      PC 25 02 Powell        Middlewood Road
                      DC 146 O'Brien

                      DC *4 05 Dynes         Penistone Road to include
                      DC 5119 Bagguley       Owlerton Stadiurr. car perk

                      DC 3c 5 Stevenson      Neepsend
                      PC 1526 Walton

                      TOC 1181 Drajling Hillsborough Car Park
                      PC 1€ 51 Moulding
          CID GENERAL SUB DIVISIONAL DUTIES




                       •FI* SUB DIVISION

 DS 81 r CXjghton - I/C                     8.CI    am - 8.00 pm
 DS 1CI-4 Ellis
                                            8.C:    am - 8.00 pm
 DC 2212 KaDcer
                                            8.C:    am - 8.0C pm
 PC 2619 Mottram                            8-CI    am - 8.00 pm


DS   1'45 Sturgess                         Nocr.   to midnight
DC   21*E Brown
                                           Nocc    to midnight
DC   32'A Lewin
                                           Nocr.   to xnidnioht
PC   lrrZ Nottingham                       Nocr.   t o midnight

DC 35; Hydes                               6.CI pm - 6.00 am



                   *F2' SUB DIVISION

DS 841 Killiamson - I/C                    8.Cl am - 8.0C pm
DC 6 4 Fox                                 8.Cl am - 8.00 pm

DC 22~l Perkins                            10.C." am - 10.00 pm
PC 3211 Harwood                            10.Cl am - 10.00 pm

DS l:“c Holderness                         Nocr. to midnight
DC 1 H 1 Stani forth                       Noar. xo midnight

DC 1152 McManus                            6.01 pm - 6.00 am
                                                             APPPOIX 'G*



                            DOG SECTION


 Meufcers of the Dog Section will be deployed as follows


 000   VAN                      AREA



                                Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

   1                            Leppings Lane Traffic Island

   1                            Herries Road Coach Park

   1                            Leppings Lane Turnstiles

  1                            Penistone Road/Parkside Road

  1                            Penistone Road/Bradfield Road

  1                            Hillfoot Bridge

  1                            Penistone Road to City Centre

  1                            Middlevood Road/Hillsborough Corner

  1                            Middlewaod Road/Wadsley Lane

  1                            Middlewood Road/Deepcar

  1                            Stocksbridge /Qjght ibridge

  1                            Tankersley



In addition to the above, two handlers together with 'explosives’ dogs

will parade at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 8am on Saturday

15th April 1989 to search the interior of the ground.
                                                  APPOCU '




                   M3UNIED SECTION




-Hambers of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follrvs



HORSES                    AREA




   6                      Leppings Lane

  10                      Penis tone Road Northtrumstile;

   6                      Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

   4                      Halifax Road*

   4                      Herries Road*



 30




 * At Phase 3, two menbers of the Mounted Sectiar. will
 be deployed in Hillsborough Park. The remaining two
 '►’ill take up a position at Leppings Lane traffic island.
                                                                           APPPOIX *1*

                                  ADMINIS'lKATIOi, QJ/TROL AMD CU5TOPy STAFF
   ^>gKIgmATIQN

   In s p e c to r B c n D s tt
   PS 4*       Sewel 1
   PC          S h e lio n
   PC i : 12    F le t r h e r


                 LTVg^FQQL
                                                                    PRQm^IY NL/JTUfHAM Fryr??T
  ^ — z 3 BoctT.
  PC -212 Canri>ell                                                 PC 3063 Marshall
                                                                    Mrs Drabble


  PS 1 11 F i d l e r         )   Cones, barriers, )
  PC 5 1 : H orn              )                                     SECTOR DRIVEftS
                                  meals            )
                                                                   Chief Supt:    PS 459 Hodgkin
                                                                   Sector 3:      PC 1653 Buxtor.
 In s p ~ — o r L e v s o n
 PS *■— ~~4 Hevi n                j   logistics Claywheels Lane


 G R C C K CONTROL
                                                                   CELL BOSES GROOM) 9.00   A M

PS       G od d ard                                                1*   PS 2514 Naylor
PC 1 I_ 5 Ryan                                                          PC 1467 Glover
PC        B ic h a r d
PC 14111 Goe§ t                                                    2.   PS 526 Langdale
                                                                        PC 701 White
CUS’l-LL^ (GRtUP)
                                                                  TRANSIT ALJLOCATIGK
                                                                  RESERVE SERIATE
In s p e c to r B a r k e r
                                                                  OQftCH SUPH^VISION 6R0UM)
PS I l f -4 C o lle y
PS E lf Long
                                                                  Inspector Scarfe
PS H -T ~ H a rc v
                                                                  PS 2450 Hickie
PC 1 S L : H u lle y
PC 1 4 1 1 Jones
                                                                  PRISONER TRANSIT VANS **
PC 15        B a rd e n
PC     . f>* M a r s h a ll
                                                              (1) Ground - PC 2954 Morledge
                                                              (2) leppings lane roundabout -
                                                                             PC 750 Simons
                                                              (3) Bradfield Road - PC 931 G r e e d y
Director's Bnt-rs^ae
                                                                  ** At Phase III Nos 1 and 2 t:
PC 31~l Stephens                                                     take up position at Lepp_ras Lar
PC 3    Cruttenden                                                   roundabout and No.3 in Cetchbar
                                                                     Lane adjacent to park to provide
                                                                     forward holding areas in ?*?»«>
                                                                     of arrests.
 Process Supervision - Inspector Burns

 PRISONER PROCESS                                        PRISONER PROCESS
 T h A W E R T C K ROAD POLICE STATION                   BOCUESFXELD

 Nottinghac Forest                                     LIVERPOOL
 Inspector Aicheson                                    Inspector Wilson
 DS 952 Charlesworth                                   DS 51C Hcmer
 PC 744 Hirst
                                                       PC 42? Hutchinson
 PC 621 Bell
                                                       PC 17c 4 Donahue
 PC 2524 .Myers                                        PC 253 Hiles
 PC 1776 rLrown                                        PC 2C21 Codling

 rar.T. pup
                                                       CELL BOS
 EBWERTCK     r o a d police s t a t i o n             BCTTfSTlEUD
 10.00 AM                                              10.00 AM

 PS 1579 ?;-_rn                                        PS 804 Webster
 PC 1404 Ackers                                        PC 11£5 Krajiiski




                             COMPLAINTS AGAINST TOE POLICE


Inspector T Riley - Sheffield Wednesday Football Club (gymnasium)




 ALL STAFF SUBJECT TO APPEJOIX *1* WILL TAKE THEIR HOT fCAL AT THE DIRECTION

 OF INSffiCTOR BEMCTT
                                                                APPOOIX ’J'




 t r a f f i c points




l^e following list denotes traffic points within 'F' Divison
w^ ~ h require coverage by uniform personnel:

1.       A61 - Grenoside traffic liahts

2-       Halifax Road/Kilner Way TL

3.       Halifax Road/Foxhill Road TL

4.       Halifax Road/Claywheels Lane TL

5.       Pen is tone Road N o r t h / H e m e s Road South TL

6.       Penistone Road/Parkside Road TL

7.       Penistone Road/BradfieId Road

8.       Penistone Road/Neepsend Lane

Personnel deputed to man these points vill parade at 10.00 an on 15
April 1989 at the South Yorkshire Pclice Driving School, Brightside lane,
Sheffield, for briefing by Inspector Walker prior to deployment.    Road
Traffic Division will be responsible for mealing and transportation to
anc from traffic points.
                                                                   APPENDIX *K’


 TRAINS

 1*   KyiTlfCHAM FOREST

 S t l t i ^ ^    !rainS      Nottingham Forest supporters will arrive at l-dland
           the^ ir}es Wl11 001 ^available until the week of the semi-final and
 therefore will be given at briefing.

 Each train has a capacity of 550.

 The fare for these special trains is inclusive of the bus fare to tie grxxnd.

              1x1565 frarT1 the Station to the ground using a route aim- Penistone Road
 and unloading m Herries Road South; these buses will be under nr.tcr'cyc^eJSrt?^

                    simflar operation will take place to return Nottingham Forest
          ^ to the railway station , loading in Penistone Road North oooosite the
 ground   and using an identical route     back to the station.

Departure times will be given at the briefing.

There is the facility to delay the trains in the event of extra tire being played.




2.    LIVERPOOL

 3   special trains carrying Liverpool supporters will arrive at Wad;ley Bridge
Station at times yet to be arranged; these will be made available attriefing.

Each train has a capacity of 550.

Departure times will also be given at the briefing.

Again there is a facility to delay the trains in the event     ofextratime   beinq
played.

As the support for Liverpool is widespread, it is anticipated that sjpporters will
travel by service train from all parts of the country to Midland Railway Station.
Arrangements have therefore been made for those arriving at Midland Station to be
transported by SYT buses to the ground by a route separate from that used by Nottingham
Forest supporters, travelling along Langsett Road. Middlewood Road a : arriving at
Leppings Lane where they will unload.

At the end of the game, SYT buses will be available to return any person arriving in
this manner back to the Midland Railway Station. These buses will be located in
Penistone Road North c h i the *to city' carriageway outside Beeley Wooc Special School.




                                     * * * * * * * * * * * *
                                                             APPENDIX *L'


                                     COACHES


 LIVERPOOL


       1     .--A Liverpool coaches should leave the Ml Motorway at E>-: 36
              xankersley) and travel via the A61 to designated parkirc areas.

    ^             geographical location of Liverpool, coupled with the countrywide
             s-jpport enjoyed by the Club, suggests that coaches coulc well approach
             the stadium by other routes, particularly the A616. If n i s is the
             case, then they m ost be brought to the designated coach jerking area.

    3      The serials engaged on duty at Tankersley and OughtibridJE will
            operate selective stop and search procedures to ensure (= passengers
            have tickets, (b) they are not in possession of alcohol ==d (c)
            they are not drunk. When this has been done, each coach -.-11 have
            ar. adhesive sticker placed on the nearside of the windscreen and it
            will be allowed to proceed to the designated parking art;.

    4      /--I_l coaches will be allowed to travel to the ground withrvt specific
            escort, although menrbers of the Road Traffic Motor Cycle *lng will
            be providing overall mobile supervision. All coaches will be directed
            tc the traffic island at Leppings Lane where in the firr: instance,
            they will park in Claywheels Lane. Once this area is full then
            coaches will be directed to park on the 'out lane' of the dual
            carriageway in Halifax Road, parking to commence at the trr of the
            crjal carriageway and then work towards the stadium.

    5      All coaches will park before being permitted to set dowr. passengers
            trereby ensuring that the occupants know exactly where t: return to
           or. ccnpletion of the football iratch.

    6      Vtiere it is discovered that passengers on a coach are net in possession
            c - tickets, or are in breach of legislation concerning elrahol at
            Sporting Events, then Ground Control will be informed far consideration
            as to returning such vehicles out of the Force area under escort.

    7      Where individual passengers only are involved who have cmsuned alcohol
            in such amounts that they are drunk, or are in possession of alcohol,
            then they should be arrested and detained pending transport.

MJrnN3B^ FOREST

   8       Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by ooach will be encouraged to
            use the Ml motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect of the
            operation will be dealt with by 'D' Division Officers anf is the
            subject of a separate order.

   9       These coaches will be parked in the South Yorkshire Transport Garage,
            Henries Road South and, if necessary, Rawson Spring Roac.
                                             APPOODC 'M'



         TRAK5IT VANS - LIVERPOOL




 Transit vans, etc. carrying Liverpool supporter= v l II
 be encouraaed to travel via the M62 and Ml noto^evs
 leaving the Latter at Junction 36 (Tankersley)
 However, it is envisaged that such vehicles will also
 approach the stadium from the Flouch (A616).


 Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly
 searched to ensure that they are not carrying
 alcohol anr the passengers have not consuted the
 same to ar. extent where they are drunk.


All passenosrs will be checked to ensure that t n v
are in possession of tickets.


The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Wardsend Road North where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.


It is not feasible to atterrpt to channel such
vehicles through one 'checkpoint' and therefore
it will be the duty of all serials on duties ourEioe
the stadiir: to monitor and check such vehicles
their occupants.


Should any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked or. the outskirts, which is found to be
carrying passengers without tickets or in breach cf
the legislation relating to the carriage and
consunptior. of alcohol en route to sporting everts,
then Ground Control will be inforrcd for consideration
as to returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be a==lt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by c r
of surrnons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                         APPOCIX 1N 1



      TOAHSIT VANS - NOTTIJOWM FOREST




 Tr^ s^t vans' etc- carrying Nottingham Forest supporters
 vail be encouraged to travel via the HI motorway
 leaving the latter at Junction 34 (Tinsley).


 Such vehicles will be stopped and thoroughly searched
 to ensure that they are not carrying alcohol and the
 passengers have not consumed the sane to an extent
 where they are drunk.



All passengers will be checked to ensure that they
are in possession of tickets.


The vehicles will then proceed to the designated
parking area in Raws on Spring Road where passengers
will alight and walk to the ground.


It is not feasible to attenpt to channel such vehicles
through one 'checkpoint' and therefore it will be the
duty of all serials on duties outside the stadium to
monitor and check such vehicles and their occupants.


Should any vehicle arrive, without having been
checked on the outskirts, which is found to be carrying
passengers without tickets or in breach of the
legislation relating to the carriage and consurption
of alcohol en route to sporting events, then Ground
Control will be informed for consideration as to
returning the vehicle to the motorway for escort.
If necessary, the driver and passengers will be dealt
with for breach of the relevant legislation by way of
surmons or arrest, dependant on their individual
condition.
                                                            APPENDIX 'O'(i)


                SPOTTING EVPfPS (CTKTRDL OF ALOCHOL) ACT 1985

                   AS AMENDED BY THE PUBLIC ORDER AT 1986


  VEHICLES

  (A)
             or a l l ™             operator to knowingly carry a l a d
            or allow it to be carried on a public service vehicle or nini bus/
            van or train, etc. travelling to or from a football net-.
  (E)
            It is an offence to possess alcohol on a public service -.-hide
             rrrorabus/van or train, etc. when travelling to or fnx * football
            match or to be drunk on such a vehicle.

 (C
            A Constable may stop and search a public service vehicle      or mini
                h3? °r       etC* Where ** *** ^ s o n a b l e grounds t: suspect
            alcohol is being carried.                                        ^


 M     W     INK) GROUND

 (A)       It is an offence to possess alcohol when entering or a~-rrptinq to
            enter a football ground.                                 v    y

 (B)       It is an offence to enter or attenpt to enter a football ground when
           in possession of bottles, cans, etc. (or part of) whie.         capable
              f u s i n g injury'. This includes drinking glasses but nr. thermos
           rlasks.

 (C)       A Constable nay search any person he suspects is attemr--i_ng to enter
           the ground with articles mentioned.


gJCUCT IN GROUND
 It is an o
.IJ L f SJfn_ ° ffenCe    t0 enter' atterrpt to enter or be in a football ground
wher. drunk


SAI£ OF ALOCHOL IN G R O W

(A)        Alcoholic drink may only be sold in those parts of the iround
           designated which will be out of view of the pitch. Alimol may
           not be taken out of the designated areas.

(B)        A Constable in uniform may cause a bar in a football grand to
           close if he believes the continued sale of alcohol is detrimental
           to good order or public safety.

PYROTECHNICS

It is an offence to possess fireworks, smoke bonfcs, etc. whet in or
entering/leaving a football ground.

POWERS

In addition to the powers of search, a Constable may arrest          2ry person
corrrltting or who has cormitted an offence under thp Ar-t
                                                                  APPENDIX »q » (ii)




                        GBCUND    regulations




              Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter
              upon the field of play.

    *        The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands and
              other buildings in the ground is forbidden.

             'I*ie consumption of intoxicating liquors is
             permitted only in authorised places and in
             accordance with the Sportinc Events (Control of
             Alcohol) Act 1985.

    4        Fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses
             cans, flags, banners, poles snd other similar
             articles or containers including anything
             which could or might be used as a weapon, are
             not permitted within the ground, and any person
             i n p o s s e s s io n o f such cm s u rtx c ie o r c o n tA in c r
             may be refused entry or ejected from the ground.

             Under no circunstances is it permitted to throw any
             object onto the pitch.

 ^          Any person who fails to conplv with instructions
             from a steward may be ejected from the ground.

            Any persons who remains in a aengway ray be ejected from
            the ground.

£           The Club reserves the right tc refuse admission
             to or eject any persons who refuses to be searched
            by a Police Officer.

5           The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents
            to remove from this ground arry person who      not
            canply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules
            and Regulations of the Football Association and The Football
            league or whose presence on the Ground is or could
            reasonably be construed as oar_stituting a source of
            danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.


W K :        Item 8 above outlines the contractual agreement between the
football supporter and the Club. It does not create a power to search
anc any search most be with the consent of the individual supporter.
Re*„2sal is merely a bar to entering the cround and not a criminal offence.
Wbere a search is conducted with consent, it is a search within the
n e e m n g of the Police and Criminal Eviderce Act 1984. Section 3(i) of the
Act requires an officerto make a record of the search in writing unless
     ~-5 Hot practicable to do so and large scale searches such as those at
focrroall matches fall within this section. There is not therefore a
requirement to conplete a Form PACE/ 1.
                                                       APPQOIX ’P’


                         PARKING RESTRICTIONS



  ND PARKING OGNES

         !^n 9 'if0065 Wl11 56 Placed in the following locations pricr to 7am
                 rth April 19E9 by civilian staff under the direction of Police
  oergaant 102 Fidler:-

  1)       Halifax Road - out of city lane    from Parson Cross Road
           to Cowper Avenue.

  2)       Foxhill Road - out of city lane    from Halifax Road to
           Parson Cross Road.

  3)      Wardsend Road North - both sides.

  ^^      Penistone Road hfcrth - from Claywheels Lane to Railwav
           Bridge - both sides

  ■*)     Claywheels Lane (including one way system) from Penis tart
           Road North to Lirestone Cottage Lane (Both sides)

 6)       Niagara Road - both sides.

 7)       lappings lane - both sides.

 8)       Herries Road - from Penistone Road North to Wordsworth
           Avenue - both siaas.

 9)       Herries Road - Wordsworth Avenue to Galsworthy Road (A*er
           from ground side only).
10)      Wardsend Road - Both sides.

11)      Herries Road South - both sides.

12)      Galsworthy Road.

13)      Rawson Spring Road - both sides.

14 )     Parkside Road - from Penistone Road to Catchbar lane
          one side only - alongside park.

15)      Catchbar Lane fror. Parks ide Road to Leppings Lane - one
          side only - alongside school.

16)      Middlewood Road - one side only (alongside park) from
          Parkside Road to Hawksley Avenue.

17)      Penistone Road North/Penis tone Road - both sides from
          Leppings lane island to Neepsend lane.

18)      Liversey Street - one side from Penistone Road car park entrance.

19)      Penistone Road North - from Winster Road to Were Road - inside
          lane to be coned vith 'Jumbo Cones'.
                                                                        APPBPDC *Q*


                                           R O W E SIGNING


 UVEKPOCL COfrCH AMD CAR Rfim=y;


 1"   m v i s i o -170"   6 signed by AA in consultation with Operations and Traffic

2.    A57-A626      Ssyfields crossroad - Derbyshire, to indicate route football
                    ~_^rfic is to follow. A628 to be placed out by Road Traffic durinq
                    ~gr.t of 14 April 1989

3.    A628/A616 tc be placed in location by Deepcar officers

WJITifGHftM POfeST OQflCB AW3 CAR ROLTTES

All Nottingham Fcrest vehicles will use a route frcm the nctorway, arriving at
QmJho' i * ^~*e ' A t th lS P°i n t '  wil1    directed along Saville Street East,
sutnerland St_rr=t, Gower street, Burngreave Road, Mina Road, Rutland Road to
Neepsend Lane.

Coaches and vsr= will travel via Upwsll Street, Firvale and Herries Road to the
ground.

Primary route *t_l again be signed by AA in consultation with Operation and Traffic
Division.

M ?ftu°nal si~-s i-ndicating car parking areas will be in position by         8.00 am and
will be placec a - by civilian staff responsible for parking cones.
                                                   APPENDIX 'R*




                   SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



Special Constables will be on duty in connection with this event t
supplsnent the Regular Officers. They will in particular be invol
in connection with the control of traffic away from the irmediate
vicir_Lty of the ground.

T^ey vill parade at 9.45am in the Gyrmasium for briefing and take
their duties as soon as possible.

Refreshments will be available in the gymnasiir. during the natch.

Radies will N3T be issued to rrembers of the Special Constabulary
except supervisory ranks.




                             DUTIES

(a)             Herries Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Longley, Norvood and Shirecliffe
                Estates by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(b)             Langsett Road - encourage and supervise parking ir.
                the area between Langsett Road and Infirmary Road
                by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(c)             Neepsend Lane - encourage and supervise parking ir.
                the area around old gas works by Nottingham Forest
                supporters.

(d)             Halifax Road - encourage and supervise parking in
                side roads on Parson Cross/Foxhill estates by
                Liverpool supporters.

(e)             Middlewood Road - encourage and supervise parking
                side roads on Marlcliffe and Wisewood estates by
                Liverpool supporters.

(f)             Herries Road South - patrol length of road from
                Penistone Road North to Five Arches to prevent
                parking of vehicles on hard shoulders (Both sides)
                This duty to ccnmence at 10.30am.
                         APPENDIX 'S'




 M A P S




Division of stadium



Liverpool routes and parsing areas



Sector 2



Nottingham Forest routes end parking areas



Sector 3



Overall parking areas (Sertors 2 & 3)



Location of mobile units ’Tl-TlO)
heffield Wednesday F. C.                                          Police
                                                                  Room
  HillsborouQh Ground                                      Room

                                                                             - v x o>o
                                              OfftmaMkim




                                                                                                55-72
                                                                                                          1*          c.c




                                                                                                               4 9 -5 't
                                                                                                               4 3-40


                                                                                         \
                                         rltyr
                                         Tvnnml
y Fans Entrance
nd Enclosures
                                                                      i


      Police Control




   K£Y
   TunNXTit rs. .... tu r n   Dlrmctari £nfranc*                           NOTTINGHAM FOREST SUPPORTERS
VMM HB WUKSt?
ttaCRQAD




                             Crown Inn   P.H.




                      M l. MOTORWAY JUNCTION 36 - TANKERSLEY

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
      Football Club
r                                                      Appendix S(lii)

              M   P   J   W   W    ,

              p W O K 5 - U VLRPOO


                                                          HALIFAX RQAT



                                             ji^CKES



                                    ^X^PARKDKS
                                  k AND   PARSON




    VADSLEY BRIDGE
                                                    -            SEMI FINAL 198 9

                                                  NOTTS FOREST ROUTES AND PARKING AREAS


                                                                                              n o r th

     N IA G A R A
       G rou nd                                                                                          TINSLEY
                                                                                                         VIADUCT
                                                                                                      Junetion 34


                                                                                                             SOUTH
                                  SHtFFtUD   WfON£SOAY   (• C.




                             Coach Parking
                      KVy \ SYPTE Garage and
                           \ Herries Road South                                       i ST.



                                                                         V
To M anchester
      AS7

                    Car parking
                    OMlerton




                                                                                                Sout h Yo rk t h   iff P"ofic«
         c                                            SEMI FINAL 1989                               Appendix S(y)
                                                 SECTOR 3 - NOTTINGHAM FOREST'



                                                                                             Not
                                                                                             Notts Forest
                                                                                                ich Park




                                                                                                   Notts Forest
                                                                                                   Coach and Mini ]
                                                                                                   park
                                                                                     c,0 °

    POC«>.tV B O ' O - J               £♦><             * r   ,c         ,*PV

    • c » ^ OH s0
>        L A w t       —       ^

                                               PARK^

                                   n
             LCHNOX        H O A D --

          °0B° ^       . 0,0       3
                                              Hillsborough Pork
                                                                                             Owlerton
                                                                                             Stadium
                                                                   idt




                                                                                   Car parking

                                                                                                  V "




                                          .»c
                                                                                 Car parking
    *o       %                          *""■

     V             \
                                           TA CUP SEMI PINAL - PARKING AREAS                                                Appendix S (vi)

                                                                                                                                   a-V V v 4 \ » v t
                                                                                                               s n / : ~



m gjt r-
X X f«r|
  «.*>                                                            •; ■

                       \                           Car ParlOn*
         / x •-.r .]                 13^'
             I --                                  tV/T                                        *»
           •i »                                      U
               • •<
                                     \         w      I 'JUr;                   W       t*h
                                                                                               t:-
                                                                                                                          J5                         •C’K'

                                                                                                                                               />■


           •jK.-
            V
  V
  4/                                                                                            v t                <r^v
                                                                                                                               „   /


                            l v *”             fes-; •*<
                                                                    I         A ] / ^ ^ Notts Fst. Car Parking 77Z.*
                                                                                                                           - ^ - .. ^           5 ?          ''~
                                                                                \ p : ~

                                                     \
                                               S3.                        ‘**.      .
                                                                                                                      'Cj n        Ln                        nfcC
                                                                          !!U

                                                                                                                     s ^ \»v•
                                                                                                                     rr


                                                                         A>
                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                       <■>£>
                                                                                                                                       ! ? ■
                                S6
                                          HHOV,
                                                                                                          1m
                                                                         f*
                                                                                          's            V /<
                           w                                                                          **■
                                                                                                         <*
                                                     741-'

sg p                       S£&V'



         $ F           £
                                         ? S                                                            A ft              ■-»w
                                                                                                                                         f c   f c



                                                                r.v.
                                                                                               «r acn    t

                                               SBODC FLAK KF BOEFDC
Seats If-178
                                                                       Seats 183-194
Rev         Specials
Rev          CID                                                      CID
Rev X       CD                                                        CID
Rev 3T       1 Insp. 2 ?E 10 PC's (serials 61 6 2 )                   2 PS 10 PC’s ( - I 63 4 6-
Rev          I Insp 1 PE :: PC’s (serial 59)                          1 PS 8 PC’s (se.- C 60)
Raw         1 Insp 1 PE :: PC's (serial 57)                           1 PS 8 PC’s (ser- 1 58)
Rev         I F5 8 PC's se ria l 55)                                  1 PS 8 PC’s (ser - 56)
Rev         1 PS 8 PC's 9erial 53)                                    1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC (serial 5-
Rev         2 PS’s 10 p : s (serials 50 & 51 )                        1 Insp 1 PS 8 PI (se ria l 5-
Rev 2-      2 Insp 2 FE'- ■ 10 PC's (serial 46 & ^7)                  1 Insp 2 PS’s 2: rC's ( s e r ia l; 48 & *
Rev 2:      1 Insp 1 PE :.3 PC’s (serial 44)                          1 Insp 1 PS 10 ?r s (s e ria l -r )
Rev r       1 FS 8 PC’s se ria l 42)                                  1 PS 8 PC's (ser_31 43)
Rev         1 PS 8 PC’s se ria l 40)                                  1 Insp 1 PS 8 PC’s (serial -1
Rev         10 PC'S (;    11 38)                                      1 Insp 1 PS 8 PT'i (serial "f-
Rev 1-      1 Insp 1 PE 3 PC's (serial 36)                            1 PS 10 PC's (seri3l 37)
Rev T;      1 Insp 1 PE PC's (serial 3*0                              1 PS 8 PC’s (seria 1 35)
Rev Z1      i PS 8 PC’s se ria l 32)                                  1 PS 8 PC’s (sen s 1 33)


Rev      1 Insp 1 PE : FC's (serial 30)                               1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 31)
Rev -y- _1 PS 8 PC’s se ria l 28)                                     1 PS 8 PC's (serial 29)
Rev 1    1 Insp 1 PE r FC's (serial 26)                               1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 27)
Rev 1    1 PS 8 PC's se ria l 24 )                                    1 PS 8 PC's (serial 25)
Rev I    1 Insp 1 PE r PC’s (serial 22)                               1 PS 8 PC’s (serial 23)
Rev I    1 Insp 1 PE 10 PC's (serial 20)                              1 PS 10 PC's (serial 21)
Rev i    1 PS 10 PC'- (se ria l 18)                                   1 PS 10 PC's (serial 19)
Rev 1 - 1 Insp 1 PE ID PC's (serial 16)                               1 PS 10 PC's (serial 17)
Rev I - 1 Insp 1 PE ID PC's (serial 14)                               1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 15)
Rev l  - 1 PS 10 PC’s (se ria l 12)                                   1 Insp 1PS 12 HTs (serial 13 )
R ev 1 - 1 PS 10 PC’= (s e ria l 10)                                  1 Insp 1PS 10 PT’e (serial 1 1 )
Rev 1 - 1 PS 10 FC’f (s e ria l 8)                                    1 Insp 1PS 10 P i's (serial
Rev f   1 PS 8 PC's s e r ia l 6)                                     1 Insp 1PS 10 Pi’s (serial
'kv :   1 PS 10 PC’s 1 Insp (serial 4)                                1 PS 10 PC's (serial 5)
Rev ~   1 PS 10 PC's (s e ria l 2)                                    1 PS 10 PC’s (serial 3)
Rev t   1 Insp 1 PS 22 PC’s (serial 1)                                as Row 6
Rev ;
Rev -    Senior O fficers                                             Senior O fficers
Rev -




                                                  HHHTJC AREA

 Swcr 367-178                                                         Seats 183-194

Rate Zl-38 to use er^rance R & Q                                      Roe 22-38 to use entrance ^ L P

Roke 3—21 to use ernrsnce N & M                                       Rcws 3-21 to uk c.txance ?_ L L
                       5S
        m
        .1-

5                                                     S!


                            &

      \fA V
       BElDCr    m




                                                ■r—    - sjj*
                                Tango   8
                                            ^  3E 51I
                                            ' "• - 3 f * ? = s




                                                      Tango 7




                                            X


                            h


                                            m




    £ ^ 9B E 22Q I£S
                                                                 APPENDIX




                    SCHEDULE   o f total manpower



               Oh Supt    Sqpt        Gh Insp       Insp   PS    PC
GROW©           1          i
                                        2            9     19   200
CONTROL ETC                i
                                                     8     16    30
PUBLIC ORDER               2
                                        4           13     23   274
MOBILES
                                                     3     10    50
CID                        j
                                                     2      4   22
RESERVE
                                                     2      2   20


                1         5            6            37     84   5%
                                                                                   f~    I          C o ^ T f i o i ___




                                                                        ■.Mi                                                                      ■
                                                                                                                                                  .ijiis
                                                                        /.     A                                                                    r'tvSf

                                                                    I        /■'




                                                     OPERATIONAL ORDER




                                                      SEMI FINAL 1988




                                                                                                                           mm&m
                                                                                                                                      mm
                                                                                                                                       m mm m m
                                                                                                                    feiSMf. :iJf.i%




                                                                                                          *£?•$«                        s « r
■!,v                                                                                                               SfSJlBiSii
                                                                                                                          $P$5£




                                                                                   ’
                                                                                   J'
                                                                                    ”IsllSSIiiiS®

                                      -■   ••■   ■     -■< -■• -v--. ■ ^ -vj.y

                                                                                                •waia
                                                                        IjKifeK
                          fiitSSS’i
 I -iMiMifSm1^


       ifcS’      SSiSi:W3f

               I£i&
          s££
       iii«&»«
                                       SOOTH            l O R K S H IRE                           POLICE


                                                                  •F* DIVISION


                                                                                                                          «_ •     ML-   <| A A A

                        O r a m O i L OBDBI 'F* 2/88                                                                   /tftll I K G a A * ©




                                     F f t O T S a g PHBL - iJiggooiu V H o m m g M !«»§»
                                                  SMtKtnw 9m num. 1988 :                                  :      : .;;x



                        M g n m t K i
• j

                        .Chief Constable                                                    .     -

                        Assistant Chief Constable (Operations),V:."..

                        Chief Superintendent 'Gperatiphs and

                        Chief Superintenctent, "P* -Division

                         Deputy Divisional Ccxnmander, *F» Division

                         Detective Superintendent, "P" C1D                                                                                                'VMM


                         Superintendent, 'FI* 'Sub-Division

                         Superintendent, 'F2' Sub Division

                         Superintendent, *E2* Sub Division.

                            «* • •              -..,w w r**—   w —.       ----- ,   .   .




                         *F2‘ Sub-Division, Control torn

                         Sub Sector Chief Impectors..                          ; .. ^

                         Ground Control ...... .                                                                          .......*s»
                                                                                                                                         WMrnMM
                                                                                                                        i#§§IIM
                         •F*- Mainistration ;.f'.                     :                     -;i                                                     mM.




                         .-Chief'                                                                 JIBS*
                                                                                                        yMMXMSkmmm
                                                                                                               mmss.


                                                                                                  Sil
                                                                          .

                             aassaii|jpM




  SitiilllStSfft l
               lit-';
                   A P P E N D I C E S


                S e n io r    O ffic e r s        d u tie s

                In s p e c t o r s   d u tie s

                Sector 1 (Ground 1 duties

                Sector 2 ( L i v e r p o o l ) d u t i e s

                S e c to r     3 (N o ttin g h a m            Forest):duties.

                T ic k e t     c o lo u r    c o d in g

                C I D duties

                Dog    S e c tio n                        .         :   . ..   .

                Mounted-Section. . . .                          ,                  ■

                'A d m in is t r a t io n     e tc

                Traf f i e '• Control;                                                   :
                                                                                         -




                Trains .....                Vv"

                C oaches         -

                ‘Vans : -      L iv e r p o o l

                ■Vans - N o t t i n g h a m



                 C ones                                                                ? M*f

                 R o u te     s ig n in g

                 S p e c ia l C o n s ta b u la r y

                 G ro u n d    'Regulations

                 Maps

                 Schedule of

                                                                        wmm
                                                          WMMSi




iBllllllilSii
                                                                  •F* DIVISION


OEsnncxi extra •f * 2/88                                                                                     B      :      28 MWCH 1988


                                                          F A COP - S B C F P B L
                                                   miMioDGH,               s w t m o


                                            u mtoocl               v H O M w g g i M icwesr
                                                         SMWBIflf 9 M O L           1988

1.          n s c iM a ic v i
1.1         Tte F. A- Cup Semi Final tie between Liverpool and                                               Nottinsjhan-:Forest
            Football Clubs will take place at the Sheffield''ttednasdqr Footbiai
            Stadium, Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturdayi^th' % r i i :lf88:
                                                                           ,-:;Mclc-o£f.
            at 3.00pm.   The gates allowing access to                                ■
            12 noon and admission will be granted to ticket holders only.

1.2         In an effort to minimise                                                                                       and to
            maximise segregation,.the
            with Appendix *T'.
                                                                                                                  Vo/'-V


1.3
         .and Terraces art the torth: Stand. a«a,a«^5i.;
            in Leppings Lane.                                                   '          "

1.4         Nottingham Forest    _       .       .....
            S p i m Hop and the South Stand and'-ao&fes. .............
            in BertLstone.Road torth' and -at.tfe rear of the

1.5         The tickets haw''been'{»l«;;o o « and details .are shown at

1.6         A sterile area has been created between the turnstiles at the rear of
            the South: Stand and. those.;.in Leppings Lane.

            To further assist in the
            ground, tickets
                                                                                                                                           WSmm
            t S n i s t o S nitoad end) and*the South'"Stand (1

            The routing of.'vehi                              ;
                                                                                                                                      «■
            ensure- that' the
            at the end of- the                                                       loffl

            Extra time mU..fe
                                                                                                             gUlB
                  .       . . . .   ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .                                    S fiW S M S
            take place at Aston V                                                           wmmmSstii
                                                                                      m B m m m S m              Wmm
                                                                                                  mmmim
                                                              'gSliMSSIiSSIBi

  mm
      laaswiw

m m M m m
                                                                                                                                         (2)




                  g ro u n d , to s e g re g a te and control o p p o sin g fans and p re v e n t u n n e c e s s a ry
                  o b s tr u c t io n o f th e h ig h w a y an d damage t o p r o p e r t y . T h is w i l l be
                  a t t a in e d and d is p la y e d w i t h a h ig h s ta n d a rd o f sm artn ess and p r o fe s s io n a lis m .


          3       IgBBP

          3.1     C h ie f Superintendent M o le w i l l b e i n o v e r a l l      catnwtd o f th e event,
                  a s s is t e d b y C h ie f In s p e c t o r O ug hton .

          3.2     The operation will be in three phases, as follows

          3.2.1   W n«i«ap> 1 - Before the match (1000 - 1500hrs)                                          . \

          3.2.2   pwisat* 7 - During the match (1500 - 1630Hrs) **                                               ■■       .

          3.2.3               - After the natch (1630Hrs until:start down) **. ■                                 ;; :     -

                  **   Subject to 30 minutes "extra time*.'' -::V.                    .r ..    v - ■■                   ■'; .■■■
 3
          3.2.4   Tbs operation will be divided into three sectors, each of which will be
                  designated to a Senior Officer who will have responsibility for that
                  Sector. The Sector areas are shown on the      at Igpencta T and the
                  Senior Officers are:-*            . . .,



                  Sector 1           (Sheffield Wednesday
                                      Football Stadiun) r

                  Sector 2                              ............

                  .Sector 3           (Nottii^hM.toest 8i«®:rters)
                                                                                                                                                   mm
          3.2.5 , Each sector will be:;f«nr1$er;axviaea m o a * Sectors wi
                  in charge, as shown at Appendices A{i) and A ( n )
                                                                                                                                                   W&rS&M
 ^        3.2.6   Separate Operation Orders have been
 ...-w        -   in:respect./v
                             ofF -Dnl ir-inn ;aixaingenents
                                  Policing   arranoadEntS for
                  Ml motorway



          3.3.1    The event is                                                                                                    h r/ -.•J.'ig
                                                                                                                                   s           *
                   be unfaniliar wi£h;the.-<^u^

          3.3.2    In an effort to alleviate this probkao,
                   pia(y* at 10.00am on Friday 8th IptH
                   Groml,; entry via the •Gymnasiun Gate
                                                                                                   iim m




Si®®!!®


                         Ww^mi                mMSM
                                                                                                {31




  3.4.2    On arrival, each Inspector will report to the Administration Desk situate
           inside the entrance to the gymnasium and will report M s serials present.

  3.4.3    Police Officers attending in their own vehicles must find their own parking
           facilities outside the football ground.

  3.4.4    The parking facilities at Niagara Sports Ground and Claywheels Lane,
           Sheffield will not be used.

  3.5      BKIEPIMG - M l     DMT

  3.5.1    After reporting for duty at the gymnasium, all officers will be briefed
           as to the general requirements of the fey and will conienoe citoties in
           accordance with the instructions of their irwlividual Inspector.

  3.5.2     Inspectors will ensure that officers under their oonmand disperse to their
           respective places of duty with a miniitun of delay.

J 3.5.3    Packed neals will be provided and will be taken 'at'the appropriate tine
           and place, dependant upon the exigencies of .Aitj. .. . ..

  3.5.4    Sergeants will brief n a t e s of their resect iye. serials *      to their   ,
           individual duties as outlined in                 ^

  3.6      m m m    mchoh

  3.6.1    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club will be responsible for the overnight
           (8th/9th April 1988)      "                    —   —   - ■   "         '

  3.6.2    Imnediately following briefing, two »'
           stadiim assisted by the serials
                                                                                                      l«lt
                                                                                                      ilfl^
  3.7      otam n, w m g n c i c n a u                                                                Mill?

  3.7.1    tetters of this department will be on duty at the
           post will be situated in the gymnasium at the                                         HlSfc
           Police Station and will dsal with all ccnplaii
           criminal offences made in connection ;idth this event      wfawA do not                m m
           immediate attention. Any such complaints will be
           of the above locations is nost c o n v e n i e n t :•>

  3.7.2     In addition, teams of Officers will ,     .... ...
            Wadsley Bridge Section Station (Halifax Road) and
            Caravan (Hillfoot Bridge/Neepsend Lane).

  3.7.3     Detective Superintendent Malay.    ...
                                                                   JJCS.H8I
                                                               U*. ;
            Crime-and the Clp:'6peratioh:as.a whole and AitAas of
            shown at Appendix 'P'.;;. ; : ;-
                                                                                         S.'A




  3.8.1     Meiribers of the Dog Section will
            after the match on the rotates to and




          SSfeif;
                                                                                                       (4)




           3 .8 .3      Duties of the tog Section personnel are set out at Appendix 'G'.

           3.9          MMfBD SaHOH

           3 .9 . 1    Mentoers of the ^bunted Section will be eitployed outside the ground to
                       maintain order, segregate supporters and escort them from and to their
                       transport.

           3.9.2        Duties of Mounted section personnel are set out at Appendix "H*.

           3.10                 K M                                                    -




           3.10.1      A Control Room will be established at Sheffield Wednesday Football
                       Stadium in the Police Control Box situate between the South and West
                       Stands.                                 .

           3.10.2      Superintendent Murray will be in
                       of Officers shown at Appendix 'I',

           3.10.3      Tte Control Room will oversee the                                        .on
                       both OHF and VHF channels.

           3.ii        miffnc qjffML

           3.11.1
                       persmnel shorn at Appendix-.’:Jr

           3.11.2      It will be necessary to switch cortadn txaf:
                       the .flow of traffic cam be maintained.
                       Appendix 'J* together with.- tte
                       they are turned 'off'
                       its conclusion! Keys will-be
                       piKpose.       ... ' ; V;>v. v

           3.12
• 3        3.12.1       The routes to the ground ^-.designated parking areas for madam,        ■
                        transit vans and private vehicles are shown at appewiix *T*.

           3.12.2       B0U3S SIGNING

                        Signing of :tte: routes, to' tte ground has been -anranged in conjvpBtim'with'
                        Sheffield ffedne$da^&ai*b^ Club. In the event                          *-'J~
                        geneies exist far detours to be iiipleaented
                        Motor ..Cycle. Wing."

           3.12.3 .To assist- in identifying traffic problems, ,
                   taken into -use from 1300 to ISOOhrs and '—   —                 ^
                        operation.       ................... .

           3.12.4
                                                                  mm




                      iM;



m m m mm
      m
    mam
                                                                                                                            (5)




       3.12.5    D e t a ils of train a r r i v a l /d e p a r t u re   tines and duties relating t h e r e t o are
                 shown at A p p e n d ix 'K'.

      3*12*6 m                  - IOfTBI3»M KBEST

                 Nottingham Forest supporters who travel by train will alight at Midland
                 .Railway Station In the centre of Steffield and travel the three mil*.
                 journey to the ground by 'special* South Yorkshire Transport buses and
                 will alight on the Penistone Road North side of the stadium.           :

      3*12*7             of train arrival/departure times and duties relating thereto are
                 shown at Appendix 'I*.                                    ,     -

      3.12.8     BY C M       - LWOtt,                                      .                                     ■         '

                Liverpool simporters who travel by ooadh will be enooiHrag^-to^ise the
fP              M62/ML motorways, leaving the latter .at-fantejslef'f Junction^36).^ ~
                Duties relating thereto 'are shown at. * '' “  — •     :         '-

      3•12,9 Coaches found approaching the venue by:ottot^
      ■-   .    to the designated parking areas and-not the stadium itself.

      3.12.10 On arrival at the designated parking areas, si^porbers will alight and
              walk to the ground under Dolice si»ervi&i<an.

      3.12.11 Bf £ W 1 .- NQOTINSBM J U S T


                              „                    (Junction 34).                       Duties
                are shown in the 'D* Division Operation Order.

     3.12.12 Coaches found ^ r o a q M n g the'venue ..w*                                            J%   -s _»
                                                                                                     d be directed
                                                                                                                  -                •{


         - ■■■ to the designated parking .areas, and not the stadium it

     3.12.13 On arrival at the
             walk to the

     3.12.14 By tbmsit         mm     - miBgoai,                                                                                •WMis

     - -     Liverpool supporters -who ....... ^ .
             be encouraged to use the M62/M1 not
        .. . Tankers ley {Junction.Jft).. .Hoievery
     ■■      channel such chicles -through cnfes*
       -   . ..therefore, of all Serials'..outside--:__                                       _.r-
                and their occupants as ©utlinea at Jlpjjenfiix *M».                     ,,

     3,12-. 15 All transit'vans will h*     ...... . ,
                                                                                                                      mmm
            - supporters will.alight' -«a.;^lk to the

                                                                                                 S1ISSS8® m
                                                                                         mM
                Sbtfc
                            a » sector 3
                                                                                           HBPBCTOR Victors
                            SPION HDP T W » ^ 5

        ferial ?            Phase 1 and 2 (Before and during natch)

                           PC's will be located at the entrances to the Spion Kbp
                           terraces in pairs to maintain order and ensure that these
                           entrances remain clear at all times.

                           In the event of Liverpool Supporters gaining entry into
                           this end of the ground they will be contained at the
                           extreme southern part of the terraoes at the rear of Gate 1
                           to await transference tnder escort to their own area.
                           Under M3 circumstances will any supporters be transferred
                           from these terraces to other parts of the ground via the
                           perimeter track.

                           Phase 3 (After match)
        MEAL
                           Remain in ground until these terraces ar?                                   clear of all
• a   llJXfter kick off
                           supporters.
        in gym

                           * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *



                           BEAR OF SPION ® P BS®ACIS

       ferial    8         Phase 1 (Before match)

                           A) 2 PC's will be located behind turnstiles 37/42 (Located
                           in official car park) to ensure persons entering these
                           premises do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
                           (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol)

                           B) Remaining officers will be at the rear of turnstiles
                           situated on Penistone load (43/76) to ensure that items
                           as shown above are not brought into the ground.

                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           This serial will remain on patrol in the rear of the Spion
                           Kop terraces to prevent unauthorised access and ensure
                           security of kiosks, etc.

                           Phase 3 (After match)

                           Remain in ground until these terraces are clear of all
       MEAL                supporters.
       After half time*,
       in gym              B fflOTCf S M M Q i

                           In the event of such a situation arising {Indicated at
                           3.16 in the serial instruction) PC's on serial 8 will
                           ensure all exit gates are' open.  Further instructions will
                           be * directed by control either by-radio or the public
                           address system.                                   ,
                  sue aero i
                                                            Inspector Wilson
                  PUCCST®* RGAD T O W B T t t K

Serial 9          R a s e 1 (Before natch)

                  This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 43-54. They
                  will ensure persons entering these premises do not possess
                  items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
                  or missiles) or alcohol.   They will also maintain order
                  and ensure orderly queues are formed.   This will be done in
                  conjunction with Maunted Officers who are on duty at this
                  location.

                  Phase 2   (During natch)

                  This serial will be located at Entrance "Z" to the Spion
                  Kqp.

                  Phase 3 (After natch)

                  At the carmencement of Phase 3 this serial willleave the
                  ground and supervise loading of SYPTE buses in Penistone Road.
After half time
in gym




                  FBMSTOtC HDM> TtJHCTOES

Serial 10         Phase 1 (Before match)

                  This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 55-64.
                  They will ensure persons entering these premises do not
                  possess items as shown above. They will also maintain
                  order and ensure orderly queues are formed. This will
                  be done in conjunction with Mounted Officers who are on
                  duty in this location.

                  Phase 2 (During match)

                  -mis serial will be located at Entrance "¥" to the Spion
                  top.

                  Phase 3 (After match)

                  At the commencement of Phase 3, this
MEAL              the g r o w l and si^rvise loading of *
After kick off    Itersistorie ted.
in gym

                                             "
                      SUB SECTOR 5
                                                    Inspector   Gray
                     NORTH STAND - UPPER LEVEL

Serial 11            Phase 1 (Before match)
                 B

                     A) Five PC's and 1 Sergeant will be located in tte area
                     at the rear of turnstiles 1-8 (Leppings Lane end) to ensure
                     that the fano    entering are not in possession of items
                     prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
                     missiles or alcohol)

                     B) Ten PC's and 1 Sergeant will patrol (in pairs) on th?
                     upper level concourse to naintain order.

                     Phase 2 (IXaring natch)

                     All Officers will be located on the upper concourse to
                     naintain order.

                     Phase 3 (After match)

                     A) At the commencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before end
                     of game) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC's will take up position at
                     the upper concourse exit gate (Top of rarrp) to Penis tone
                     Road to prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone
                     Road.   All supporters must be directed to Leppings Lane
MEAL                 exit.
After kick off
in gym               B)   Regaining PC's patrol until stand is clear.
                                NOFTO STAND - LOWOR LEVEL

      Serial 12                 Phase 1 (Before natch)
                           B
                               A) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of Gate “O"
 1)                            (Penistone Road) to assist the stewards and prevent
 2)                            unaut hor is^d access.
 3)
 4)                            B) 2 PC's will be located at the gate to the car park
 5)                            at the rear of the gymnasium (Penistone Road) to assist
 6)                            the stewards and prevent unauthorised acoess.
 7)
 8)                            C) 2 PC's will be located at the rear of turnstiles
 9)                            73-88 in Penistone Road to ensure persons entering
10)                            are not in possession of art icles prohibited by the
11)                            ground rules i.e. banners, weapons, missiles or
12)                            alcohol.
13)
14)                            D) Remaining PC's will patrol lower level concourse
                               of North Stand.

                               Phase 2 (During match)

                               A) 2 PC's to renain at Gate “0 “ for duties outlined
                               above.

                               B) 2 PC's to renain at car park for duties outlined
                               above.

                               C)    Remaining PC's will patrol concourse in pairs.

                               Ph a s e   3 (After natch)
      NOTE:-
      1 Sergeant will be       At the commencement of Phase 3 (Ten minutes before end
      responsible for          of game) 1 Sergeant and 8 PC's will take up position at
      A, B, and C in           lower concourse exit gates to Penistone Road to
      Phase l                  prevent supporters leaving and entering Penistone Road.

                               ALL supporters must be directed to Leppings Lane exit.

                               B)    Remaining PC's will patrol until stand is clear.
      MEAL
      After half time
      in gym.
                               BCRGBCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                               In the event of such a situation arising, PC's located
                               at tha gates at the end of each level giving access
                               to ranps leading to Penistone Road will ensure these are
                               open.

                               Officers will also take ip positions at exit gates in
                               Penistone Road and Leppings Lane to ensure these are
                               open.

                               Further instructions will be as directed by control
                              SIB SECTOR 6                  In s p e c to r   H ooley


                             VEST STAND

      Serial 13          _   Phase 1 (Before natch)
                         e   ---------------------
                             A) 2 PC's will be located at the North entrance gates
 1)                          to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry
 2)                          and where necessary preventing entry of unauthorised
 3)                          persons.
 4)
 5)                          B) 2 PC's will be located at the South entrance gates
 6)                          to this stand to assist stewards in supervising entry and wher*
 7)                          necessary preventing entry of unauthorised persons.
 8)
 9)                          C) 2 PC's will patrol the concourse/bar area to maintain
10)                          order.
11)
12)                          D) 6 PC's will be located at the front of the stand
                             to prevent missiles being thrown/stand tickets being
                             dropped to the terraces below or persons dinting from the
                             terraces to the stand and to maintain order.

                             Phase 2 (During natch)

                             PC's will be located at the entranoes to the stand to
                             naintain order.

      MEAL                   Phase 3 (After natch)
      After kick off
      when relieved by       Remain in stand until clear.
      Serial 16
      in Gym
                             QCRQBftTY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                             In the event of such a situation arising indicated at 3.16
                             in the serial order. PC's will take up positions at the
                             emergency exits at the extreme front comers of the stand
                              and ensure the gates are unlocked.   Other offioers will
                             take up positions at the entrance steps to the stand and
                             again ensure the gates are open.

                             Further instructions will be as directed by control or
                             passed over the public address system.

                             Offioers will be nominated for individual points at the
                             start of this duty.
                      SUB SBCTCft 7                    Inspector   Walter (Ops)

                      USPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAR ENCLOSURE (SOOTO)
Serial 14             Phase 1 (Before natch)

                     This serial will ensure that si^>porters entering through
                     turnstiles A-G do not enter in possession of items
                     prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons
                     missiles or a lc o h o l) .

                     They will also ensure order is maintained on th? terraces.

                     Phase 2 (During natch)

                     This serial will be located in th? central turrel to th?
                     Leppings Lane terraces to naintain order as required.

MEAL                 Phase 3 (After natch)
After kick off
in gym
                     Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.




                     LEPPINGS LANE TERRACE AND REAR BCLQSURE (NORTH)
Serial 15            Phase 1 (Before natch)
                 B

                     This serial will ensure that supporters are entering through
                     turnstiles 9-16 do not enter in possession of items
                     prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc., weapons,
                     missiles or alcohol).

                     They will also ensure order is naintained on th? terraces.

                     Phase 2 (IXnring natch)

                     This serial will be located in the tunnel to the North
                     Pen in the lappings Lane terraces, to naintain orcier as
                     required.

MEAL                 Phase 3 (After natch)
After
                     Supervise exit of supporters into Leppings Lane.
half time
in Gym

                     EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURES

                     In the event of such a situation arising, indicated at
                     3.16 in the serial instructions, PC's will take up
                     positions at the exit gates and ensure they are open.

                     Further instructions will be as directed by control
                     or passed over the public address system.

                     Offioers will be nominated for individual points at the
                     start of this duty.




                                                             -     -*    ^
                     SUB SECTOR 8                    In s p e c to r Sykes
                                                     In s p e c to r B ro catead

                     leppings lane turnstiles


   Serial 16         Phase 1 (Before match)

                     This serial will be responsible for turnstiles A-G.
                     They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
                     items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
                     weapons missiles or alcohol). They will maintain order
                     and ensure orderly queues are formed.

                     Phase 2 (During match)

                     This serial will be located in the West Stand.

                     Phase 3 (After match)

                     At tfr? carmencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
    MEAL             tte ground and take up a position in Lappings Lane
^-^After half time   opposite tte* turnstiles to await exit of simporters and
   J i n Gym         prevent disorder.




                     leppings l m c   TORHsmas

    Serial 17        Phase 1 (Before match)

                     This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 1-8.
                     They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
                     items prohibited by the ground rules (As above).
                     They will iraintain order and ensure orderly queues are formed.

                     Phase 2 (During match)

                     This serial will be located in the central tunnel to
                     tte Leppings Lane terraces.

                     Phase 3 (After match)

                     At tfr? connencement of Phase 3, this serial will leave
                     the ground and take up a position in leppings Lane
                     opposite ths turnstiles to await exit of supporters
                     and prevent disorder.
    MEAL
                        LEPPINGS LANE TUWBTHZS

      Serial 18         Phase 1 (Before natch)

                        This serial will be responsible for turnstiles 9-16.
 1)                     They will ensure that persons entering do not possess
 2)                     items prohibited by the ground rules. (Banners, etc.,
 3)                     weapons, missiles or alcohol.   They will maintain
 4)                     order and ensure orderly queues are formed.
 5)
 6)                     Phase 2 (During match)
 7)
 8)                     This serial will be located in the tunnel to the
 9)                     North Pen.
10)
                        Phase 3 (After natch)

                        At the ccrrmencement of Phase 3 this Serial will leave
                        the ground and take up a position in lappings Lane opposite
  — -MEAL               the turnstiles to await exit of supporters and prevent
      After kick off    disorder,
      in gym




                        UEPPINGS LAIC TUraCTII£S

      Serial 19         Phase 1 (Before natch)

                        This serial will be located at Leppings Lane and ensure
                        that orderly queues form. They will assist other
                        Serials at this location as required and in the event
                        of vehicles, coaches, etc. arriving, supervise their
                        unloading.

                        Phase 2 (During natch)

                        This serial will be located in the West Stand


                        Phase 3 (After match)

                        At the caimenoement of Phase 3 this serial will leave
                        the ground and take up a position in lappings Lane
      MEAL              opposite the turnstiles to await exit of Supporters
      After half time   and prevent disorder.
      kick off
      in gym.
                             SUB SECTOR 9                   In s p e c to r   S e w e ll/S e lv o o d


                            GROUND RESERVES

     Serial 20              Phase 1 (Before match)

                            ■Riis serial will act as a Reserve Serial and remain
                            within the Gymnasiun unless direct otherwise.

                            Phase 2 (During natch)

                            As above

                            Phase 3 (After natch)

                            As above.



     At 12 noon in gy~..




                            CTOJND RESERVES

    Serial 21               Phase 1 (Before natch)

    Inspector Selwooc       This serial will act as a Reserve serial and
                            remain in the area adjacent to the Police control
                            box between the South stand and Leppings Lane
                            terraces.

                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            As above

                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            As above

MEACr' After half tirr*?
in gym




                            Q O O M D RESERVES

    Serial 22       F1/F2   Phase 1 (Before natch)

                            This serial will act as a Reserve serial and remain
                            in the area between the South Stand and the Spion
                            kop unless directed otherwise.

                            Phase 2 (During match)

                            As above

                            Phase 3 (After match)

                            As above

    MEAL
    After kick off in Gym
                                                           APPHTODC "C
                   SUB SECTOR 10                     Inspector Codke

                   PUBLIC ORDER - KIDCLHCXX) ROM)

Serial 23          Phase 1 (Before natch)

                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Wads ley
                  Lane to Croft on Avenue to maintain order end prevent any
                  clash of supporters.    Direct supporters to side street
                  parking and maintain security of business premises, paying
                  special attention to local public houses and shcps.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                  Phase 3 (After match)

                  On ccrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune patrol
                  in location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                  and supermarkets and prevent any clash of supporters.



                  PUBLIC ORDER - MIDCLQOOD ROAD

Serial   24       Phase 1 (Before natch)
              C
                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Croft on
                  Avenue to Winn Gardens to maintain order and prevent any
                  clash of supporters. Direct supporters to side street
                  parking and maintain security of business premises, paying
                  special attention to local public houses and shops.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

                  Phase 3 (After match)

/)                On ccrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resume patrol
                   location as above. Paying particular attention to shops
                   and prevent any clash of supporters.



                  PUBLIC OROER - HIDCLEWOOD HOAD

Serial 25     c   R a s e 1 (Before match)

                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Hoad from Wads ley
                  Lane to Minto Road to maintain order and prevent any clash
                  of s’upporters.  Direct supporters to side street parking
                  and maintain security of business premises, paying special
                  attention to local public houses and shops.

                  Phase 2 (During match)

                  Refreshments at Claywheels Lane.

                  Phase 3 (After match)                                  ,

                  On ocnrnenoement of Phase 3, this serial will resxwe patrol
                  in location^-^above^ paying particular attention to shops
                  and orevent anv clash of supporters.
                  SUB SECTOR 11                                      In s p e c to r   Jtoare


                  PUBLIC CREEK - KmUBHDOO ROM?

      Serial 26   Phase 1 (Before natch)

                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from Minto
                  Road to Hillsborough Precinct to maintain order and
                  prevent any clash of supporters, paying special attention
                  to shops and in particular licensed premises.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)'

                  R e fre s h m e n ts a t   H rrm p rto n noe.c*.

                  Phase 3 (After match)

                  On corrmencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
                  patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                  to shops and licensed premises and prevent any clash
                  of supporters.




                  PUBLIC OREER - HILLSBOROUGH PRECINCT

      Serial 27   Phase 1 (Before match)

                  PC's will patrol in pairs in Middlewood Road from
                  Hillsborough Precinct to Bradfield Road and from
                  Bradfield Road to th? Old Blue Ball Public House.
                  Patrols will also be required in the Hillsborough
                  Precinct, paying special attention to the supermarkets
                  where looting could take place.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                  Refreshments at Hannerton Road.
10)
11)               Ph^se 3 (After natch)
12)
13)               On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
14)               patrol in location as above, paying particular attention
15)               to shops and to prevent any clash of supporters.
16)
                                  SUB SECTOR 12                   Inspector     Turner
                                                                  Inspector     Tbwnend

                                 PUBLIC OREER - PARKSICE ROftD/CATCHBAR LAME

       Serial 28                 Phase 1 (Before natch)

                                 PC's will patrol in pairs in Parkside Road and
                                 Catchbar Lane to naintain order and prevent any clash
                                 of rival supporters, paying special attention to
                                 shops and lioensed premises. It is essential that
                                 vigilance is naintained on this road as it is the
                                 train route between either end of the ground.

                                 Phase 2 (IXxrlng natch)

                                 Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
10 )
                                 Phase 3 (After natch)

                                 On ccronencement of Phase 3 this serial will resume
                                 patrol in location as above, paying special attention
                                 to prevent any clash of rival supporters.




                                 PUBLIC ORCER - PHCSTC1C RQAD/LEPPINGS LAME

       Serial 29          ^      Phase 1 (Before natch)

                                 This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
                                 to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
                                 prevent access by supporters. It is essential that
                                 access be prevented to all but residents. At similar
                                 events in the past considerable damage has been caused
                                 by groups of supporters, both before, during and after
                                 the game.

                                 1)    Penistone Road North/Vere Road
                                 2)    Penistone Road North/Fielding Road
                                 3 )    lappings Lane/Vere Road
                                 4)    Leppings Lane/Fielding Road

                                 Phase 2 (IXuring match)

                                 Remain at locations given above to prevent supporters
                                 who are unable to enter the ground gaining access to
       MEALS During natch        these roads.
       Staggered at Clayvheels
       Lane to ensure eerier     Phase 3 (After match)
       for points in Phase 2
                                 Renain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
                                 barriers is given by Sector Inspector. It is
                                 that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane
                                 supporters have cleared the area.
                                                                   .



                                                   ■■                  ;   ■-- ■'
                           PUBLIC GREER - PPtLSTQC HQAD/LEPPINGS LANE

Serial 30                  Phase 1 (Before match)

                           This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
                           to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
                           prevent any supporters gaining access. It is essential
                           that access be prevented to all but residents.   At
                           similar events in the past considerable damage has been
                           caused by groups of supporters both before, during and
                           after the game:-

                           1) Penistone Road North/Bickerton Road
                           2 ) Lappings Lane /Bickerton Road
                           3) Lappings Lane/Leake Road
                           4 ) Lappings Lane/Famdale Road

                           Phase 2 (During match)

                           Remain at locations given to prevent supporters who are
                           unable to enter th*3 ground gaining access to thes^ roads.

                           Phase 3 (After match)
MEALS During natch
Staggered at Claywheels    Remain until all crowds have cleared and consent to remove
Lane to ensure cover       barriers is given by the Sector Inspector. It is essential
for points in Phase 2.     that no vehicles be allowed into Leppings Lane until all
                           supporters have cleared the area.




                           PUBLIC GREER - LEPPINGS LAKE

Serial 31                  Phase 1 (Before match)

                           This serial will be responsible for manning the barriers
                           to be placed at the mouths of the following roads to
                           prevent access by supporters:-

                           1)   Leppings Lane/Shenstor*1 Road
                           2)   Leppings Lane/Eskdale Road.

                           (2 PC's on each road)

                           The remaining PC's will patrol Leppings Lane in pairs to
                           maintain order and prevent persons arriving at the
                           ground in coaches unloading except at the turnstiles.

                           Phase 2 (During natch)

                           Renein at locations given above to prevent simporters who
                           are unable to enter the ground gaining access to the roads
                           to naintain order.

                           Phase 3 (After match)

                           Remain until all         hav®        and consent to
MEALS Daring match         barriers is given by Sector             It is
                           that no vehicles be allowed into          Laneunt ila      ^^
Staggered at Claywtieeis
Lane to ensure oover for   jsqpporters have cleared the area
points in Phase 3 —
                   SUB SECTOR 13                   Inspector   Qraoe
                    " ''                    t




                   PUBLIC CREER - LEPPINGS LANE ROUNDABOUT

Serial 32   C      Phase 1 (Before natch)

                  This serial will be located at the roundabout at the
                  junction of Leppings Lane/Penistone Road North/Herr ies
                  Road. They will ensure that Liverpool supporters who
                  travel down Halifax Road/Penistone Road North from the
                  motorway do not gain access to Herries Road or that part
                  of Penistone Road leading to the Spion Kop. They will also
                  ensure that Nottingham Forest supporters whose vehicles
                  will be parked in Herries Road and Penistone Road do not
                  gain access to Leppings Lane or Penistone Road North.

                  Phase 2 (During natch)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                  Phase 3 (After match)

                  Location as in Phase 1 to ensure that supporters
                  leaving the ground do not come into contact.




                  PUBLIC CREER - USPPINGS LftNE ROUNDABOUT

Serial 33   a   « Phase 1 (Before natch)

                  This serial will have similar responsibilities as
                  outlined in the serial above in relation to segregation
                  of supporters before the natch but will also have
                  responsibility for ensuring that the traffic island
                  retrains clear of traffic to allow convoys of Liverpool
                  supporters coaches to round it to gain access to
                  their designated unloading/parking places.    IKless
                  directed otherwise they will prevent such coaches gaining
                  access into Leppings Lane.

                  Phase 2 (During match)

                  Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                  Phase 3 (After match)

                  At the end of the match they will prevent all traffic
                  travelling into lappings Lane and that part of Penistone
                  Road leading from the ground until directed to allow
                  traffic to flow again by control.
            SUB jadCTCR 14                  Inspector    Ingham

            PUBLIC GREER PATHOL - PENISTONE ROAD NORTH

Serial 34   Phase 1 (Before match)

            This serial will be responsible for part of Penistone
            Road North from the traffic island at the junction with
            Leppings Lanp to the Travellers Rest Public House.
            This road will be extensively used by Liverpool supporters
            en route from Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking
            areas in Claywheels Lane and Penistone Road North/
            Halifax Road. They will naintain order and ensure
            that supporters do not possess items prohibited by the
            ground rules (Banners, etc., missiles, weapons or
            alcohol).

            A) 2 Offioers will be located at the top of Niagara
            Road to prevent access into this road by football
            supporters or any other unauthorised person who tries
            to gain access to the Niagara Police Sports Ground.

            B) Remaining offioers will be located in pairs
            on static points at the kerb edgp or, if neoessary, on
            the central reservation (dependant on the vclune of
            traffic) to ensure public order.

            Phase 2 (IXiring match)

            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            Offioers will be situated in locations as given for
            Phase 1.




            PUBLIC GREER PATROL - PBOSTOW ROAD NORTH

Serial 35   Phase 1 (Before natch)

            This serial will be responsible for the part of
            Penistone Road North from the Travellers Rest Public
            House to Wardsend Road North.    This road will be
            extensively used by Liverpool supporters en route from
            Wadsley Bridge Station and coach parking areas in
            Halifax Road. They will naintain order and ensure that
            supporters do not possess items prohibited by the ground
            rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol). Officers
            will be located in pairs on static points at the kerb
            edge or on the central reservat ion (dependant on volume
            of traffic) to ensure public order.

            Rase 2 (During match)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

            Phase 3 (After match)

            Offioers will be situated in the locations as
            for Phase 1.
             SUB SECTOR 15                 Inspector     Pinch


            OQACH RECEPTION - CLAYVKEELS LANE

Serial 3b   Phasp 1 (Before match)

            This serial will supervise the unloading of
            Liverpool coaches In Claywheels Lane. PC's will ensure
            that supporters leaving the coaches do not possess
            items prohibited by the ground rules (Banners, etc.,
            weapons, missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywheels is full, thi
            serial will be relocated and assist serials 41 & 42 in Hal if.
            Phase 2 (IXuring natch)                                   Rex

            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            Supervise loading of supporters onto
            coaches.




            COACH RECEPTION - CLAYWHEELS LANE

Serial 37   Phase 1 (Before natch)

            This serial will supervise the unloading of
            Liverpool coaches in Claywheels Lane. PC's will
            ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do
            not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
            (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol. Once Claywhee
            is full, this serial will be re-located and assist serials 41
            Phase 2 (During match)             & 42 in Halifax Road.

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane,

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.



            NOTE:-

            Claywheels Lane will be subject of "No parking"
            cones for it's full length to allow Liverpool's
            coaches to park - THESE MUST BE B1PCXCED -
            Barriers will also be available to prevent access
            from Penistone Road.

            Access must be allowed for persons workings at
            the various premises including the brewery aid
            bakery in Claywheels Lane which will be open on
            this day.




                                                   0 - o C   !’
                                                   :M    K        ! !
                        SUB SECTOR 16                   Inspector   Scfaoley


                        PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RHZEPTION/WADKLEY STATION

        Serial 38       Phase 1 (Before match)
                    B
                        This serial will work in conjunction with MDunted
                        Officers to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the
                        trains at Wadsley Station. They will marshall the
                        supporters and only allow them to leave when all
                        have left the station premises.   Where necessary
                        searches will be carried out to ensure that items
                        prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
                        weapons, missiles or alcohol) are not in their possession.

                        This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
                        but remain static at this location.

                        Phase 2 (During natch)

                        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                        Phasp 3 (After match)


                        Resune location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                        is maintained and queues form in a proper manner.




                        PUBLIC ORDER - TRAIN RBCEPTION/WAISLEY STATION

        Serial 39       Phase 1 (Before natch)

                        This serial will work in conjunction with Haunted Officers
                        to supervise Liverpool supporters leaving the trains at
u                       Wadsley Station. They will marshall the supporters and
    f                   only allow them to leave when all have left the station
4)                      premises.   Where necessary searches will be carried
5)                      out to ensure that supporters are not in possession
6)                      of items prohibited by the ground rules (banners, etc.,
7)                      weapons, missiles or alcohol).
 8)
 9)                     This serial will NOT escort supporters to the ground
10)                     but remain static at this location.

                        Phase 2 (During natch)

                        Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                        Phase 3 (After match)

                        Resune location at Wadsley Station to ensure order
                        is maintained and queues form in a proper manner
                MINI BUS RECEPTION - WARDSEND ROW) NORTO

Serial 40       Phase 1 (B e fo re m atch)
            B
                This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
                mini buses in Wards^nd Road North. PC's will
                ensure that supporters leaving the coactes db not
                possess items prohibited by the ground rules
                (Banners, etc., vreapons missiles) or alcohol.

                Phase 2 (IX ir in g m atch)

                Refreshments at Traffic Dept. Claywheels Lane.

                Phase 3 ( A f t e r m atch)

                Supervise loading of supporters onto mini buses.




                NOTE; -



                This road will be subject to "No Parking" cones and
                only mini buses, etc. will be allowed to park.
                Barriers will also be available for erection
                at the entrance to this road to control entry.
                 SUB SECTOR 17                    Inspector   Jtabinson

                 OQACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX ROAD

    Serial 41    Phase 1 (Before match)

                This serial will supervise the unloading of Liverpool
                coaches in Halifax Road/Penistone Road North. PC's
                will ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do
                not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
                (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles) or alcohol.

                Phase 2 (IXiring match)

                Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                Phase 3 (After match)

                Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




                COACH RECEPTION - HALIFAX ROAD

    Serial 42   All duties will be identical to and work in
                conjunction with the serial above.



                Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.




1
             SUB SECTOR 18                 In s p e c to r   B u llia a n


            PUBLIC GREEK - HALIFAX ROAD

Serial 43   Phase 1 (Before match)

            This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Wads ley
            Station to Southey Green Road. Officers will work
            in pairs to naintain order, etc.

            Phase 2 (Daring match)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane

            Phase 3 (After match)

            Patrol location outlined above.




            PUBLIC OREER - HALIFAX HQftD

Serial 44   Phase 1 (Before natch)

            This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Southey
            Green Road to Browning Road. Officers will work
            in pairs to naintain order, etc.

            Phase 2 (During natch)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            Patrol location outlined above.




            PUBLIC OREER - HALIFAX HQM)

Serial 45   Phase 1 (Before match)

            This serial will patrol Halifax Road from Browning Road
            to Deer lands Avenue. Officers will work in pairs to
            maintain order, etc.

            Phase 2 (During match)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After match)

            Patrol location outlined above.



            NOTE:-   These officers will ensure that Liverpool
                     supporters travelling in private cars are
                     directed to park in side roads on
                     estates -.
                 SUB SBCTCft 19                In s p e c to r   B u lla s


                 PUBLIC CREEK - COKSi RBCEPTICW/SEARCH SQUAD

Serial 46        Phase 1 (Before natch)
            HO
                 lhis serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
                 Offioers on the A616 at Ought abridge on the one-way
                 system to check at random coaches and mini buses
                 carrying Liverpool supporters.

                 Vehicles stqpped will be checked to ensure passengers
                 are in possession of tickets, are not under the
                 influence of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and
                 are considered fit to attend this event.

                 Where this is not the case, or where they are in
                 possession of alcohol or under it's influence,
                 consideration should be taken regarding action under
                 tfy? appropriate legislation or returning them to the
                 motorway.

                 All coaches/mini buses checked will have a
                 lab?l (issued to sector corrmanders) affixed to
                 the windscreen prior to them being allowed to
                 leave.

                 Phase 2 (IXiring match)

                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                 Phase 3 (After natch)

                 Reserve duties, as directed by control.
SUB SECTOR 20                  In s p e c to r   S te e le


FU3LIC OREER - O O K H RBCEFTCON/SEMCH SQUAD - TANKERSLEY

Phase 1 (Before natch)

This serial will work in conjunction with Road Traffic
Officers on tfr? A61 on the Sheffield side of the
Tankersley motorway junction (Exit 36) to check at
random coaches and mini buses carrying Liverpool
supporters.

Vehicles stopped will be checked to ensure passengers
are in possession of tickets, are not under the influence
of alcohol or in possession of alcohol and are considered
fit to attend this event.

Where this is not the case, or where they are in
possession of alcohol or under its influence consideration
should be taken regarding action under the appropriate
legislation or returning them to the motorway.

All coaches/mini buses checked will have a label
(issued to sector ccnnanders) affixed to the windscreen
prior to ttem being allowed to leave.

Phase 2 (During match)

Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

Phase 3 (After netrch)

Reserve duties as directed by control.
                         SIB SECTOR 21                                       Inspector          P Sfcith (E)

                         K3BILE PATROL - CALL SICK TANGD ONE"

         Serial 48       Phas^ 1 ( B e f o r e match)
                     F
                         •mis serial will patrol the Stocksbridgp area.
1)                       p a y in g p a r t i c u l a r a t t e n t i o n to l i c e n s e d p re rra se s
2    )                   an d t o m a in ta in o rd e r.
3)
4)                       Phase 2 (During match)
5)
6)                       Refreshments at Deepcar Polio* Station, at 3pn-3.45pri
                         Resume patrol 3.45pm.
                         Phase 3 ( A f t e r n a tc h )

                         Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                         MJBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN TEAN0D TOP"

     Serial 49           Phas* 1 (Before match)

                     F   Thi* serial will patrol the Deepcar/Ought ibridg®
1)                       area, paying particular attention to licensed
2)                       premises and to naintain order.
3)
4)                       Phase 2 (During natch)
5)
6)                       Refreshments at Deepcar Police Station.                              Meal at 3.45pm-4.30pni
                         Patrol prior to 3.45pm.
                         Pha<^ 3 (After natch)

                         Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                         MDBIUE PATROL - CALL SIGN TANQD THREE*

         Serial 50       Pjv^p 1 (Before match)

                         This serial will patrol the Wads ley/Middlewood area,
i)                       paying particular attention to lioensed premises, to
                         maintain order.
I)
n                        Phase 2 (During match)
i)
»)                       Refreshments at Claywheels Lane at 3pm.
>)                       Itesixne patrol at 3.45pm in area shown far Phase 1.

                         R a s p 3 (After match)

                         Patrol in area as outlined above.
              SOB SBCK)t< 22                     Inspector       Purdy (HQ)


              mobile patrol    -   call s ig n t a n g o four"

 Serial 51    Phase 1 (Before match

              Patrol Foxhill area, paying special attention to
              licensed premises.

              Phase 2 (IXirinq natch)

              Meal at 3.00pm at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
              Resune patrol at 3.45pm Foxhill/Parson Cross area.

             Phase 3 (After natch)

             Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




             MDBILE PATROL - CALL SIGN "TANGO FIVE*

Serial 52    Phase 1 (Before natch)

             Patrol Parson Cross area, paying special attention
             to licensed premises to naintain order.

             Phase 2 (Curing natch)

             3.00pm patrol Parson Cross/Foxhill area.
             3.45pm Meal, Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lary?.

             Phase 3 (After natch)

             Resune patrol as outlined in Phase 1.




             M3BILE PATROL - CALL SIGN T A N G D SIX*

Serial 53    Phase 1 (Before natch)

             Patrol Grenoside area, paying special attention to
             licensed premises and to naintain order.

             Phase 2 (IXiring natch)

             3.00pm Meal - Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane
             3.45pm Resume patrol Grenoside.

             Phase 3 (After match)

             Resume patrol as outlined in Phase 1.
                                                           APPENDIX "D*
                SUB SBCTCft 23                 Inspector      Meek (HQ)


                OQftCH RHCEFTION - HEKRIES ROM) BUS GARAGE/
                REAR CAR PARK/HEKRIES ROAD

Serial 54       Phase 1 (Before match)

                This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
                Forest Coaches at H e m e s Road Bus Garage. PC’s will
                ensure that simporters leaving the coaches do not
                possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
                banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.

               Any over-flow will be directed to park on the south
               side of Harries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.

               Phase 2 (IXiring natch)

               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

               Phase 3 (After natch)

               Supervise loading of supporters onto coactes.




               CQftCH RECEPTION - HEBRIES HOAD BUS GARAGE/
               REAR CAR PARK AM) MERRIES ROAD

S e n a l 55   Phase 1 (Before natch)

               This serial will supervise the unloading of Nottingham
               Forest coaches at Herries Road Bus Garag?. PC's will
               ensure that supporters leaving the coaches do not
               possess items prohibited by the ground rules i.e.
               banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol. Any over-flow will be
               directed to park cm the south side of Herries Road South anc
               Phase 2 (IXiring match)               Rawson Spring Road.

               Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

               Phase 3 (After natch)

               Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches..



               NOTE:-

               Herries Road and Wardsend Road will be subject
               to "No parking" restrictions which will be strictly
               enforced in relation to private cars.
                                 SUB SECTOR 24                                            In s p e c to r        A m ita g e "E *


                                 BOS/QMCH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD SOUTH

                     Serial 56   Phase 1 (B e fo re n a tc h )

                                 This serial will ensure that Herries Road South remains
                                 clear of all parked cars to allow the unloading of SYPTE
                                 bus^s carrying Nottingham supporters. Coaches will
vOOo-JCT'UnitkOJNj




                                 unload on the North side of this road, having travelled
                                 along Penis tone Road from the Midland Station.

                                 They will supervise unloading and ensure that supporters
                                 are not in possession of items prohibited by the ground
                                 rules (Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).

                                 They will also supervise the unloading of any Nottingham
                                 coaches who nay be directed to unload and park on the
                                 hard shoulder in this road (South side) as an overflow
                                 from other parking locations.

                                 Phasp 2 (D u rin g n a tc h )

                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywhe^is Lan^.

                                 Phase 3 ( A f t e r n a tc h )

                                 Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches/buses.




                                 CQKH RECEPTION - HERRIES ROAD SOUTH

                     Serial 57   Phase 1 (Before natch)                            •

                                 This serial will be located at the junction of Herries
                                 Road and Herries Road South to ensure that Nottingham
                                 coaches arriving at this location are directed to the
                                 car parking areas at SYPTE Bus Garage in Herries -Road.
                                 Any overflow will be directed to park on the South
                                 side of Herries Road South and Rawson Spring Road.

                                 Mini buses, vans, etc., will be directed to the parking
                                 area in Rawson Spring Road.

                                 They will ensure that passengers do not unload until they
                                 are in the appropriate parking area.

                                 Phase 2 (During natch)

                                 Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

                                 R a s e 3 (IXiring natch

                                 Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.

                                 * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *


                                 (TOE:- Herries Road South will be
                                 Parking" cones to
                                 B C RESTRICTIONS_____________ . .         .... .
                                 parked on the hard shoulder on both sides of this
MINI BOS RECEPTION - RAMSON SPRING ROAD

Phase 1 (Before natch)

This serial will supervise the inloading of Nottingham
Forest mini buses in Rawson Spring Road.

PC's will ensure that supporters leaving tb? coactes
do not possess items prohibited by the ground rules
(Banners, etc., weapons, missiles or alcohol).

Phase 2 (During natch)

Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

Phase 3 (After match)

Supervise loading of supporters onto coaches.




NOTE;-

This road will be subject to "No Parking" cones   and only
mini buses, vans, etc. will be allowed to park.
Barriers will also be available for erection at   the
entrance to this road to control entry.
             SUB SECTOR 25                  Inspector   JfcDcaell (HQ)


             PUBLIC OREER - FERRIES HCftD
Serial 59    Phase 1 (Before natch)

            This serial will be responsible for patrolling
            Herries Road (PC's in pairs) from the railway
            viaduct to the Five Arches Public House, to
            maintain order and ensure that any parking
            restrictions are enforced. Direct Nottingham
            Forest supporters in private vehicles to park
            in locations in side roads.

            Phase 2 (During match)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After match)

            Patrol in the area outlined abovp to maintain
            order.




            PUBLIC OREER - FERRIES HQftD
Serial 60   Phase 1 (Before natch)

            This serial will be responsible for patrolling
            Herries Road (PC'S in pairs) from the Five
            Arches Public House to the traffic island at
            the junction with Moonshine Lane/Shirecliffe
            Road to maintain carder and ensure that any
            parking restrictions are enforced.

            Direct Nottingham Forest supporters in private
            vehicles to park in locations in side roads.

            Phase 2 (During natch)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After match)

            Patrol in the area outlined above to maintain order.
             SOB SECTOR 2 h                   Inspector   feytxoc

             PUBLIC GREER - PEMSTONE HOAD

Serial 61    Phase 1 (Before match)

             PC's will patrol in pairs in Fenistone Road from
             Parkside Road to Borough Road to maintain order and
             prevent any clash of supporters.    Direct simporters
             to side street parking and naintain security of
             business premises. Sjpecial attention to be given to the
             enforcement of parking restrictions on Fenistone Road.
             Phase 2 (During natch)

            Refreshments at Traffic Dept., Claywheels Lane.

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            On ccrnnencement of Phase 3, this serial will
            resume patrol in location as above and prevent
            any clash of supporters.




            PUBLIC GREER - FQHSK1E ROAD
Serial 62   Phase 1 (Before match)

            PC's will patrol In pairs in Fenistone Road from
            Borough Road to Burton Street to naintain order
            and prevent any clash of supporters. Direct supporters
            to side street parking. Maintain security of
            business premises.

            Phase 2 (IXiring natch)

            Refreshments at Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            On commencement of Phase 3, this serial will resune
            patrol in locations as above and prevent any clash of
            supporters.
                                  SOB SECTOR 27                  Inspector   Hudson


                                MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIO* "TANQD SEVEN"
     Serial 63                  Phasp 1 (B e fo r e n a tc h )

                 "E"            Patrol Firvale area, paying special attention to
 1)               F             Lioensed premises.
 2)              R/T
 3)               m
                                Phase 2 (During natch)
 4)               m
 5)               m
                                3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane.
 6)               m
                                3.45pm Resume patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.

                                Phase 3 (After match)

                                Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIO< "TANGO EIGHT"

     Serial 64                  Phase 1 (B e fo r e n a tc h )

                 E              Patrol Southey Green area, paying special attention to
l)               F              licensed premises.
2)               *R /T
                  m
3)                              Phase 2 (D u r in g n a tc h )
                  m
4)
                  m
5)                              3.00pm Patrol Firvale/Southey Green area.
                  m
6)                              3.45pm Meal Claywheels Lane.

                                Phase 3 (After match)
                                               V

                                Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.




                                MOBILE PATTOL - CALL SHK "TANGO NINE”

 Serial 65                      Phase 1 (Before natch)

                                Patrol Hillsborough/Langsett Road area, paying special
                                attention to licensed premises.

                      HQ C ID   Phase 2 (During natch)

                                3.00pm Meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic Dept.
                                3.45pm resume patrol Hillsborough.

                                Phase 3 (After natch)

                                Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
            MOBILE PATROL - CALL SIQi "TWOD W
Serial 66   Phase 1 (Before match)

            Patrol Owlerton/Neeps°nd area, paying special attention
            to lioensed premises.

            Phase 2 (During natch)

            3.00pm patrol Owlerton/Neepsend areas.
            3.45pm meal - Claywheels Lane, Traffic D?pt.,

            Phase 3 (After natch)

            Patrol in area as outlined in Phase 1.
                    LIVERPOOL                                    APPENDIX »E«

i STAND:            1 »TAND

                              mar¥
                                                      atiom
                                                Ecyp
 ENTRANCE

                        NOTTIN
                           FOREST




                                                                         worth
                                                                         •BUJE*

                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. pie
                                HtlLSftOftOOGH. SHEFFIELD




STAND               I STAND



                                                              ENTRANCE

ENTRANCE




                                                                          iffiSI   ,
                                                                          •HOW!*




                          SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C pic
   TO BE GIVEN UP               MULSMHtOUGM SHEFFIELD




I STAND             I STAND:

                                                 lakji

                           FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                              CHALLENGE CUP
                               SEMI-FINAL
                        NOTTINGHAM      LIVERPOOL
                          FOREST
                               AT NIUMOROUOH WADWM
                            SATURDAY STH APRIL 1
                    |              IlOC-OfF 3p»
                                                                         -
             WMTIHBHAM FORRSST,
                                                          APPENDIX *E«
 I STAND:         f STAND:

                       KbP

  ENTRANCE




                                                            r     "ORANGE1




                      SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. ptc
                             musmmmM. sHirmto




i STAND:     I STAND:

                      Sovjnt


ENTRANCE




                                                                  SOTTB    ,
                                                                  •GREY*




1STAND:      1 STAND:
                      D »OLOve £c D
                                                                            •r
                                                     ENTRANCE              vV'
              !         FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
 ENTRANCE:
              j            CHALLENGE CUP
              <              SEMI-FINAL

              I m mSm/M v w ® t w 6 t
              I mHUJLSSOROUGH STADIUM
              i         SATURDAY STH APRIL 1888                  ■''!
              t           .  KICK-OFF 3pm                         ;
                                                         Appendix 'F*



CID General Sub Divisional Duties



FI   DS                         I/C        8am - 8pm

     DS                                    8am - 8pm
     DC
     DC
     TDC
     DC
     DS                                Noon - Midnight
     DC
     DC
     TDC

     DC



F2   DS                                    8am - 8pm
     DC                                     n     n
     DC                                     N     M
     DC                                     M     M


     DS                               Noon - Midnight
     DC                                  N     »
     DC

     DC                                    6pm - 6am



     GROUND                           OUTSIDE GROUND - PICK-POCKETS

     DI Scaife                        pc :
     DS                               TOC ;
     DS                               toc :
     TDC                              pc    :
     Pc
     DC
     DC
     DC
     DC
     DC



     PARKSIDE SECTION STATION

     DCI Addison
     DI  Towell
                                                             A ppendix 'F '




    WADSLEY BRIDGE SECTION STATION

    DS
    DC
    DC
    TDC
    PC



THEFTS ERCM VBHCLES

Duties in relation to thefts from motor vehicles,   The Officers will
be based at Parkside Section Station.

Group A




Gtovxd B

Based out at Wadsley Bridge Section Station, Halifax Road.




All Officers to report to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
Gymnasiun for briefing at 9.45am Saturday 9th April 1988.




The following Officers will man a Criminal Investigation Department
post situated in the Sheffield Wednesday Football ClubGymnasiun and
deal with prisoners arrested for crime
                                                      APPENDIX 'G'



                         DOG SECTION


Members of the Dog Section will be deployed as follows:


     DOG VAN                           AREA


        2                 Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

        1                 Leppings Lane Traffic Island

        1                 Herries Road Coach Park

        1                 Leppings Lane Turnstiles

        1                 Penistone Road/Parkside Road

        1                 Penistone Road/Bradfield Road

        1                 Hillfoot Bridge

        1                 Penistone Road to city centre

        1                 Middlewood Itoad/Wadsley Lane

        1                 Middlewood Road/Hillsborough Corner

        1                 Middlewood Road/Deepcar

        1                 Stocksbridge/Oughtibridge

        1                 Tankersley




In addition to the above, two handlers together with ’explosives
dogs will parade at Sheffield Wednesday Football Stadium at 8.00 am
on Saturday 9 April 1988 to search the interior of the ground.
                                                                    Appendix




                      MOUNTED SECTION


Members of the Mounted Section will be deployed as follows



       HORSES                         AREA



            6                     Leppings Lane

         10                       Penistone Road North turnstiles

          6                       Wadsley Bridge Railway Station

          4                       Halifax Road *

         4                        Herries Road *



        30




        *       At Phase 3, two menbers of the Mounted Section

                will be deployed in the Middlewood Road/
                                                                \

                Catchbar Lane area.    Hie remaining two will

                take up a position at Leppings Lane Traffic

                Island.
                                                                                                  APPENDIX «I«
                        ADM INISTRATION. CONTROL AND CUSTODY STAFF. ETC.



ADMINISTRATION

In s p e c to r B e a n e tt
PS

                                  R ad io s




PROPERTY - LIVERPOOL                                                           PROPERTY - NOTTINGHAM FOREST

ps   ;                                                                         PS
pc   :                                                                         PC




PS
                               Cones - M e a ls s u p e rv is io n (G ro u n d )
PC


In s p e c to r Lawson )
                                    L o g is t ic s - C la y w h e e ls Lane
PS                     )
PS




GROW© CONTROL                                                                  SECTOR DRIVERS

In s p e c to r C a lv e r t                                                   Chief Supt.         Insp    B ro u g h to n
PS                                                                             Sector 2          - PC
                                                                               Sector 3          - PS
                                                                               Directors Entrance) PC
                                                                                                 ) PC



CUSTODY (GROUND)                                                               PRISON BUSES

Police Roam

In s p e c to r C r o f t


                                                                               PR O CESS READER

                                                                               Inspector Bums
                                                                         APPENDIX »I»



PROCESS SUPERVISOR - INSPECTOR BURNS


PRISONER PROCESS (HRPS)                              PRISONER PROCESS (BOCLESFIELD)

NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                    LIVERPOOL


Inspector Aicheson                                   Inspector Etheridge
DS




PRISON BUS («PS)                                     PRISON BOS (BOCLESFIELD)

PS                                                   PS
PC                                                   PC




                          COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE POLICE



               Inspector B. Walker          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                                             (Gyrmasiun)

               Inspector K. Walker          Hanmerton Road Police Station


               Inspector D. Riley           Ecclesfield Police Station
 TRAFFIC POINTS                                                                              APP ENDIX *J*




1     A 61   -   G r e n o s id e     tr a ffic      lig h t s                                   PC



2     H a lifa x     R o a d /K iln e r      W ay      TL                                       TW



3     H a lifa x     R o a d /F o x h ill      R oad        TL                                  TW



4     H a lifa x     R o a d /C la y w h e e ls      Lane         TL                            TW



5     P e n is to n e    R oad      N o r t h /H e r r ie s      R oad    S o u th      TL



6     P e n is t o n e   R o a d /P a r k s id e     R oad        TL                            TW



7     P e n is t o n e   R o a d /B r a d fie ld       R oad                                    TW



8     P e n is t o n e   R o a d /N e e p s e n d    Lane                                       TW

      A ll    o th e r   tr a ffic        lig h ts     w ill      be     c o v e re d   by   *D 1 '    O ffic e r s




P o lic e S e rg e a n t 102 F i d l e r w i l l e n s u re t h a t t r a f f i c                     lig h t keys a re
a v a i l a b l e f o r i s s u e t o O f f i c e r s n o m in a t e d f o r t h e s e                p o in ts . He w i l l
a l s o s u p p ly r e f l e c t i v e j a c k e t s i f r e q u i r e d .
                                                                                                         APPENDIX 'K'




TRAINS

1.     N O T T IN G H A M       FO R E S T

F iv e s p e c i a l t r a i n s c a r r y i n g N o t t in g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s w i l l                       a r r iv e
a t M id l a n d S t a t i o n ;   t h e t im e s w i l l n o t b e a v a i l a b l e u n t i l t h e                             w eek o f
th e S e m i F i n a l an d t h e r e f o r e w i l l b e g iv e n a t th e b r i e f i n g .

Each       tr a in    has       a    c a p a c ity o f 5 5 0 .

The    fa re fo r         th e s e      s p e c ia l     t r a in s      is    in c lu s iv e     of    th e   bus      fa re     to
th e   g ro u n d .

S Y T w i l l r u n b u s e s f r o m t h e s t a t i o n t o t h e g r o u n d u s i n g a r o u t e a lo n g
P e n is t o n e R o a d a n d u n l o a d i n g i n H e r r i e s R o a d S o u t h ; th e s e b u s e s w i l l
b e u n d e r m o to r c y c le e s c o r t .

A f t e r t h e m a tc h a s i m i l a r o p e r a t i o n w i l l t a k e p l a c e t o r e t u r n
N o t t in g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s t o t h e r a i l w a y s t a t i o n , l o a d i n g i n
P e n is to n e R o ad N o r t h o p p o s it e t h e g ro u n d a n d u s in g a n i d e n t i c a l                              ro u te
b a c k to th e s t a t io n .

D e p a rtu re       t im e s       w ill   be     g iv e n      at   th e     b r ie f in g .

T h e re    is th e f a c i l i t y           to      d e la y    th e    t r a in s    in    th e     event     of     e x tra    t im e
b e in g    p la y e d .

2.     LIVERPOOL

Tw o s p e c i a l t r a i n s c a r r y i n g L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s w i l l a r r i v e a t
W a d s le y B r i d g e S t a t i o n a t t im e s y e t t o b e a r r a n g e d ;         th e s e w i l l                       be
m ad e a v a i l a b l e a t b r i e f i n g .

Each       tr a in    has       a    c a p a c it y    of     550.

D e p a rtu re       t im e s       w ill    a ls o    be     g iv e n    at     th e   b r ie fin g .

A g a in t h e r e i s a f a c i l i t y                to    d e la y    th e    tr a in s      in    th e e v e n t    of     e x tra
tim e b e in g p la y e d .

As th e s u p p o r t f o r L iv e r p o o l i s w id e s p r e a d , i t i s a n t ic ip a t e d t h a t
s u p p o r te r s w i l l t r a v e l b y s e r v ic e t r a i n fro m a l l p a r t s o f th e c o u n tr y
t o M id la n d R a i lw a y S t a t i o n .      A r r a n g e m e n ts h a v e t h e r e f o r e b e e n m ade f o r
t h o s e a r r i v i n g a t M id la n d S t a t i o n t o b e t r a n s p o r t e d b y S Y T b u s e s t o t h e
g r o u n d b y a r o u t e s e p a r a t e f r o m t h a t u s e d b y N o t t in g h a m F o r e s t s u p p o r t e r s
t r a v e l l i n g a lo n g L a n g s e t t R o a d , M id d le w o o d R o a d a n d a r r i v i n g a t L e p p in g s
L a n e w h e re t h e y w i l l u n lo a d .

A t th e en d o f th e g am e, SYT b u s e s w i l l b e a v a ila b le t o r e t u r n a n y
p e r s o n a r r i v i n g i n t h i s m a n n e r b a c k t o t h e M id la n d R a i l w a y S t a t i o n .
T h e s e b u s e s w i l l b e lo c a t e d i n P e n is t o n e R o ad N o r th o n t h e ’ t o
c a r r i a g e w a y o u t s i d e B e e l e y W ood S p e c i a l S c h o o l .
                                                                                                             Appendix 'L'




                                                     COACHES


      LIVERPOOL


                    A l l L iv e r p o o l coaches s h o u ld le a v e th e M l M otorw ay a t E x it 36
                    (T a n k e r s le y ) an d t r a v e l v i a th e A61 t o d e s ig n a te d p a r k in g a r e a s .

                    The g e o g r a p h ic a l lo c a t io n o f L iv e r p o o l, c o u p le d w it h th e
                    c o u n try w id e s u p p o rt e n jo y e d b y th e C lu b , s u g g e s ts t h a t coaches
                    c o u ld w e l l a p p ro a c h th e s ta d iu m b y o t h e r r o u t e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y
                    th e A 6 1 6 . I f t h i s is th e c a s e , th e n th e y m ust be b ro u g h t t o
                    th e d e s ig n a te d co ach p a r k in g a r e a .

                    L iv e r p o o l E x e c u tiv e C lu b coaches w i l l b e s u p p lie d w it h a r e d
                    n o t ic e (C o p y a tta c h e d ) t o d is p la y i n th e w in d s c re e n an d th e s e
                    w i l l b e p e r m it t e d t o u n lo a d a t th e g ro u n d . T h is f a c i l i t y w i l l
                    n o t b e e x te n d e d t o an y o th e r co ach f o r w h a te v e r re a s o n .

                    The S e r ia ls en g ag ed on d u ty a t T a n k e rs l e y an d Ought ib r id g e w i l l
                    o p e ra te s e le c t i v e s to p and s e a rc h p ro c e d u re s t o e n s u re (A )
                    P assen g ers h a v e t i c k e t s , (B ) th e y a r e n o t i n p o s s e s s io n o f a lc o h o l
                    and (C ) th e y a r e n o t d ru n k . When t h i s has b een d o n e, each
                    co ach w i l l h a v e an a d h e s iv e s t ic k e r p la c e d on th e n e a rs id e o f
                    th e w in d s c re e n an d i t w i l l be a llo w e d t o p ro c e e d t o th e d e s ig n a te d
                    p a r k in g a r e a .

                    A l l co ach es w i l l be a llo w e d t o t r a v e l t o th e g ro u n d w ith o u t
                    s p e c i f i c e s c o r t , a lth o u g h m enbers o f th e Road T r a f f i c M o to r C y c le
                    w in g w i l l b e p r o v id in g o v e r a l l m o b ile s u p e r v is io n . A l l coaches
                    w i l l b e d ir e c t e d t o th e t r a f f i c is la n d a t L ep p in g s Lane w h ere,
                    i n th e f i r s t in s ta n c e , th e y w i l l p a r k i n C la y w h e e ls L a n e . Once
                    t h i s a r e a i s f u l l th e n coaches w i l l b e d ir e c t e d t o p a r k an th e
                     •o u t la n e 1 o f t h e d u a l c a rria g e w a y i n H a l i f a x R oad, p a r k in g t o
                    commence a t th e to p o f th e d u a l c a rria g e w a y an d th e n w o rk to w ard s
                    th e s ta d iu m .

..J         6       A l l c o a c te s w i l l p a r k b e fo r e b e in g p e r m it t e d t o s e t down p a s s e n g e rs ,
                    th e r e b y e n s u r in g t h a t th e o ccu p an ts know e x a c t ly w h ere t o r e t u r n
                    t o on c o m p le tio n o f th e f o o t b a l l m a tc h .

             7      W here i t i s d is c o v e re d t h a t p a s s e n g e rs on a co ach a r e n o t in
                    p o s s e s s io n o f t i c k e t s , o r a r e in b re a c h o f l e g i s l a t i o n c o n c e rn in g
                    a lc o h o l a t S p o r tin g e v e n ts , th e n G round C o n tr o l w i l l b e in fo rm e d
                    f o r c o n s id e r a t io n as t o r e t u r n in g s u ch v e h ic le s o u t o f th e F o rc e
                    a re a u n d er e s c o r t.

            8      W here in d iv i d u a l p a ss en g e rs o n ly a r e in v o lv e d who h ave consuned
                   a lc o h o l i n s u c h am ounts t h a t th e y a r e d ru n k , o r a r e i n p o sses­
                   s io n o f a lc o h o l, th e n th e y s h o u ld b e a r r e s t e d an d d e ta in e d p e n d in g
                   tr a n s p o r t.


            HOTTPKHaM FOREST
            9      Nottin^iam Forest supporters who travel by coach will be
                    to use the Ml Motorway leaving at Exit 34 (Tinsley). This aspect
                    Of the operation will be dealt with by 'D* Division officers arid
        .
                    is the subject of a separate order.
N o ttin g h a m F o re s t E x e c u tiv e C lu b co ach es w i l l be s u p p lie d w ith
a w h ite n o t ic e (C opy a tta c h e d ) a f f o r d in g th e same f a c i l i t i e s
as in P a ra g ra p h 3 a b o ve.

T hese co ach es w i l l be p a rk e d i n th e S o u th Y o r k s h ire T ra n s p o rt
G a ra g e , H e r r ie s Road S o u th a n d , i f n e c e s s a ry , Rawson S p rin g
R oad.
fjrrrrjx
r ffr r s
   rra
                                                                           Appendix "M*




                TRANSIT V M C - LIVERPOOL




T r a n s it v a n s , e t c . c a r r y in g L iv e r p o o l s u p p o rte rs w i l l
b e e n c o u ra g e d t o t r a v e l v ia th e M62 an d M l M otorw ays
le a v in g th e l a t t e r a t J u n c tio n 36 ( T a n k e r s le y ) .
H o w ever, i t i s e n v is a g e d t h a t s u c h v e h ic le s w i l l a ls o
a p p ro a c h th e s ta d iu m fro m th e F lo u e h (A 6 1 6 ).

Such v e h ic le s w i l l b e sto p p e d an d th o ro u g h ly s e a rc h e d
t o e n s u re t h a t t t e y a r e n o t c a r r y in g a lc o h o l an d th e
p a s s e n g e rs h ave n o t consumed th e same t o an e x te n t
w h e re th e y a r e d ru n k .

A l l p a s s e n g e rs w i l l b e checked t o e n s u re t h a t th e y a r e
i n p o s s e s s io n o f t i c k e t s .

A f t e r th e s e a rc h has been co m p lete d an a d h e s iv e s t ic k e r
w i l l b e p la c e d on th e n e a rs id e w in d s c re e n t o c o n fir m
t t e s e a rc h has b een c a n p le te d .

The v e h ic le s w i l l th e n p ro c e e d t o th e d e s ig n a te d
p a r k in g a r e a i n W ardsend Road N o rth w h ere p a s s e n g e rs
w i l l a l i g h t an d w a lk t o th e g ro u n d .

I t i s n o t f e a s ib le t o a t t e n p t t o c h a n n e l s u c h v e h ic le s
th ro u g h one " c h e c k p o in t" and t h e r e f o r e i t w i l l b e th e
d u ty o f a l l s e r i a l s on d u tie s o u ts id e t h e s ta d iu m t o
n o n it o r an d c h e c k su ch v e h ic le s an d t h e i r o c c u p a n ts .

S h o u ld a n y v e h ic le a r r i v e , w ith o u t h a v in g b e e n ch ecked
on t t e o u t s k ir t s , w h ic h i s fo u n d t o b e c a r r y in g
p a s s e n g e rs w ith o u t t ic k e t s o r i n b re a c h o f th e
l e g i s l a t i o n r e l a t i n g t o th e c a r r ia g e and con su m p tio n
o f a lc o h o l e n r o u te t o s p o r tin g e v e n ts , th e n G round
C o n tr o l w i l l b e in fo rm e d f o r c o n s id e r a tio n as t o
r e t u r n in g t h e v e h ic le t o th e m otorw ay f o r e s c o r t .
I f n e c e s s a ry , th e d r iv e r and p a ss en g e rs w i l l b e d e a lt
w it h f o r b re a c h o f th e r e le v a n t le g i s la t i o n b y w ay o f
su m o n s o r a r r e s t , dependant on t h e i r in d iv id u a l c o n d itio n .
                                                                               Appendix 'N*



      TRANSIT VANS - NOTTENCHAM FOREST




T r a n s it v a n s , e t c . c a r r y in g N o ttin g h a m F o re s t s u p p o rte rs
w i l l b e e n c o u ra g e d t o t r a w l v ia th e M l M otorw ay le a v in g
th e l a t t e r a t J u n c tio n 34 ( T in s le y )

Such v e h ic le s w i l l be s to p p e d an d th o r o u g h ly s e a rc h e d
t o e n s u re t h a t th e y a r e n o t c a r r y in g a lc o h o l an d th e
p a s s e n g e rs h ave n o t consumed th e s an e t o an e x te n t
w h ere th e y a r e d ru n k .

A l l p a s s e n g e rs w i l l be checked t o e n s u re t h a t th e y a r e
in p o s s e s s io n o f t i c k e t s .

A f t e r t h e s e a rc h has been ccrn p lete d a n a d h e s iv e s t ic k e r
w i l l be p la c e d on th e n e a rs id e w in d s c re e n t o c o n firm
th e s e a r c h has been c o m p le te d .

The v e h ic le s w i l l th e n p ro o eed t o t h e d e s ig n a te d
p a r k in g a r e a in Rawson S p rin g Road w h ere p a s s e n g e rs
w i l l a l i g h t an d w a lk t o th e g ro u n d .

I t is n o t f e a s ib le t o a tte n p t t o c h a n n e l s u ch v e h ic le s
th ro u g h one " c h e c k p o in t" and t h e r e f o r e i t w i l l b e th e
d u ty o f a l l s e r i a ls cm d u tie s o u ts id e th e s ta d iu n t o
m o n ito r a n d c h e c k su ch v e h ic le s an d t h e i r o c c u p a n ts .

S h o u ld a n y v e h ic le a r r i v e , w ith o u t h a v in g b een checked
on t h e o u t s k i r t s , w h ic h is fo u n d t o b e c a r r y in g
p a s s e n g e rs w ith o u t t ic k e t s o r i n b re a c h o f th e le g i s l a ­
t i o n r e l a t i n g t o th e c a r r ia g e an d c o n s u n p tio n o f
a lc o h o l e n r o u t e t o s p o r tin g e v e n ts , th e n G round
C o n tr o l w i l l be in fo rm e d f o r c o n s id e r a tio n a s t o
r e t u r n in g t h e v e h ic le t o th e m otorw ay f o r e s c o r t .
I f n e c e s s a ry , th e d r iv e r and p a s s e n g e rs w i l l b e d e a lt
w it h f o r b re a c h o f th e r e le v a n t l e g i s l a t i o n b y w ay o f
suim ons o r a r r e s t , dependant on t h e i r in d iv id u a l
c o n d it io n .
                              o>              CM
                                                                                            u»                                                                                                       N)

                 o •—
                   a                                          CD
                                    2 -                                                     P        5                                                                   03                                        n              03
                 S> 0)              <                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
                 xr a
                 o     a
                              3in   >—
                                    a
                                         w                                            tfl                                                                                                            1
                                                   •cO 7  >        a                             oo >                                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                            possession of bottles, cans etc (or part of) which are capable of causing
                                                                                                            injury. This includes drinking glasses but not thermos flasks.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          n o >




                                                                                                            It is an offence to enter or attempt to enter a football ground when in
                       Wt           00 0)              re 5        re                 0)                                                                                                                                a o' —                          r~
                 rr    -                a                          V) »                                                                                                                                   0) *1         -i c —         1 o ~
                 0)    >—           0)
                                                   cr    *<
                                                                   M« n-•on           a          o n                                                                                                                    c                               C3
                 (/>   o                o          m. J? n         00                                                                                                                                     Z-2           3 - <-*.
                       3            *-« •*.        n *- o          3                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                               V)    cJ   *-•*13
                                                                                                                                                                                                          r             5r < w         2 s’s-
                 O                  o
                                                   w
                                                      m. a         0)    j                                                                                                              —>0)              Qe
                                                                                                                                                                                                           * oi w         01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 3 01
                                                   tu r
                                                      <e v
                                                         ->
                                                                         M« M*
                                    c re                                                                                                                                                             9
                                                                                                                                                                                              —.
                                                                                      re         * . OJ                                                                                 •- a              .   3    Q)                       n o>
                 I» -o              ~ a                   ►        re          o      a          >-• cr                                                                                                                 a * a               11) D
                                    a n            “i re #         CL                 n          r» *—<                                                                                 00 o                  re 2                     3 ~l
                 Wt                 id re          re v> cr                    a      re         a" re                                                                                   *1                   •-+ CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        w o o          oo n o
                                                   «■»        M    0)                                                                                                                   o -»                            c -i
                                                   *< — re            y a                        a   3                                                                                  c re
                                                                                                                                                                                                              n         n                re *-h
                 CD ^                    o          • tr           re                            i «S<                                                                                  a a
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ^ 3       S’ ~1 3re      o a re
                 a                  oo                O M.         o> o s -                                                                                                             cl n                  £
                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               -'o<i     .“                 3
                                                              a    V)                 re         M*                                                                                     • re                            < oi n         o o n
                 •3                 Sc ’Sw               o
                                                                        5 g           a          n in
                                                                                                 ^ re
                                                                                                                                                                                                              re
                                                                                                                                                                                                              *1 w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        re «-•re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        313            *i 3 re
                 3 £                a w                  §§             o <<          re         re a                                                                                                         CD r*                    «■*Q1 H
                 o w
                   *1               a re                                »■**                     v> n                                                                                                                   n re o         *1        o
                 “i                 •    V)              M-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        re n-g
                 >-«i                    V)              3 O            < §                                                                                                                   *V)8               0)                    §■? ^
                 (C r*                                                                0)                                                                                                                                                  cr oi
                 3 O                                                                             a u                                                                                           w                                w      01 *- 3
                 O                                       &3                                      ~ a
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?g.           a - v>
                 CD W                                                                                                                                                                          re
                                                                                                                                                                                               v>
                                                                                                                                                                                                              V)            re re           n o
                      CD                                 « 3            o ff                                                                                                                  v>
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 x          3 w
*                                                        QJ<<                                    a tj                                                                                                         *i re               V)        w "8
                 § 2J                                                          V)                                                                                                                             re oi         *-*             re i
*                Q. n                                    re o            JJ    o                 a
                                                                                                                                                                                              0)              03   *1       *10►)-          *1 Q)
• ■              re zr                                      0)           rr    *-                • sw                                                                                         n               s &           0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            < n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            >-• o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 « -♦
                 *1    •                                 0 c             re    a                     o                                                                                                                      re o            n i
                                                              V)                                     a                                                                                        §■              3 a,
                 r*    0)                                     re        •a     ~      re                                                                                                      o                              •-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             « rr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
*                                                        01              >-•   a      a
                 £ n                                     •— 0)                        **                                                                                                                                     3         S-» ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       •   re °
                 >§
                 n v>
                                                         n               o            re
                                                                                                     in                                                                                                       00 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OO O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3      n j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3"— 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                                                               tfl                                                                                                                            *1 W.          **        •    n g
                 •     0)
                                                         o *1                                         &                                                                                                       O n           0     01
                                                                                      o                                                                                                                                                     re *-■•
                       O’
                       f
                       c
                       —<                                                >
                                                                         f
                                                                         c  n
                                                                         —<*0                        *8                                                                                       re              § V)                              3
                                                              a                                       o                                                                                                       p
                       re                                w               n 55                         r+                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                              w. r*e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1        ^■gcr           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1m
                                                         a
                                                            0)           O *i
                                                                         rr r*
                                                                                      S’              tfl                                                                                     re                  <                            v«—
                                                         re *-•*         o (A                         M*                                                                                                      *-*           *1 w .          3    ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                              o n                           *-■ n
                                                         r* O                         a               w                                                                                        a                   re       I n             30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
                       oi
                                                         *i o
                                                         M» f*                        0)              0)                                                                                      oo               x               W            >—   *1
•     ■                -j                                                                                                                                                                                     c <           01 re                *1
          -'w,         ■*1                               8a 7*-          g
                                                                        *<
                                                                               °
                                                                                *■*
                                                                                                                                                                                               o               w re
                                                                                a"
                                                                                                                                                                                              *1              *rge 3”
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ►—       -3
                                                         r» *“*                                                                                                                               0)                                            V)   01
                        Si                               0)
                                                                         a
                                                                         o
                                                                                re                                                                                                                            n n           § n             V ►-
                       -                                      00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            < n
                                                                                                                                                                                                              0) re
                                                                               oo                                                                                                                                                           a> o
                                                         ^
                                                              *1                      S'                                                                                                                                                    3 3"
                     -J
                                                         ~ o                                          3                                                                                                                           CO           o




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             APPENDIX
                 .
                                         o
                                                         o g             S'S                         oo                                                                                                       n o                 rr        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               •-
                       "a                                oo a.                        00                                                                                                                                                         o
                       re                                c
                                                                         £r a
                                                                                       *1                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                              oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                              o a           g a             »•   *1
                       w                                 8. o            re re
                                                                                      o                                                                                                                                        re           *1
                                                                         a w                         §                                                                                                                      n •
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3"              01 01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M . I—I
                       °                                 0 n                M*        CL                                                                                                                      w                   O         3 —
                                                         1               O oo                        CD                                                                                                                     O     *1            o




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             'O'
                                                         a o             C 3          *                                                                                                       re                            *1              re s;
                                                         re v>           ** 0)                                                                                                                a                                   3
                                                         i re                                                                                                                                                               p* w .          n >-•
                                                                         o re
                                                                         —,CL                                                                                                                 re               a <          O     3
                                                         o **•                                                                                                                                                0 0 01
                                                         *i **•                       a                                                                                                                           a
                                                                                                                                                                                              o>                            sr
                             1W
                                                                                                  APPENDIX *P»


                                                   PARKING RESTRICTIONS

     NO PARKING CONES

     No p a r k in g co n es w i l l be p la c e d in th e fo llo w in g lo c a t io n s p r i o r t o 7 . 0 0 am on
     S a tu rd a y 9 A p r i l 1988 b y c i v i l i a n s t a f f u n d er th e d i r e c t i o n o f P o lic e S e rg e a n t



     1.   H a lif a x Road - o u t o f c i t y         la n e frc m Parson C ro s s Road t o C ow per Avenue

     2.    F o x h ill Road - o u t o f c i t y s id e frc m H a lif a x Road t o P a rs o n C ro ss Road

     3.   W ardsend Road N o rth - b o th s id e s

     4.   P e n is to n e Road -     frc m C la y w h e e ls Lane to R a ilw a y B rid g e - b o th s id e s

     5.   C la y w h e e ls Lane ( in c lu d in g one way system ) fro m P e n is to n e Road t o L im esto n e
          C o tta g e L a n e . (B o th s id e s )

J    6.   N ia g a ra Road - b o th s id e s

     7.   L ep p in g s Lane - b o th s id e s

     8.   H e r r ie s Road - frc m P e n is to n e Road t o W ordsw orth Avenue - b o th s id e s

     9.   W ardsend Road - b o th           s id e s

    10.   H e r r ie s Road S o u th -      b o th s id e s

    11.   G a ls w o rth y Road

    12.   Rawson S p r in g Road -          b o th s id e s

    13.   P a rk s id e Road - fro m Pen i s to n e Road t o C a tc h b a r Lane -
          one s id e o n ly - a lo n g s id e p a rk

    14.   C a tc h b a r L an e frc m P a rk s id e Road t o Leppings L ane
          One s id e o n ly - a lo n g s id e s c h o o l

    15.   M id d lew o o d Road - one s id e o n ly (a lo n g s id e p a r k ) f r o n P a rk s id e Road to
          H aw ksley Avenue

    16.   P e n is to n e Road - b o th s id e s fro m L ep p in g s Lane is la n d t o Neepsend Lane

    17.   L iv e r s e y S t r e e t - o n e s id e frc m P e n is to n e Road c a r p a r k e n tra n c e
                                                                                                                 Appendix "Q1


                                              ROUTE SIGNING



LIVERPOOL COACH A N D CAR ROUTES

1        M 1-A61         t o be p la c e d in       lo c a t io n b y Road T r a f f i c

2        A 57-A 628      Hayfields crossroad-Derbyshire to indicate football t r a f f i c
                         i s t o f o llo w .  A628 t o be p la c e d o u t b y Road T r a f f i c d u rin g
                         n ig h t o f 8 A p r i l 1 9 8 8 .

3        A 628 /A 6 16 t o be p la c e d in         lo c a t io n b y D e e p c a r O f f ic e r s .

A d d it io n a l s ig n in g w i l l be r e p e a te r s a t in t e r v a ls on th e r o u t e .




NOTTINGHAM FOREST COACH AND CAR ROUTES

A l l N o ttin g h a m F o re s t v e h ic le s w i l l use a r o u te fro m th e m o to rw ay, a r r i v i n g a t
B r ig h t s id e L a n e .          A t t h i s p o in t , c a rs w i l l b e d ir e c t e d a lo n g S u th e rla n d S t r e e t ,
Gower S t r e e t , B ru n s w ic k R oad, N u rs e ry S t r e e t t o Neepsend L a n e .

Coaches and Vans w i l l t r a v e l v i a U p w e ll S t . ,            F i r v a l e , an d H e r r ie s Road t o th e
G round.

SIGNING

1        R oute s p l i t s ig n                                                     O w le r Lane

2        Coach r o u te s ig n                                                       H e r r ie s R o a d /B a m s l e y Road

3        D ir e c t io n a l s ig n                                                  B a rn s le y R o a d /P its m o o r Road

4        D ir e c t io n a l s ig n                                                  P its m o o r Road /R u tla n d Road

5        D ir e c t io n a l s ig n                                                  R u tla n d R oad/N eepsend Lane

6        D ir e c t io n a l s ig n                                                  Neepsend L a n e /R u tla n d Road

7        C oach r o u te s ig n                                                      H e r r ie s R o a d /S h ir e c lif f e Rd Is la n d

8        C a r r o u te s ig n                                                       B e r r ie s R o a d /S h ir e c lif f e Rd Is la n d

A d d it io n a l s ig n in g w i l l be r e p e a te r s a t i n t e r v a l s .

A l l s ig n s m ust be in p o s it io n b y 8 .0 0 a m .          T he s ig n s h ave m ovable a rro w s an d when
p la c e d must be f a c in g oncom ing t r a f f i c w it h th e a rro w p o in t in g i n th e a p p r o p r ia te
d ir e c t io n t o f o llo w th e r o u te s g iv e n a b o v e .

S ig n s w i l l be p la c e d o u t b y       c iv ilia n    s t a f f re s p o n s ib le f o r p a r k in g cranes.                    j?
                                              APPENDIX *B*




              SPECIAL CONSTABULARY DUTIES



Special Constables will be on duty in connection with this
event to supplement the regular Officers. They will in
particular be involved in connection with the control of
traffic away from the immediate vicinity of the ground.

They will parade at 9.45 am in the gymnasium for briefing
and take up their duties as soon as possible.

Refreshments will be available in the gymnasium during the
match.

Radios will NOT be issued to members of the Special Constabulary,
except supervisory ranks.



                         DUTIES


(a)   Herries Road - encourage and supervise parking in side
      road on Longley, Norwood and Shirecliffe estates by
      Nottingham Forest supporters.

(b)   Langsett Road - encourage and supervise parking in area
      between Langsett Road and Infirmary Road by Nottingham
      Forest supporters.

(c)   Neepsend Lane - encourage and supervise parking in area
      around old gas works by Nottingham Forest supporters.

(d)   Halifax Road - encourage and supervise parking in side
      roads on Parson Cross/Foxhill estates by Liverpool
      supporters.

(e)   Middlewood Road - encourage and supervise parking in
      side roads on Marlcliffe and Wisewood estates by Liverpool
      supporters.
                                                                 APPENDIX «S*-


                              GROUND REGULATIONS


Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the field of play.
The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings in the ground is
forbidden

The consunption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only in authorised places
and in accordance with the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act 198a

Fireworks, snioke canisters, bottles, glasses, cans, flags, banners, poles and
other similar articles or containers including anything which could or might be
used as a weapon, are not permitted within the ground, and any person in possession
of such an article or container may be refused entry or ejected frarc the ground.

Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw any object onto the pitch.

Any person who fails to comply with instructions from a steward may be ejected from
the ground.

Any person who remains in a gangway may be ejected from the ground.

The Club reserves the right to refuse admission to or eject any person who
refuses to be searched by a Police Officer.

The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents to remove from this ground
any person who does not comply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules and
Regulations of The Football Association and The Football League or whose presence
on the Ground is or could reasonably be construed as constituting a source of
danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.
                                        A ppendix *T *




     MAPS




Division of stadiun


Liverpool routes and parking areas


Sector 2


Nottingham Forest routes and parking areas


Sector 3


Overall parking areas (Sectors 2 & 3)


Location of mobile units (Tl-10)
Sheffield Wednesday F.
  Hillsborough Ground
                                                        •3Z S.




v-
..




     /                Crown Inn   P.H




               M.1. MOTORWAY JUNCTION 36   TANKERSLEY

     &NESDAY




                                                                 7mw»
           SEMI FINAL 1588

         SECTOR 2 - LIVERPOOL



                             LIVERPOOL



                                   ‘lg£iEN!!I2>




                          «H
                          O
1*11




                          X



WADSLEY BRIDGE               I
A        .


                                                    ^ E W I FIHAL 1988

                                    M/ITS   forest routes and parking areas


                                                                               NORTH
    : .V^

          NIAGARA                                                                      NSLEY
     ■   ■ ■ * .
           Ground                                                                      ADUCT
                                                                                       c tion 3 4

                                                                                       SOUTH
                                                              □
                    SHCFFI f t D   WFONCSOAY   ht



                                                                F i r v al e




                                               * C*ntr ~
                                                       0
    r                                                     nrgra ■; - MpggmsMM k >hbst



                                                                                                  Notts Rarest
                                                                                                  Coach Bark
                                                     P   /

                                                Ui
                                                     v;
                                                                                                          #«wit ■
                                                                                                          HanflMini bus'

                                                             'Sh•ti
                                                                      *«<>.
                                                                *C

    ^    c   .p l i o n


'       L A ^ £
                                                     PARK~ % -

                                                                         'to.
              U N N O X ROAD
         000°THr                 B040Ii              Hillsborough Pork




                                                                                                          r

                                                                  A *                               x y
                                           *0                                               RD-
                                                                                   .FIELD

                      cv
                                                % \
               '- f        f f   itq


                      \                %        v
         °0
                           °           X •                      V -1
               %                 v V>
               N>
                                                                  r       a.   -
              fA   cm SEMI IZNAL - PAHKDO ASEAS


                                                  k /A !J
« lf '4   T
fGLZJTWS
 mo on

                    Car:




                                                            .pm*.
                                                               2?T&,
    t
                    n   J tlB B M S iJ O U



Tango 1
£tookstai4fe»   ;
'Tango 2                                     f t   * * w   \w *

Bt®pcar
          \!
                                             ' £ ^

MUtsr
                                                                      APPENDIX 'U'




                             S€3fH3Ut£ OF TOTAL MftMKJflSR



                  Cfa Supt      Supt           Q i In s p    In s p    PS      PC

GRCUND               1            1              3            10       27      241

                                                              9        16      oc
OCNIRQL   ETC                     1

H B U C CXffiH?                   2              4            20       44      346

MOBILES                                                       4        10      60

                                  1              1            3        9       2g

SEffiM                                                        1        3       30




                     1            5              8            47       109     731




                                         ri:
