From:           R J Clifford                                cc     Home Secretary
                ABCU                                               Mr Michael
                Room 970 QAG                                       Mr Howarth
                273 3560                                           Permanent Secretary
                                                                   Mr Boys Smith, PPD
                20 March 1998                                      Ms Wheldon, LAB
                                                                   M - °•        CCPD
                                                                   M           PU
                                                                   Mr Evans, ABCU
                                h-+~                               Mr Clayton, LAB
                                                                   Mr Edmundson, OPPU
                                                                   Mr Butler, CD
                                                                   Mr Norman
                                                                   Mr Warner
Lord Williams

CORRESPONDENCE FROM PROFESSOR SCRATON

Issue

A response to the attached letter from Professor Scraton regarding his recommendations on
inquests and disasters.

Timing

2.       Routine.

Summary

3.     Professor Scraton seeks to engage on fundamental changes to the inquest system,
drawing attention in particular to the recommendations contained in his No Last Rites about
the Hillsborough disaster.

4.      Although there is always room for debate about the purpose and effectiveness of the
present system, the issue has moved on as regards disaster enquiries following the report of
the Interdepartmental Working Group on Disasters and Inquests which recommended that
inquests should not normally proceed where a public enquiry into a disaster is held.

5.    Since a fundamental review of the inquest system is not envisaged, it would not be
appropriate to respond in detail to the points raised, but the broad aims of Government policy
towards coroner arrangements should be explained.

Recommendation

6.      That you reply along the lines of the draft letter at Annex A.

Consideration

7.      No Last Rites, published in 1995, is the Final Report of the Hillsborough Project
which was commissioned by Liverpool City Council. The aim was to analyse the
Hillsborough inquest and to consider the experience of both the bereaved and those who
survived. Consideration is also given to the media coverage of the events.

8.       The report contains a wide range of recommendations relating to the conduct of
inquests into disaster casualties. The approach is based on the perception of the inquest forum
as inadequate to deal with the issues which arise in such cases because of its inquisatorial
nature and the limitations imposed as to findings of liability, whether civil or criminal. The
main recommendations relate to the need for advance disclosure, legal aid and participation
by interested persons in determining the conduct of the proceedings (calling witnesses, cross-
examination, and addressing the jury on the facts). Far from avoiding findings of criminal
or civil liability, the aim would seem to be encourage the enquiry to result in a verdict which
would imply liability and lead to recommendations of various kinds, including further
proceedings in the civil or criminal courts.

9.      To the extent that the report and its recommendations relate to post-disaster inquests,
No Last Rites has effectively been overtaken by the report of the Interdepartmental Working
Group on Disasters and Inquests which recommended that, where the Lord Chancellor
certified that a public enquiry would constitute sufficient investigation of the deaths arising
from the disaster, the inquest should be adjourned and not normally resumed. If this
recommendation were acted upon, there would not usually be an inquest into the deaths in
such cases and no need to introduce special procedures for dealing with them.

10.    It is true that the Working Group had approached the issue from a different direction -
 the need to avoid the existing overlap between inquests and inquiries which appeared to
serve no useful purpose and simply added to the distress of the bereaved. But since the
recommendation for change has been accepted in principle, the case for considering Professor
Scraton’s recommendations further falls away.

 11.   Similar recommendations might, of course, be made in respect of a wider range of
inquest cases, but since this would introduce fundamental changes to the coroner system,
which are not at present envisaged, it would seem inappropriate to pursue them at this
juncture. A relatively brief acknowledgement, drawing attention to the Working Group
recommendation, would therefore seem to be the most suitable response.

Resource implications

12.    None.

Handling/presentation

13.    No additional points




                                                    R J CLIFFO
                                                                                     ANNEX A
LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY LORD WILLIAMS


Professor Phil Scraton
Director
Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
Edge Hill University College
St Helens Road
Ormskirk
Lancashire L39 4QP




CORONIAL PROCEDURE AND THE CONDUCT OF INQUESTS

Thank you for your letter of 9 March with a copy of No Last Rights. You outlined possible
ways to improve enquiries into deaths resulting from disasters.

I have studied the recommendations contained in your work. Clearly there are difficulties
where the inquest system, which is designed primarily to deal with single deaths in relatively
straightforward circumstances, is faced with large scale multiple deaths in the complex and
confused situation of a major disaster.

Hillsborough brought this home. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s recent report made clear,
the need for an inquest following the Taylor enquiry placed an unreasonable and unnecessary
burden on the coroner. When the circumstances of the deaths have been fully investigated
in the course of a public enquiry, we must seriously question the value of holding an inquest
as well, especially when it largely serves merely to prolong the distress of the relatives of
those who died.

As you will no doubt be aware, the Home Office published last year the report of the
Interdepartmental Working Group on Disasters and Inquests. This considered the problem
of the overlap between inquests and judicial inquiries into major disasters. After considering
various models, it concluded that the most satisfactory solution would be to enable inquests
to be suspended where disasters were the subject of a public enquiry, and to resume them
only in very exceptional circumstances. This seems to us in principle to be the right solution,
although I have to say that there is no immediate legislative opportunity to give effect to the
recommendation.

I realise, of course, that disaster fatalities are not the only deaths in which the circumstances
may be controversial and the effectiveness of the present inquest system is open to criticism.
But we have no plans for major changes. What we do aim to achieve are practical
improvements for the families of the deceased while continuing to work within the existing
legal framework. I am confident that real advances can be made on this basis.

It was good of you to write. I hope this brings you up to date on our thinking on these
important matters.
        M R ?,q,9g


           edge hill                                                                                                        Rr HI tkfrti
U N IV E R S IT Y COLLEGE
                                                                                                                                            S e c re t^
                                                                                                                            W          -SHA^k
                                                                                                                            |4\ lo^JULdO-^
            Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice                                                                  Kvss sue*****
                                                                                                                               ^ u-jU
                                                                                                                            Kr E mo/ ^
            Direct Line:
                                                                                                                            Hr    C
           Our Ref:                   P S /B H                                                                              kf                   n


                                                                                                                            b j ^"uJcUf
           9 March 1998
                                                                                                                             Kr   b ^ o rn k f
                                                                        U j-
           Lord Williams of Mostyn Q C                                                                                       Hr 0 u X ,/\
           Parliamentary Under Secretary
           Home Office                                                                                                            CK)/&
           50 Queen Anne's Gate
           LONDON
           S W 1 H 9 AT                                              (W :

           Dear Lord Williams


           Ref: Coronial Procedure and the Conduct of Inquests
                                                                                                                            uh
           W e met several years ago when I presented a paper on the aftermath of the
           Hillsborough Disaster to a C O R E Westminster conference which you chaired.
           Since that time our long-term research has been published, No Last Rights
           (enclosed), and our work into resolving inter-agency conflict in the aftermath of
           disasters and related traumatic events has been grant-supported by the Home
           Office. W e presented our research report, Beyond Disaster, in December 1997.

          The purpose of this letter is to present some of the key issues to you in the light of
          your current review of coronial procedure and inquests. With colleagues I have
          researched controversial deaths and their investigation and legal processing since
          1979. In 1987 Dr Kathryn Chadwick and I published In the Arms o f the Law:
          Coroners ’ Inquests and Deaths in Custody. It used a range of diverse cases to
          expose the system's failings and presented a programme of fundamental reforms.

          The Hillsborough Disaster exposed the full extent of the problems associated with
          Inquests and the anomalous relationship which exists between the coroner’s
          court, public inquiries and criminal prosecution.    These problems have been
          further emphasised by other disasters, particularly the Herald o f Free Enterprise
          and the Marchioness.


                                                                                                                             Continued...




         D r Jo hn C ater Ch ief Executive   St Helens Road, O r m s k irk ,   Telephone: 01 69S 57S171
                                             Lancashire L39 4 Q P              F acsim ile: 01695 579997
                                                                               Inte rnet: h ttp ://w w w .eh ch e .ac.u k
9 March 1998

Lord Williams of Mostyn Q C

No Last Rights is the first in-depth analysis of the inquest procedure and its
application to disasters. It is a study of the mini-inquests, the resumed generic
inquest and the eventual judicial review. Whatever the quality of the judgements
as they emerged within the existing structure, and I accept that the coroner’s
discretion is broad, the case demonstrates the depth and breadth of the
inadequacies of this out-dated and inappropriate procedure. Not only is the
procedure contradictory regarding the issue of liability, but also it adds to the grief
and desperation experienced by families. Other research carried out at our
Centre by Bob Dunn (Custody Deaths and Human Rights) illustrates the pain
endured by the bereaved.

I enclose a copy of No Last Rights for your consideration and ask you to note
specifically the summary (first part) and recommendations. I draw your attention
particularly to the 8 recommendations Role and Constitution o f Official Inquiries
into Disasters (pp xx-xxi) and to the 33 recommendations: Role and Function of
Inquests following Disasters (pp xxi-xxiii).

If you wish to meet with myself or my colleagues please let me know and we will
arrange a visit.

Yours sincerely




Professor Phil Scraton
Centre Director
