                                  RESTRICTED: POLICY

From: Paul Pugh                            cc: Mr Howarth
      Head of Operational Policing             Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                              Sir Richard Wilson
      Room 539                                 Stephen Boys Smith
      Queen Anne’s Gate                        Tim Middleton
      S 0171-273-3141                          Peter Edmundson
      20 November 1997                         Mike Granatt
                                               Robert Clifford ABCU
                                               Ivan Bailey
                                               Norman Warner
                                               Ed Owen




1.       Mr Michael
2.       Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

Issue

Letters (attached) (i) from the Hillsborough Family Support Group asking for the
scrutiny to be delayed and making accusations about the South Yorkshire Police,
and (ii) from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire disputing their allegations.
There are issues also about the timing and handling of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report.

Timing

2.         Pressing.

Summary

3.     The Family Support Group make a number of allegations about delay by the
South Yorkshire Polide in releasing information to them which they believe puts them
at a disadvantage. They would like you to extend the timetable for the scrutiny.
They released their letter to the press. That was how the South Yorkshire Police
received it. In his letter of 12 November Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, disputes that the police have delayed any disclosure of information,
claiming that they have bent over backwards to co-operate with the Family Support
Group in the release of information. Both parties are in effect accusing the other of
being deliberately misleading to influence the outcome of the scrutiny.

4.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report is likely to be ready either immediately
before or immediately after the Christmas break.


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0442pddoc
Recommendation

5.    You should not take sides in the disagreement.          You have appointed
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to get to the bottom of allegations about new evidence.
You should seek his assurance that his task is not being hindered. You should also
see him before his report is submitted.

Consideration

6.     The Family Support Group allege that the South Yorkshire Police are
attempting to manipulate the conduct of the scrutiny by denying or delaying access
to information. They give examples relating to photographs, medical records, and
the “body files” relating to some of the deceased. They believe that the approach of
the South Yorkshire Police is a deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families in
putting their case to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. They are concerned that if the
scrutiny reports to its original intended timetable at the end of the year, they (the
Family Support Group) will not have had the time to see and consider all the material
which they would like from South Yorkshire Police. They would like you to delay the
scrutiny to allow further submissions by the Family Support Group. They also
believe that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith should take possession and control of all the
documents and other evidence. They also say that they will be writing separately
about the terms of reference for the scrutiny - this letter has not yet been received.

7.    The Family Support Group released their letter to the press at the time that it
was sent and have been promoting their case in the media since, including on
GMTV on Friday. South Yorkshire Police received the details of their allegations
through the press and have in response tried to rebut the allegations.

8.     Richard Wells’s letter disputes all the allegations made by the Family Support
Group. He believes that the South Yorkshire Police have “bent over backwards” to
co-operate in the release of information and emphasises his complete commitment
to openness. He comments on the detail of the points raised by the Family Support
Group.      He claims that the force has always promptly provided copies of
photographs, providing laser copies when photographic copies were not immediately
available. He states that it is untrue that any family is waiting to receive all or part of
their relative’s “body file” - other than 18 identically worded requests received within
the last fortnight asking for copies to go to the Family Support Group’s solicitor:
these requests have clearly been recently orchestrated. In relation to Philip
Hammond’s medical records, he states that Mr Hammond has been provided with all
the papers from his son’s “body file”. Richard Wells is not able to comment in detail
on the other points about medical records because the information in the Family
Support Group’s letter is not sufficient to identify specifically which records are in
question.

9.     Richard Wells indicates that he would not be concerned about delay in the
timing of the scrutiny, but he does not accept that the cause of any delay could be
attributed to the actions of the South Yorkshire Police. He makes clear also that he


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0442pd.doc
would have no objection to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith taking possession of all the
documents if the Judge wished to do so.

10.    It is impossible to form a completely clear view of the rights and wrongs in this
correspondence. There is also no doubt that in previous years, not least during the
Taylor Inquiry, there has been evasiveness and obfuscation by the force, and it is
understandable that the Family Support Group find it impossible to trust anything
they say or do. There was also a misunderstanding soon after Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith was appointed when South Yorkshire Police refused to release anything on
the grounds that it might be needed by the scrutiny. It was soon made clear that the
Judge had no objection to material being released. I believe that Richard Wells’s
commitment to openness now is genuine and unequivocal.

11.        There are three main categories of documentary evidence:

           (i)        The 100 plus volumes of papers from the Taylor inquiry: these are
                      held by the scrutiny and will be returned in due course to the Public
                      Record Office;

           (ii)       Material assembled in connection with the inquests and used in
                      evidence during the proceedings; and

           (iii)      Material assembled in connection with the inquests but not used
                      during the proceedings.

The latter two categories - amounting literally to tons of material - are held by South
Yorkshire Police on behalf of the coroner. Under the Coroner’s Rules documents
used in evidence at an inquest must be disclosed on request to any party with a
proper interest, which includes relatives of the deceased. South Yorkshire Police
also make non-inquest material available on request, subject to obtaining the
consent of any third party with a legitimate interest. That means that if South
Yorkshire Police receive a request for material in which a third party has an interest -
for example, photographs subject to copyright or a witness statement - they seek the
third party’s consent. That leads to delay, and consent is sometimes refused.

12.    The families have understandable grievances that over the years they have
not always had free access to the documents which they would have liked, and this
has been one of the main reasons why they remain convinced of conspiracy to cover
up the truth. But the recent bombardment of requests for “body files” using identical
photocopied letters with names crossed out suggests a tactical ploy by the Support
Group solicitor rather than a genuine desire for access to information. There is no
reason to think that those files contain any new evidence likely to influence the
outcome of the scrutiny and the files could have been requested at any time in
previous years, but requesting them now may cause delay and buy further time.

13.   I have not discussed this with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, but I have raised the
issues informally with Chris Bone, secretary to the scrutiny. He agrees with the
assessment in the preceding paragraph.


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0442pAdoc
14.     The request by the Family Support Group for an extension to the timetable of
the scrutiny is not in your gift. It is for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to take whatever
period of time he considers necessary. The end of the year has always been a
provisional indication of when he hoped he might complete his work. If he wanted
longer, that would be for him to decide. It may be helpful, however, to put on record
in a letter to him that you would be happy for him to take as long as he considered
necessary, and that the timing is for him to determine.

15.     The decision about taking possession of the documentary and other evidence
is also a matter for the Judge. The scrutiny has chosen to inspect the material in
situ, rather than transport it from Sheffield to London. I understand that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has been entirely happy with the access to the material afforded to the
scrutiny and is satisfied that the integrity of the material is properly protected.
However, on this point also it may be helpful to secure his confirmation.

Handling

16.    I think you should write to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith before you reply to the
Support Group or to South Yorkshire Police. It must be for the Judge to advise on
whether he needs more time to complete his work and whether he has any reason to
question the access to documentation afforded by the police. If you agree, you may
want to write to the Judge as attached, to secure confirmation on the record. I
suggest that interim replies are sent to the Support Group and Richard Wells,
pending receipt of the judge’s advice. Drafts are attached.

17.     This correspondence confirms that there is no abatement in the bitter feelings
of the families against South Yorkshire Police, and equally no reluctance on the part
of the Support Group to resort immediately to the media when they believe matters
are not going their way. It is a foretaste, therefore, of their reactions if the outcome
of the scrutiny is unwelcome to them.

18.    I understand that the Judge will want to discuss with you the publication of
evidence which has been submitted to him. I think that it would be useful in any
case to see the judge before he submits his report. I understand that he plans to
complete it before Christmas, although it is not certain whether he will submit it to
you immediately before or after the Christmas break. It is all but certain that his
conclusion will be that no new evidence justifying a further full scale inquiry has been
produced.




                                     PAUL PUGH


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0442pAdoc
              DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 1106
Queen Anne’s Gate



I understand that you have received copies of letters to me from the Hillsborough
Family Support Group dated 9 November and from the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire dated 12 November.        In the light of that correspondence, I would be
grateful for your confirmation on certain points.


The Family Support Group have asked me to extend the timetable of your scrutiny.
We have previously discussed the timetable, and I said in the House of Commons
on 30 June that we hoped that you would be able to produce your report by the end
of the year. I added, however, that that was a judgement which only you could
make in the light of the representations which you received.           I should make
absolutely clear, therefore, that the timing of your work is ultimately a matter for you
to decide, and that I would have no objection if you felt that more time was
necessary to complete the scrutiny.


The Family Support Group also expressed concerns about difficulties which they
have encountered in securing access to documents or other material They believe
this to be because of deliberate obstruction by the South Yorkshire Police. The
Chief Constable vehemently denies the allegations made by the Family Support
Group. I would be grateful for your advice on the access to material, which has
been afforded by the police to the scrutiny and to others, such as the Family Support
Group, who have an interest.


The Family Support Group have proposed that you should take possession and
control of all the material to safeguard its integrity and make disclosure easier. I



f:\oppu\houMongsub\pp0442pd.doc
understand that you have chosen to inspect the material in situ, rather than transport
it from Sheffield to London. I would be grateful to know whether you are satisfied
that the integrity of the material held at South Yorkshire Police is properly protected.


I understand that you may wish to discuss with me questions about the publication
of submissions and other evidence which has been put to you during the course of
the scrutiny. I would be happy for us to meet, and I think that it would be helpful for
that to take place before you complete your report. My office will contact yours
about possible dates.




f:\oppu\houMongsub\pp0442pd.doc
DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY PRIVATE SECRETARY TO THE HOME
SECRETARY


Mr Trevor Hicks
Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group




The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 November about
the Hillsborough Scrutiny. The Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith for his advice on the issues raised in the correspondence, and he will write to
you when he has received the Judge’s advice.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0442pddoc
DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE PRIVATE SECRETARY TO THE
HOME SECRETARY




Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) CIMgt
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY



Thank you for your letter of 12 November about the Hillsborough Scrutiny. He has
also seen the letter of 9 November from the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


The Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for his advice on the
issues raised in correspondence. He will write to you when he has received the
Judge’s advice.




f:\oppu\houMongsub\pp0442pd.doc
10. II             97 (Id .HI                IAX 01729 840602                         TREVOR HICKS


                                                                                                                                        ^BO RO ^
                    i° houG
               t
              A                         Pu

                                   #                                                                                                        Sl/ppO*
                   SUppo^
                                                  Hillsborough Family Support Group                                                     _
                                                                    Cc w OM4.

                   Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP                                      fsA*-                                            V s"
                   Home Secretary                                             *P e—
                   Home Office                                                     ® «n « S ~ U .                               fvA/
                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                                                                                           i
                   London                                                         H-                                  J s *~
                   SWU1 9AT
                                                                                                                                     9* November 1997
                                                       T=2..t                                                                      BY FAX AND POST ^
                                                                \A»^*ke                                                        *tr w M -
                   Dear Mr Straw,                                                                                                      C.o'*C>oLt*r ua L i e K t * ^

                    r e : Hillsborough Scrutiny                                              a   VLtzd                    ujv>4e f»     U J £4i«a4-
                                                                                                                     ^ 5 rH
                    It is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your          i0
                    intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement of the scrutiny on the
                    10* Tune the problems of slow or non-disclosure of information by South Yorkshire Police
                    and others have continued unabated.. It is of such scale and regularity as to render any
                    arguments of mistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe it is a
                    deliberate lactic to disadvantage the femilies and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
                    outcome of the scrutiny.

                      We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
                      Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements all
                      our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation of our case are being thwarte .

                         You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that femilies expressed concern that custody
                         (and apparently control!!) of the evidence /documentsshould remam with South Yorkshire
                         Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
                         Rather than the spirit of “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
                         of the problems of the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

                         The> appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see tL.
                         It cannot he right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
                         or delay of information.

                         I xumples of the problems we are encountering are:-

                         I i As kilo as the 6th November we received four important photographs - they were requested
                         over ilircc months ago!!!

                           N                                              VICE-CHAIRM AN/SECRETARY                                          TREASURER
  ( H A lR M \N                                                                                  Mrs. J. T r uy nor
   .          ||     .                                                    R Ihm m una                                                       43   G orsefieU I R o a d
  | . . „ I   H iii ! 1 , , „                                             21 R u ic im o ih R n a d                                         B irk e n h ead
          O,. ip..- I - Il ■ . I ' • i '"                                 L i v e n * * >1                                                  M ersey sid e
                    UN.'        I'.'1                                     L I 7 6KX                                                         T e l. 0 1 5 1- 6 52 75 03
                                                                            ld/r -iA oi s 1-724' • / n
                                                                                                                                            <     tin*
11     9 7 00:.50   I'AX 01729 840602                TREVOR HICKS




 2)Several families are still waiting to receive all or parts of their loved ones “bodyfiles”

 3)On the 24th September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
 written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

 4)Medical records of the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
 Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

 The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1st September but this had to be relaxed when it
 became dear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
 information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions mid-September and
 lodged others on the 25th September. Both of those documents made it clear that our efforts
 were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

     Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn of the year” foil consideration of newly
     disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part of any deliberation or
     conclusion.

     It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control of all the
     documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
     parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families of the deceased.

     We further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions and
     their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
     public as fair and exhaustive.

     All of us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
     you to introduce a one or two month extension to the timescale to ensure all our concerns can
     be properly investigated and “scrutinised”. It is the femilies view that this is our last chance
     for justicc to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in the judicial
     process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, attended the
     justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support of our cause.

     We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
     Terms of Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also give
     rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

     Yours sincerely,




     'Irevor I licks
     Chuirman. - TfFSG
                                                                                                      y 1OT
              S o u t h Y o r k s h ir e

              POLICE                                                 Richard Wells qpm . a w     w cm gt
              JUSTICE       with     COURAGE                         Chief Constable


J Straw Esq MP                             T U jl-                                        12 November 1997
Secretary of State               -------------
Home Office                            a< W                                   CC - f'V K j C kctJ-
CA Queen
50 A iiaam Anne's
           Ann a*ciGate
                      a              fc
                                                                                                     <fe<yztis^ i
London SW1H 9AT                                          pUr*2x
                                                                                       kA'/'    r ^J W - ^K     I
                                                  C AcjX-
                                                                                    |U/' L}<if
HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                      s   / l                 fas' OLrC^v
I am incensed that I should have to respond to a letter signed by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group to yourself, which I have received courtesy of the Liverpool
Echo News Desk. I do not believe that such correspondence should be conducted via the media.

We have bent over backwards to co-operate with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the
release of information to them. As you know, we are constrained by Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules
1984 and by aspects of confidentiality so far as statements are concerned which do not fall within
Rule 57. These constraints are particularly noticeable when we correspond with the author of a
statement who seeks release of documentation to the Hillsborough Family Support Group or to
other families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is fully aware of our policy. We have also been at pains to
be completely open with the Scrutiny Team, promptly supplying any documentation requested.

The letter writer is being disingenuous in suggesting that it is the fault of South Yorkshire Police
that the Hillsborough Family Support Group and individual families cannot meet the time scales for
submissions to the Scrutiny. If the Group wish more time to make their submissions, of course it is
a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in consultation with yourself. Certainly South Yorkshire
Police would not resist that proposition but we strongly object when the reason for the extension is
laid at our feet.

Neither would I object to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's taking custody and control of the Hillsborough
evidence and documents. I have made this perfectly clear to the Judge. The volume of the archive,
however, the time for its transportation and the fact that the Judge is unlikely to be able to afford
dedicated staff to access the material, will combine to make delivery of information from the
archives take more time than at present rather than less.

Moving now to the four examples used by Trevor Hicks to highlight the problems encountered:-

1.     The writer of the letter - dishonestly in my view - makes no mention of the fact that four
       important photographs received by the Group on 6 November 1997 were also accompanied
       by two that had been requested as late as 27 October 1997. Furthermore, within seven
       working days of the original request, the Group's Solicitor had been supplied with laser
       copies of three of the photographs and an original photographic copy of one of them. At this
       time it was made clear that there would be a delay in providing photographic copies, though
       we had acted in good faith in providing the best copy versions of the photographs available
       at the time.
                Police H eadquarters
                                                                          Direct line: 0114 2523400
                SnigH ill                                                  Direct fax: 0114 2523481
                Sheffield S3 8LY                                         Switchboard: 0114 2202020
               ■T el: 0111 376 8532 Fax: 0114 252 3243
1.     As to the allegation that families are still waiting to receive all or part of their relatives' body
       files - this is simply wrong. No family is waiting to receive all or part of body files. A body
       file is a complex bundle of documents varying from 30 to 100 pages, depending on the
       amount of evidence gathered, made more complex by the presence of photographs and
       ANACAPA analytical charts. Two families are waiting for actual photographs from the
       body file as opposed to the laser copies we originally sent. You should know that, within the
       last two weeks we have received no fewer than eighteen word-processed, identically worded
       requests from different families, who in the main have had no previous contact with South
       Yorkshire Police,to supply a copy of their deceased's body file to the solicitor actingfor the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group. This figure represents 72% of the requests previously
       received during the period from April 1992 to the end of September 1997. Staff are
       presently processing these requests and the majority will be dealt with this week. If I
       indicate that some of these stereotyped requests have earlier names crossed out and new
       names written in, you will appreciate our doubts about the motives behind the demands (a
       sample is attached for your interest).

3.     Without the courtesy of further information I am unable to comment on access to medical
       records being denied to the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.

4.     Again we are not sure precisely which medical records the Hammonds have been told did not
       exist yet which have been made available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I can be certain
       however, that Mr Hammond has been supplied with all the statements from his late son
       Philip's body file, including the autopsy report supplied as long ago as 8 May 1992, which
       have been supplied to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Any purported failure to supply records
       would be patently 'out of synch' with all we have done so far.

South Yorkshire Police and its officers are as interested in the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith's Scrutiny as the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and look forward to its conclusion. We
have no wish to leave any room for doubt to be cast in future, which is why we have put so much
effort, despite some inevitable legal constraints, into providing material when we have been asked
for it.

Though Trevor Hicks has lent his name to the letter, I would be surprised if Ann Adlington were not
the author of it. It has all the hallmarks, ironically, of the delay and prevarication attributed to the
South Yorkshire Police. This is at its most obvious in the final paragraph where, at least four
months into the process of the Scrutiny, they seek to challenge its early announced terms of
reference. My feeling is that this is simply because the existing framework is unlikely to have yielded
the 'successes' of which they had built up expectations. Though the butt of allegations of 'dirty
tricks' emerging from some quarters close to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, may I
reiterate my complete commitment to openness - even if it should be to the detriment of our Force -
and to the repeated expression of my sorrow at the awful consequences of 15 April 1989. Nothing
will ever change those two aspects of my life or my relationship with the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.




                                             Richard Wells

Enc.

cc. Paul Pugh, Scrutiny Office, H O.
I




    22 October 1997


    PC Greenway
    South Yorkshire Police
    Discipline and Complaints Dept
    Windsor Road
    Sheffield S8 8UB

    Dear Sir
                                                          Sirt'en
    Would you please release the body file of my brother,       Bell, who died at Hillsborough to
    the Group’s solicitor, Ann Adlington, Hillsborough Family Support Group, Pioneer Building,
    65-67 Dale Street, Liverpool L2 2NS.

    Thank you for your assistance in this matter.


    Yours faithfully




    Mrs F" Lyons
