INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

David Evans Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA

                                           Date
                                            21 November 1989




 •3-0-r   Nv- E W n
                      )

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
16 November about his meeting with the All Party Football
Committee on 14 November.

Lord Justice Taylor received written evidence from the Committee
in June.  In submitting the evidence, Mr Tom Pendry MP, the
Chairman, said that the officers of the Committee were willing to
give oral evidence if required, or to explain any aspect of the
submission.  In response to that offer, Lord Justice Taylor
invited the Committee to give oral evidence to him. The
composition of the delegation was a matter for the Committee's
officers, but Lord Justice Taylor indicated that he was anxious
it should reflect the full range of opinion on the Football
Spectators Bill, one of the topics covered in the original
submission.  In the course of the discussions, Lord Justice
Taylor sought views on criticisms of the national membership
scheme for football spectators which had been put to him by
various bodies.  In doing so, he was not expressing any
conclusions of his own.

The meeting was a private one, and Lord Justice Taylor does not
intend to comment on press reports about what was said. But you
will be aware that his terms of reference cover both crowd safety
and control at sports events.   In his Interim Report in August
Lord Justice Taylor said that he would consider issues such as
membership schemes and identity cards in his final report, which
he aims to complete in January.
You refer to the membership scheme at Luton Town FC. Lord
Justice Taylor invited the Club to explain their scheme to him,
and the Chairman, Executive General Manager and other officers of
the Club, accompanied by representatives of Bedfordshire police,
did so in detail at a lengthy meeting with Lord Justice Taylor
and Professor Maunder, one of his Assessors, on 16 November.

Lord Justice Taylor is aware of all the Parliamentary debates on
the Football Spectators Bill. He has copies of all the Hansards
concerned and has read them, so I am returning to you the
enclosures which you kindly sent in with your letter.

I am sending a copy of your letter and this reply to Mr Pendry.




                                           RMV\JU-u^
                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                            H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                  L O N D O N SW1A OAA
                                   DAVID EVANS, M.P.




  16th November, 1989

Lord Justice Taylor,
6th Floor,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London.
SW1H 9AT




I thought I should make you aware that those present at the meeting you
attended with members of the All-Party Football Group provided an un­
representative and misleading reflection of Parliamentary opinion in the
House of Commons and in the Group.

A number of well established procedures and guidelines were breached.
The meeting was not advertised on the All-Party Whip, and in the experience
of myself and colleages meetings of such Groups     are always open for all
members, particularly when membership is subject     to a fee.    It was not
a meeting of Officers as in addition to Tom Pendry, Joe Ashton, Jim Lester
and Alan Meale;   Simon Hughes and John Greenway were invited and all were
united against the Membership Scheme.    Only after strong representations
and just a few hours before the meeting was John Carlisle allowed to attend.
I and a number of colleagues were prevented from providing a balance to
their views.

This meant that we were not in a position to answer some of your reported
remarks including "it will cost a lot of money" and "it will result in
a loss of revenue".   It goes without saying that neither of these remarks
can be substantiated.    First, as you may be aware, seven companies have
been short-listed by the F.A. and the Football League to produce a National
Membership Scheme which is to be within the parameters of the legislation
and football friendly and I quote "at no cost to football". As the football
authorities will confirm these companies believe the scheme can be an income
generator and not a cost to football;    given the membership card fee will
create revenue sufficient to pay for the scheme.Second, it is      patently
inaccurate to argue that the scheme will necessarily result in a loss of
revenue when every partial membership scheme including our 100$ home only
supporters at Luton, has increased income to the game.    The vast majority
of those in the game believed Luton's scheme would fail completely in that
it would be impossible to get sufficient members to join.      Even if they
joined it was doubted that the computer readers could cope with a 10,000
crowd with only thirty turnstiles.    They were proved to be wrong.     At

                                                                              2/ .
                 Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
Manchester United about 50% of spectators    are   members   and   their   system
of entry for them is also claimed to work.

This was comprehensively highlighted in the Parliamentary debates on the
Bill which received a substantial majority in favour.    You may care to
read the attached Hansards.

Those of my colleagues and myse]fwho were barred from attending the meeting
feel it would be impossible for you to form a balanced judgement without
attending a conventional open meeting of all interested M.P's and preferably
under the auspices of the All-Party Group.

If you felt unable or unwilling to do this I only hope that you seek full
answers to the concerns you were reported to have expressed directly from
the Minister for Sport.
