                                     F rom     T   he   P   r ivate   S   ecretary

                                                                                             2S APR 1989
                       Cfcr         (Ui<u      CONFIDENTIAL                                   H o m e O ffice
                    /4 A   ( li/J    A 4£a.                 f 0                             Q l 'E E N A N N E 'S G A T E

                   u                 IVV\                                            *~jr    LONDON
                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                           SW IH 9 A T

                                      ^Vv                                 J    -jU>* jr~• ? 4 /)
                                      tVv\                                                26 April 1989
                                                                                              CrcaC          Monies'
                                                                                        ms 4j?c*m5 Air K?tfa//c*4
                                                                                        fits                C-c>PZta*3
     >                     -■\                                                         for ^ev4es •vr^,/£<*nir
                                                                                       ft)'* OUf/cCTT'. Wr- <_,£/sVq^(ert
                                                                                      ft)S'
                                       HILLSBOROUGH ENOTITRY                          oor         ro&(jh
                                                                                     rnr-TY&Xjcrrre^.^
                                                                                     for jSou^sssn/77-/
 4     , T4h 6 H°me, Secretary saw Lord Justice Taylor yesterday to gain some
         4.4
 ^ 4      impressions of the progress of Sir Peter's enquiry.       Sir Clive
iSM.tmore and Mr Whalley, Secretary to the enquiry, were present.

         The Home Secretary thanked Sir Peter for agreeing to undertake the
 enquiry and expressed sympathy for the difficulties he had faced in the
 days since the disaster at Hillsborough.

         S*r Peter said that he would be free of judicial duties after 27
April and would be holding a preliminary hearing on 28 April to settle
issues of legal representation.    He hoped to arrange the start of the
hearings for 15 May but would hear shortly whether the police could make
the necessary arrangements by then.       Sir Peter had quickly come to
appreciate the magnitude of the task in hand, which was both more complex
and more controversial than the task faced by Popplewell.     To make the
police exercise manageable he hoped it would be possible to concentrate on
a sample of witnesses representing the full range of opinion. If a 15 May
start could be arranged he thought that some recommendations could be made
before the new football season:      however he would welcome the Home
Secretary's views.

           T^e Home Secretary said he could envisage three areas which Sir
Peter might wish to cover in his interim report. The first area was the
 technical and physical aspects of safety which could be given attention
before the new football season. The second was the membership scheme set
°U             Football Spectators Bill. He was neither compelled to comment
on this, nor precluded from doing so. This was in part an enabling Bill
creating an Authority to devise a membership scheme.                  There were
consequently several stages at which the eventual form of the scheme could
be influenced.       The Government's original intention had been to obtain
Royal Assent for the Bill by July. This target had shifted to the end of
the present Session, which in practice meant October.              If he wished
therefore, Sir Peter would be able to express an opinion on the membership
scheme in the expectation that the Government would consider his view
before the Bill's final stages were reached.        The Home Secretary realised
that the timetable for the Bill created a difficulty for Sir Peter. The
revised timetable would, however, make it possible to take account of any
comments of principle Sir Peter wished to offer in his interim report.
  7 n£ r V      Peter might have other matters to raise for which legislation
might be needed but which did not relate to the membership scheme or the
2!          °f the 8 1 1 1 * Any SUch P°ints could be considered for inclusion in
the Bill or perhaps in a separate Bill at a later stage.


                                                        1.

                                              CONFIDENTIAL
                                    CONFIDENTIAL



•
            Sir Peter responded that it would be necessary to devote the early
    stages of his enquiry to establishing the facts of the disaster. There
    would be much disputation about the facts and the location of responsiblity
    for what happened. It should be possible for a short interim report to be
    produced in time for consideration before the mid-August start of the new
    season, which in practice meant early to mid-July, to cover the question of
    perimeter fences and one or two important matters of police procedure. But
    it would not be possible to give as wide ranging an interim report as
    Popplewell had, since in the case of the Bradford fire there had been little
    disagreement over the basic facts presented to the enquiry. He believed
    that his enquiry would in practice have to deal with the question of member­
    ship cards unless this issue was specifically excluded from its terms of
    reference. But he did not see how he could offer a helpful recommendation
    on the subject until he had completed much of the work. If membership cards
    did form part of its remit he therefore could not promise recommendations in
    time for consideration within the revised timetable for the Bill. Unless

•   the timetable for the Bill was again changed, Sir Peter accepted that the
    Government might proceed without knowledge of what he might eventually have
    to say on the subject. Sir Peter stressed that he had a completely open
    mind on the membership card issue at present: he did, however, perceive
    membership cards as part of a set of interlocking factors such as stadium
    design and ticket arrangements.

            The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter what he would be likely to say in
    the summer if the Government went ahead with the revised timetable for the
    Bill and he was asked then for a view on the membership scheme: would he
    say that he had not yet formed an opinion? Sir Peter responded that this
    would probably be his answer in such circumstances, although he might say
    that he had a provisional view which he was not yet ready to divulge.

            The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter whether he was really quite sure
    that it was out of the question to form and express a view on the subject
    of membership cards in the three and a half months which would be available
    between the start of the enquiry, assuming 15 May would be achieved and the
    end of August? Sir Peter said that this was possible, but he was not
    confident that it could be achieved. Hearing the initial evidence could
    take over a month. There would be cross allegations to hear on a number of
    important points before moving onto more refined areas of judgment, which
    could not be a priority. Sir Peter added that Popplewell had not said that
    there should be a membership scheme, but that consideration should be given
    to some form of membership scheme. Sir Peter's enquiry was certain to be
    presented with the argument that a membership scheme would add to the
    problems of crowd control outside football grounds. Before forming a view,
    he would need to hear evidence of the answer to this argument. He was not
    saying that it was impossible he would have formed a view by August or
    September but there appeared at the present stage to be a high likelihood
    that he would need longer.

            The following additional points were made in discussion:

              (i) Sir Peter expected to find a good deal of support for
                 V all seater stadiums, given especially the Liverpool
                 \decision to convert Anfield. He did not propose to go
                  Iinto the question of who should pay for such
                 / conversions.    The Home Secretary   said  that  the
                ! Secretary of State for the Environment would be
                   pursuing this issue in parallel with Sir Peter's
                   enquiry, without waiting for or depending upon his
                   recommendations;

                                     CONFIDENT
                                CONFIDENTIAL


                                     2.


        (ii)   The Home Secretary explained that he had considered
               whether   to issue some fresh guidance to local
               authorities on the exercise of their powers while Sir
               Peter's interim report was awaited, given that the
               football season had several weeks to run. Instead, he
               had decided to remind local authorities of the main
               points of existing guidance.    Sir Peter agreed with
               this approach. There was a danger of further incidents
               at the important end of season matches. But the clubs
               were alert to this danger and some had already taken
               action. If it was recommended that all fences should
               be dismantled there was a danger of disorder;

        (iii) Sir Peter had agreed that his enquiry should be
              constituted as a Departmental enquiry rather than a
              Tribunal under the 1921 Act.    Further reflection had
              led him to conclude that the 1921 Act approach might
              have been the better course, since there would be much
              crossfire and some witnesses could be reluctant to
              testify in the absence of the protection afforded by
              the 1921 Act.    However, to change now would mean
              further delay and Sir Peter was content to proceed
              with a Departmental enquiry for the present.        If
              formidable difficulties arose during the course of the
              enquiry he might have to ask for the enquiry to be put
              onto a 1921 Act basis;

        (iv) iiwhen he held his preliminary hearing on 28 April Sir
             iPeter intended to make a statement announcing that the
              icosts of witnesses would in normal circumstances be
               met from central funds. This was in keeping with the
         9     Popplewell precedent and been agreed with the Hpme
               Office,. Sir Peter would also say something about the
               constructive purpose of the enquiry which he hoped
               would help to reduce tension.

        The Home Secretary thanked Sir Peter for sharing his thoughts on
how the enquiry would be taken forward. The Government would reflect on the
difficulty which remained over the timetable for the Football Spectators
Bill. The thoughts of the Home Secretary and his colleagues went with Sir
teter in the weeks which lay ahead.
        Copies of this note go to Andrew Turnbull (No 10), Stephen Catling
(Lord President's Office), Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal's Office) and
Trevor Woolley (Cabinet Office).




                                           C J WALTERS


Alan Ring, Esq.

                                CONFIDENTIAL
MMR271                              (W




NOTE TOR TEE RECORD
                                         cc    Mr Yates
                                               Mr Moriarty
                                               HMCIC
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                               Mr Malone Lee—
                                               Mr Norris
                                               Mr Addison
                                               Mr Soden
                                               Mr Whalley


HTT.TfiBQRCtJGH - PO IJC E POSTS




Mr Astling, the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority, telephoned
me on an informal basis to ask if there was anything that could be said
in response to his letter on behalf of his Authority seeking central
government funding for the costs of the police enquiries on
Hillsborough.


2.   I told him that there was a Parliamentary Question from Mr Bruce
George, as well as the letter of which he was aware from the South
Yorkshire Police Authority; I said that the likely response the Home
Office would make to each of these at this stage was that they indeed
had representations from South Yorkshire, would be considering them,
and would respond as soon as they were able to do so.


3.   I added that I did not think it likely that the matter would be
settled at once, or that the Home Office would refuse to entertain
argument and justification from South Yorkshire; I also said that it
was not apparent that West Midlands had direct responsibility for any
of the three aspects involved:     the judicial enquiry, South Yorkshire
Police's own need to establish the facts, and potentially the
investigation of complaints under the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.




                                              J A
                                              26 April 1989
                            23/04    '99   13 1 4 3                    8   433226          DUDL EV   M.B.C.

                                                                                                                                    i   X
                                                                                                          G o fWj
                                                                                                              1 V \A   K |o j ^


WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY                                                      Council House             A/V\
Clerk                                                                               Dudley
                                                                                    DY1 1HF
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M.Soc.Sc
                                                                                Telephone: Du dley 456000              <=»

My Kcfevoncv:    AVA/AMD/RMC                                                                                                  WvL

You. R « ^ n « : C T / E y p / V A R l / 2 3                                                25th A p r i l , 1989

                 Dear Secretary of State,

                             Judicial Review - Hillsborough Football Tragedy

                      I am writing to you to seek urgent clarific tion
                 regarding the cost of the police investigations to support
                 the Judicial Review into the Hillsborough Footba 1 Tragedy

                      As you know the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
                 Force, Mr. G. Dear, and a large number of his of iicers,
                 will be seconded to gather information for the J ldicial
                 Review and Mr. Dear is working directly to Lord Justice
                 Taylor.

                           O f f i c e s h a v e b e e n se t u p in S h e f f i e l d , L i ve rpool and
                 th e W e s t M i d l a n d s a n d the e x p e n d i t u r e b e i n g i n c u rred will
                 i n v o l v e a d d i t i o n a l c o a t s (eg o £ £ i c e * c e ® m m e d » t i o  hotel
                 accommodation, travelling, aubaiatenee, overtime                                    vehi cle
                 hire, t c l o p h o n e e a nd e q u i p m e n t ) .

                      Whilst the West Midlands is glad to assist Ln this
                 matter, the members of the Police Authority wish to be
                 assured that they will be recompensed for the lo ss of the
                 officers and additional costs borne by the Autho rity as a
                 result        Of    th e J u d i c i a l   Review.

                      In view of the national importance of the J udicial
                 Review and the fact that the West Midlands Force was asked
                 to assist by the Home Office, this is clearly a case for
                 special payment from central funds.

                       I should be most grateful for your confirma tion that
                  the cost o£ the seconded officers and the additiional costs
                  incurred by the West Midlands will be reimbursed in full.

                       There is a full meeting of the Authority du e to take
                  place this Thursday, 27 April, at 10.30 a.m. and it would
                  be very helpful if I could report to Members on this most
                  crucial issue which is now becoming very imports nt to
                  members of the Authority.  A faxed response or telephone
                  call clarifying the position would be sufficient in view of
                  the short time available before the meeting.

                                                        Yours(1 sincerely,
                                                                      /'/1
                                                                /,
                                                               /1
                                                      \
                                      Clerk to west Midlands Police Authority
                 TO: Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd PC, MP,                                  c.c.    South Yorkshire Clerk
                     Secretary of State,                                                   Mr. J. Chilcot,
                     Home Office,                                                          Deputy Secretary,
                                          O C K F ID E M T IM   j
                                                                                     fVv\
 M M R 266
                                                                                     /Uv

 N O T E F O R 'f f i F , 'R K FT 8R D
                                                                                     fW
                                                        cc          Mr Yates
                                                                    Mr Mbriarty
                                                                    HMCIC
                                                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                                    Mr Malone Lee,
                                                                    Mr Norris
                                                                    Mr Addison
                                                                    Mr Soden
                                                                    Mr Whalley


 HJHSBORCUGH POLICE ENQUIRIES - COSTS ETC



Mr Geoffrey Dear raised with me this morning, in the margins of another
meeting, same aspects of the enquiries being conducted by his force
into the events at Hillsborough.


2.     First, he said that same members of his Police Authority on the
extreme left were seeking to cause difficulty for him because of the
abstraction from policing effort in the West Midlands and what was
being portrayed as a burden falling on West Midlands' ratepayers.
Mr Dear said that behind this lay same criticism by those members that
he was too close to the Home Office, that he should not so readily have
accepted the commitment by West Midlands, and the risk that they would
seek to restrain or inhibit the work of the West Midlands force in
conducting the enquiry unless they were satisfied on the financial
aspect.


3.    I showed Mr Dear the letter from the Clerk to the South Yorkshire
Police Authority to the Heine Secretary seeking central funding because
of the expected costs of the enquiries; I said that in my view this
contained implicit acceptance that South Yorkshire had same or all of
the responsibility, at least initially.                    While I was not in a position
to give any undertakings to the West Midlands (who should be looking to
South Yorkshire in any event at the first instance), South Yorkshire
had now formally raised the matter with the Heine Secretary and it was
perfectly open to Mr Dear to tell his police authority that the matter

                                         CCNFTCTKTIAL
                                OCNEIEEMnRL

 lay between South Yorkshire and the Hcroe Office.   Hr Dear (and neither
 of us had then seen the letter from the Clerk to his police authority
 to the Home Secretary received by fax today (25 April) seeking
 assurances that West Midlands would not have to meet any of the costs)
 thought he could get through his next police authority meeting later
 this week perfectly comfortably on tfeert footing that the issue would
 need to be resolved fairly early.


 4.    I then raised with Hr Dear the issue of the scale and duration of
the police enquiries.    Very large numbers of police officers had been
mentioned in press reports, and I said I should not be surprised if
Sir Peter Taylor (whom Hr Dear was to meet later in the day) would want
to form his own view about the necessary scope of enquiries.    Mr Dear
said that he was very ready to take direction from lord Justice Taylor
on, for example, the range of people from whom statements needed to be
taken.    West Midlands have, in any case, initiated a preliminary
questionnaire procedure (which I thought very sensible and said so) to
get a first idea of the quality of information available from all those
who might respond to the free-phone enquiry system.    Once they knew how
many respondents there were to the free-phone enquiries, and then later
when initial questionnaires had been returned, it ought certainly to be
possible to categorise respondents and to limit further statement-
taking and interviewing to those who had something substantive to
contribute.    This would be for Lord Justice Taylor in conjunction with
West Midlands police to decide at a later date.


5.    Finally, Hr Dear said that much of the effort would be done with
police officers working overtime and there was a natural limit to how
long this dteuld go on; but on present form he thought that by mid or
late May the great bulk of the work of processing questionnaires and
taking statements ought to be complete.   Thereafter it was not easy to
see how further police enquiries might develop, but I rather formed the
impression that these would be on a very much smaller scale than the
current initial round.


                                              J A CH3DJOOT
                                              25 April 1989

                               CXWJU£mTAL
                                              Mr Yates
                                            ' Mr—-Malone-Lee-.
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Turney




Mr Chilcot


                     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY



'   The Home Secretary was approached by Mr Anthony Beaumont-
Dark, MP yesterday evening concerning the burden falling on the
West Midlands Police from their investigation into the
Hillsborough Disaster.      He said that in addition to the direct
costs of the investigation falling to West Midlands, there would
be a need for officers engaged on normal duties to wor k a good
deal m o r e _overtime in order to police the county effectively
while their colleagues were engaged on the Inquiry.      He was
anxious that West Midlands should be reimbursed for the
additional costs they would incur.

2.     The Home Secretary undertook to write to Anthony Beaumont-
Dark as quickly as possible about the position, and would be
grateful for a draft letter.     The Home Secretary commented to me
that you will no doubt be taking the position reached over the
Guildford Inquiry fully into account in framing your
r ec o m m e n d a t i o n s .




Private Office                                C J WALTERS
25 April 1989                         Principal Private Secretary
                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                An im jp,
      %                                         POLICE AUTHORITY
R .C . Johnston B .A ., l.P .F .A .                      Kr CUikof'                                                          P .O . Box 37
Clerk and Financial Officer                                           Cc    hs                              Regent Street
                                                                            farTurnftvj                          Barnsley
                                                                                                 South Yorkshire S70 2P Q
                                                                                                ne Barnsley (0226) 733222
                                                                           NV    MdLisv'
                                                                                 MBLwvn   —   --- -----------------------

Our R tf           RCJ/VS                                                        Watfs        0 ^ 2 4 April 1989
Thi s m a i l e r is b e in g deal t * ith by    Mr R C Johnston                               e ie p n o n e e x i: o *+1




                                                              Co
              Dear Sir Douglas
             HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY
             .TRIBUNAL OF INQUIRY
   % At          a meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee of the Police
              Authority last Friday, reference was made to the establishment of the
              independent enquiry to be carried out by Lord Justice Taylor. The Committee
              wholeheartedly welcomed the establishment of this enquiry but expressed concern
              as to how it would be financed, including particularly the investigation to be
              carried out by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands.
              The Committee felt that the terms of reference of the inquiry "to enquire into
              the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
              safety at sports grounds" reflected the national importance of the issues raised
        J     and firmly indicated that finance should be made available by central
              government. You have yourself made it clear that the Chief Constable of the
              West Midlands will be reporting directly to Lord Justice Taylor.
              Preliminary announcements on the scale of the enquiry indicate a cost well in
              excess of Elm. Such a cost if borne locally would eliminate the Police
              Authority’s provision for operatio naTco nting encie s with a consequential threat
              to the efficiency of the force. It would also leave the Authority completely
              stripped of financial resources to face the uncertainties of next y e a r ’s
              budget.
             The Committee therefore directed me to write to you on behalf of the Authority
             seeking your confirmation that the full cost of the Tribunal including the
             enquiry by the Chief Constable of West Midlands will be borne by central
             government.
             Yours sincerely


             R C
             ClerK ana u n a n c l a l Officer
             cc Mr John Chilcott, Sir Jack Layden, Chief Constable West Midlands, Clerk to
                West Midlands Police Authority, Chief Constable South Yorkshire
            The Rt Hon Sir Douglas Hurd
            Home Office
            Queen A n n e ’s Gate
            LONDON
            SW1P 9AT
   L                                                                   J
