                                                             Reference. f u / 9 . 7 .....




Austin Mitchell encloses correspondence from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary o f the
Hillsborough Family Support Group.

Mr Hammond has written to all Members o f Parliament, and this is one of a number of
resulting Minister’s Cases.

                         ? To P/S of M of S as within




                              MlM/
                             MWard
                             17 February 1997




                                                        - hM;               2 4 FEB 1997
                        MINISTER OF STATE wrote as WltWO
                                                        H om e O ffice
                         The Rt Hon David Maclean MP
                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                       LONDON SW1H 9AT




Our Ref:  PW/97 5/2180/33
          PO 2638/97
Your Ref: AM/JB




Thank you for your letter of 18 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you know, the Home Secretary undertook in December to consider
carefully the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough,
and the representations which have been made to him by the bereaved
families and by others. He emphasised that the decision to reopen
the inquiry was one that could not be taken lightly, and he would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a decision on any
further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to consider
all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN


Austin Mitchell Esq MP
                         The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H ome O ffice
                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                       LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                            M   jfB |




Our Ref:  PW/97 5/2180/33
          PO 2638/97
Your Ref: AM/JB




Thank you for your letter of 18 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you know, the Home Secretary undertook in December to consider
carefully the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough,
and the representations which have been made to him by the bereaved
families and by others. He emphasised that the decision to reopen
the inquiry was one that could not be taken lightly, and he would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a decision on any
further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to consider
all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN


Austin Mitchell Esq MP
Thank you for your letter o f 18 January to Michael Howard, enclosing one from Mr
Phil Hammond, Secretary o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you know, the Home Secretary undertook in December to consider carefully the
points which were made in the programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He emphasised that the
decision to reopen the inquiry was one that could not be taken lightly, and he would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so and that it would
stand a chance o f providing a better understanding than there is at present of what
happened on that terrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there is any new
evidence; he will also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance
that had it been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome o f the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.


The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a decision on any further action to
be taken as soon as he has been able to consider all the issues.
                         Dlvlslonol rile ft^nrnnm          S j'LiV >j$$

HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS C A S E DRAFT REPLY

A      d       d   r e   s    s    e   e   ! ______________ ._______
 Name                        mC k i AV        '_________ ______
 Address                          \ Reference              _____
    Tick on* box
                   House of Commons
           □       House of Lords
           □       Other - Insert full postal address




 Le t t e r drafted tor Signature by 1_______                        —

                         ^A ovds^x____________       (j Name of Slonntoryl


 enclosures]




      oples to be sent to]




                                              (fulloddrcsscs. If nccessory
                        FROM A U STIN M ITC H ELL M P




                               H O U S E O F C O MMO N S
                                   L O N D O N SW1A OAA
Our Ref: AM/JB


18 January 1997


The Rt Hon Michael Howard QC MP
The Secretary o f State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT


Dear Michael

I enclose representations from Mr. Phil Hammond, Secretary o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, for your information, and would urge a fresh enquiry because there is clearly
widespread concern that the facts have not emerged and that new evidence hasn't been
properly assessed.

Yours sincerely




AUSTIN MITCHELL


end
 *      •. • *


  V*'
                                                                                     s(JP?0^
                           H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o r t G rou p

All Members of Parliament,


                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN


Mr Austin Mitchell M.P


I am writing to ask for your support for the campaign mounted by
the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by
the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
the Hillsborough Disaster.

You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
Television on December 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary .
"Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which
emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
privately with the many family members who had travelled to
London to be present at the debate.

The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopeful that the Home
secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
support we have received - people from all walks of life from
right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
take forward our quest for justice

i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
srideo- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.

CHAIRMAN                                      SECRETARY                           TREASURER
T. Hicks                                      P. Hammond                          Mrs. J. Traynor
7 Moor Lane                                   21 Rosemont Road                    43 Gorsefield Road
Grassington                                   Liverpool                           Birkenhead
Nr. Skipton BD23 5BD                          L17 6BX                             Merseyside
Tel: 0756-752345                              Tel: 051-724 5771                   Tel: 051-652 7503
Liverpool City Council, at an extraordinary meeting held on 19th December 1996, have
already pledged their unanimous support to the families in our campaign. With the
assistance of the City Council, the campaign is now being taken out across the country
where it is our intention to seek the support of local authorities in all areas of Britain in
response to the massive public disquiet which has emanated from the television
programme (the "Daily Mirror", for example, has received a huge response to the
petition it launched in december, on behalf of the families, supporting the call for a new
inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly indicates this is a
matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.

The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern
and to Granada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into homes and
consciences of the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television
could not truly reflect the scale of what we have been made to endure by having the
absolute grief of losing our loved ones compounded by what can only be described as
the biggest farce and cover up in British legal history. As if this was not enough of a
burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the Taylor Inquiry, have also
had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign by certain public
and media figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by blaming
them, and their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.

The "Hillsborough" television programme seems at last to have washed away the
cartload of lies about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a fair
and just conclusion about the needless deaths of 96 people. On behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group I would now urge you to help us go one step further
and establish as a matter of public record for all time the truth of what did happen on
that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be done may the bereaved families
be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.

Yours faithfully




Phil Hammond
Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
