                                                                   W/ylr,              flow W- PcJSL ,



                 ft
                                 ALA
                                   ASSOCIATION OF
                                 LONDON AUTHORITIES
                                                                                             C\d{ \

                                                                                                      ^ W   c tv v ^




                                                                                                            p
12 December 1989
                                                                                                             y
R H Whalley                                       ..... .. ^
Secretary to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough/Disaster Stadium
R H Queen
50  rilioon Anne's
            Snrifl * e Gate
                          Q                   •*»
London SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr Whalley

RESPONSE TO THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE INQUIRY BY LORD JUSTICE
TAYLOR INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

I have pleasure in enclosing this Association1s response to the
recommendations in the Interim Report of the Inquiry into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

Officers from the Association's member authorities would be
happy to meet with the Inquiry Team to discuss any of the points
we have made in more detail, if that would be of assistance.

We would also welcome the Inquiry looking at a number of the
issues raised by the Hillsborough Disaster in relation to
emergency planning.

If you require any further clarification or information do not
hestiate to contact me at the ALA.


Yours sincerely


               —     su

                           —

CAROLINE STRALLEN
COMMITTEE ADMINISTRATOR




     36 OLD QUEEN STREET, LONDON SW1H 9JF 0 1 -2 2 2 7799 FAX 01-799 2339 SECRETARY: JOHN McDONNELL
RESPONSE TO THE INTERIM REPORT OF THE INQUIRY BY LORD JUSTICE
TAYLOR INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


1.   INTRODUCTION

     The Association of London Authorities represents 13 London
     Boroughs:  Brent, Camden, Ealing, Greenwich, Hackney,
     Hammersmith and Fulham, Haringey, Hounslow, Islington,
     Lambeth, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Waltham Forest,
     and the Inner London Education Authority. Most of the
     League Football Clubs in London have their grounds in ALA
     boroughs and Wembley Stadium is located in the London
     Borough of Brent.


2.   GENERAL COMMENTS

     Whilst generally welcoming the recommendations in the
     report the Association takes the view firstly that they
     relate very specifically to events at one particular
     ground. The recommendations fail to take account of
     arrangements and liaison which have been taking place
     locally over the years, taking account of the physical
     aspects of the ground and the "culture" of the football
     club concerned.

     Secondly we feel the administrative arrangements are
     cumbersome and could prevent speedy action.

     In addition we see the recommendations, following those of
     Justice Popplewell, as reacting to specific incidents
     without any attempt to be forward looking in reviewing the
     situation as a whole.


3.   THE ROLE OF OTHER AGENCIES

     The Association has points of concern over the role of the
     local authority and the involvement of other agencies e.g.
     Police; London Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

     The Association is aware that in some areas outside London
     the local authority delegates its role vis a vis safety to
     the Police. This has led to a lack of clarity about their
     role and that of the local authority.  There is a need for
     the full report of the Inquiry to clarify the role of
     different agencies.  For instance in London a particular
     police division may make a policy decision e.g. on stopping
     and searching all individuals attending a football match
     which have implications for the safety of the ground e.g.
     crowd flows.



                                  1
The interim report tends to separate out agencies rather
than examining the relationships between them. There is
often conflict between the different agencies, who may have
different perceptions about their role, and there is a need
for firm guidance on their respective roles.  In many
instances Police Forces have reacted quickly and
defensively in the wake of the criticisms made of the
Police in its handling of the Hillsborough incident.

The relevant legislation (Safety of Sports Ground 1975) may
well need re-examining in that some areas are open to
different interpretations. These ambiguities then become
blurred by the police's own perception of their role.

The Association is strongly of the view that the management
of the Football Club has the responsibility for safety and
if it delegates those responsibilities it must still be
accountable.

Stewards can play a positive role in that they are not
perceived by supporters in the same way as the Police.
Their contribution is especially valuable if they accompany
the away supporters.

We are of the view that representatives of the club should
be members of the safety team along with the fire
authority, police, ambulance and local authority.

We are concerned that cumbersome administrative
arrangements, for instance some local authorities have been
experiencing delays in the Police giving written agreement.


RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS

At present the legislation allows a local authority to
charge a fee where the club management is itself making a
change to the safety certificate, but not when the local
authority takes the initiative.  In view of the
recommendation to review annually the safety certificate we
would ask that the relevant legislation is rexamined to
enable a change to be made as such a review has enormous
resource implications for a local authority.


FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES

In London the London Ambulance Service has the role of
providing the advice to the club management and in most
instances it sub contracts ambulance provision to St John's
Ambulance.
     There are obvious implications for the overall ambulance
     provision in the capital if for instance several ambulances
     are dedicated to, four football grounds in London on one
     Saturday afternoon.  It is our belief that guaranteed quick
     response time is more important.

     We fully support the recommendation that there should be a
     medical practitioner employed by the club, present at each
     match, able to deal with emergencies and is fully trained
     and competent in advanced first aid.


6.   GROUND CAPACITY

     Again whilst supporting the reduction by 15% of the
     recommended capacity figures as experience suggests this is
     about right. However many variables operate influenced by
     the dynamics of a crowd; how it chooses to distribute
     itself on terraces depending on ground design i.e. vision;
     shelter; staying near exits etc.

     Many stadia are in the process of redevelopment and the
     introduction of seating is seen by many as a solution to
     problems that have been previously associated with large
     numbers of people standing on terraces, and are considering
     pulling down fences at the same time. We would therefore
     ask that the Inquiry looks at the issues of seating and
     fencing as we do not believe that the introduction of
     seating and higher priced tickets avoids the necessity to
     have fencing.


7.   "GREEN GUIDE" (GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS)

     We understand that the "Green Guide" is currently under
     review although the Association has not been formally
     consulted. Again it should be reviewed neither
     retrospectively nor in isolation of other aspects of sports
     ground safety. The surrounding environment of a Football
     Ground and the transport systems are integral to safety.


8.   LOCAL AUTHORITY ROLE

     The Association is concerned that the Inquiry has not
     consulted widely with the local authority associations and
     that the final report will not incorporate the local
     authority view.

     We would particularly welcome the Inquiry looking at the
     strategic role that the local authority has in terms of the
     services it provides. This role should be more formalised
     e.g. as a highway authority it has a role in traffic flow,
     street furnishing etc. This is particularly important in
     London where grounds are sited in heavily populated areas.


                                 3
The Association would also oppose the introduction of the
Inspectorate to oversee local authority enforcement which
could be a possibility through the setting up of the
Football Licensing Authority. Under the Football
Spectators Act 1989 this would add another layer of
bureaucracy and cause confusion.  In addition the
possibility of the Licencing Authority being able to
specify conditions in the safety certificate, would we
believe, compound the problems.




                           4
