                                             r.                  /

                                                             (
                                             cc   Mr Addison
                                                  Mr Nicholson

Mr Durbin


ORAL PQ FOR PRIME MINISTER: 13 JULY 1989


Your note of 3 July to Mr Thompson requests supplementaries for
this PQ on law and order costs.

2.   Mr Hargreaves, a Lancashire MP, has been active in pressing
for Government to meet the costs of policing the Conservative
Party Conference. However it seems unlikely that such a general
question is to be a springboard for this topic, although it is
conceivable that he might want to raise this with the Prime
Minister as he has pursued it unsuccessfully with the Home
Secretary.

3.   Of the notes for supplementaries (with accompanying
background attached notes) the most likely to be raised are
Conservative Party Conference and Hillsborough costs; although
Guildford and Woolwich and amalgamation of forces might be
raised. You might want to cut these if the supplementaries are
too extensive.




                                             P RANSFORD
                                             4 July 1989
FI Division
NOTES FOR SUPPLEMENTARIES



1•   Will the Home Office be reimbursing Avon and Somerset Police
Authority the full costs of the Guildford and Woolwich pub
bombings enquiry?


The enquiries by the Avon and Somerset Constabulary into the new
evidence in this case have been concluded. Following the issue
of a writ the matter of costs is subjudice.


The case was referred to the Court of Appeal on 16 January and
the conduct of the prosecution case now rests with the Director
of Public Prosecutions.


2•   Will the Government now reconsider paving the full cost of
security at Party Conferences from central funds?


My Right hon Friend the Home Secretary has concluded that he
would not be justified in departing from the normal police
funding arrangements by giving additional funding to meet the
increased costs of policing Party Conferences.


The Government contributes to all police expenditure both
directly through police grant, which is now at 51% - and
indirectly through block grant.


3•   Will the Government meet the costs of the police
investigation into the Hillsborough disaster from central funds?


The Home Secretary has accepted that the additional costs of the
police investigation into these tragic events by West Midlands
Police should not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority.


The investigation was initiated by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire.  It was subsequently agreed that the results should be
put at the service of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.  In
recognition of that, and of the scale of costs, we have put
proposals to South Yorkshire whereby central government would
meet a greater share of the costs. We hope the matter can be
resolved soon.  [NB details of offer to South Yorkshire not made
public as they are still considering it.]


4.   Should not provincial police forces be merged into larger
units in the interests of efficiency?


There is no reason to suppose that a reduction in the number of
provincial police forces would result in economies of scale. On
the contrary a reorganisation would be likely to result in
considerable prolonged disruption and a diversion of police
effort from the essential task of maintaining law and order and
protecting the citizen.
BACKGROUND NOTES


 (i)   COSTS OF GUILDFORD AND WOOLWICH PUB BOMBINGS' ENQUIRY


Enquiries were reopened when alleged new evidence was produced
which implied the original convictions might be unsafe.


2.   Normally the Home Secretary would ask the police force which
conducted the original investigation to consider further
enquiries and the costs (whether of enquiry by the force itself
or by an outside force at their request) would fall to that
police authority.


3.   In this case, for reasons of speed, the original forces
(Surrey and the Metropolitan Police) were contacted by telephone
by HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary and the written request for
an investigation was sent direct to the Chief Constable of Avon
and Somerset who had agreed to conduct it .


4.   Subsequently the Chief Constable of Surrey denied that his
force had accepted that the investigation would be conducted on
their behalf and claimed they had believed it would be conducted
by the Home Secretary.


5.    Avon and Somerset have issued a writ against the Home Office
iri the High Court seeking full costs. Because of the way in
which the investigation had been established, Counsel have
advised that the Home Office would have no defence against claims
that it was liable, but that only additional costs should be
reclaimable. Treasury Solicitors are currently in negotiation
with Avon and Somerset to seek a settlement on that basis.

(ii) COSTS OF SECURITY AT PARTY CONFERENCES


Ken Hargreaves has shown an interest in Party Conference costs
over several years, having written to the Home Secretary on a
number of occasions, he was also (at his request) one of a
number of MPs from conference venue areas who met the Home
Secretary in July 1988 to discuss the matter.
2.   The Home Secretary receives regular representations from
police authorities hosting the Conservative Party Conference for
special payments to meet their costs. Each year he has fully
considered their cases but so far he has not agreed that special
payments are warranted.


3.   Special payments are only made in the most exceptional
circumstances where the efficiency of forces is threatened by the
size and unpredictability of the commitment (eg miners' strike).
Special payments are considered on a case by case basis based not
only on the size of the expenditure but also on its
unpredictability.  It would be very unusual for a special payment
to be made for expenditure below the product of a Ip rate.

4.   The additional costs of policing the party conference in
Lancashire in 1989 are estimated at £1.1 million, below the
product of a lp rate which is a £1.5 million. Nor can the costs
be said to be unpredictable. It is a fundamental principle of
policing arrangements in the United Kingdom that central and
local government share the responsibility for the public service
and its costs. The ratepayer may contribute to the costs of some
things - eg security at the homes of members of the royal family,
policing of demonstrations - which are arguably "national", but
the taxpayer contributes to the cost of all policing whether
local or national.  (Costs are met through police specific grant
at 51% plus block grant at whatever rate applies to the area
concerned.)


(iii)  COSTS OF POLICE INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
DISASTER


West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an investigation into
the policing aspects of the Hillsborough disaster.


2.   It is clearly right that the additional costs should not
fall on West Midlands Police Authority, which has no direct
interest in the outcome of the investigation.   The Home Secretary
has therefore given an assurance, in replies to Members of
Parliament concerned about the matter, that wherever the
additional costs might fall, they would not fall to the West
Midlands.


3.   The Home Secretary believes that it is right in principle
that the costs should fall initially to South Yorkshire Police
Authority. The investigation was initiated by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned primarily with
matters of policing in South Yorkshire.


4.   He has however offered a special payment to South Yorkshire
in recognition of the facts that:-


     a.   when it was decided that Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry
          should be established, it was agreed that information
          obtained by West Midlands police should be placed at
          the disposal of that enquiry and the investigation has
          thereby been somewhat extended;


     b.   The expected costs (currently £4-5 million) could not
          be absorbed without serious detriment to the efficiency
          of South Yorkshire police.


5.   Under the offer, South Yorkshire would receive police grant
at the usual 51% until costs reached the product of a lp rate
(about £1.3 million), then would receive 90% grant. When South
Yorkshire's contribution reached a product of a 3/4p rate (about
£9 50,00 0) its liability would cease and Government would meet
100% of costs.


6.   The offer was put to South Yorkshire recently by Lord
Ferrers. It is still under consideration by South Yorkshire
Police Authority and the terms have not been made public.
(v) MERGER OF PROVINCIAL FORCES INTO LARGER UNITS IN INTEREST
OF EFFICIENCY


Mr John Wheeler MP, the Chairman of the Home Affairs Select
Committee which recently issued a report on Home Office
expenditure, has expressed himself to be personally in favour of
regionalisation of the police service. An article appeared in
the Sunday Times on 9 April which suggested that the Government
intended to subsume the present country constabularies in England
and Wales into six regional forces, leaving only the Metropolitan
Police intact.


2.   The Home Secretary made clear in a speech which he delivered
to the Kensington Conservative Political Centre on 25 April that
the Government had no plans to re-examine the present structure
of the police service.
