               Yates
          Ext 2199
          31 M a y 1989                                                  Ms   Craig
                                                                         Ms   Harrison
                                                                         Ms   Adams
                                                                         Ms   Rex

                                                                        TtiT'Morlarty
                                                                         Mr   Turney
                                                                         Mr   Goddard
                                                                         Mr   Watts
                                                                         Mr   Lidington
                                                                         Mr   Godfrey


 Mr Walters




    spoke today with Mr "Whalley, secretary to tfhe inquiry, about
  progress and the likely timing of any interim report from
  Sir Peter T a y l o r .

  Sir Peter considers that the inquiry is going well in terms of
/ progress made and the tentative timetable he has set h i m s e l f .
  As the Home Secretary w i 11 be aware, evidence is now being heard
  from police o f f i c e r s . Counsel for the inquiry intends to call
  45 officers but the later witnesses will be junior officers who
  were on duty outside the ground and it is not expected that
  taking their evidence will take l o n g . Sir Peter hopes to move
  on to hearing evidence from officials from the football club
  next week.          His present estimate is that he should complete
  hearing oral evidence by about the first week of July.          He then
  intends to prepare an interim report which he hopes to submit to
  Ministers within two weeks of the conclusion of the oral
  h e a r i n g s , that is towards the end of July.

  At present he e nvisages the interim report covering police
  o p e r a t i o n s aritX^physical s a f e t y m e a s u r e s at F o o t b a l l grounds'.
 " m e question of*~TITe~eT?ect~~oT,^ r i ^ T 5 ‘          e ntity card sclieme on events
  at Hillsborough has not yet been raised in evidence.                                WhTTe the
  possibility cannot be"ruled out that a witness might refer to
  this issue, this is unlikely as this stage of the inquiry is
  concentrating on what happened during the d i s a s t e r ; the question
  of what might have happened had circumstances been different -
  for example had identity cards been in use - is not strictly
  relevant to this s t a g e . For this reason Sir Peter does not
  intend to include anything in his interim report on identily
           "schemes but cannot give a categorical assurance that this
The inquiry will then move on to consider written submissions.
Sir Peter intends to discuss the more important submissions with
those who put them to him.    For example he may w ish to discuss
evidence from AC P O with representatives of chief nffirprs.   Such
meetings will take time to arrange and Sir Peter will then need
to consider all the evidence he has received before preparing
his final report.    At this stage it is unlikely that the final
report will be ready this year.

The Home Secretary will wish to be aware that Sir Peter intends
to fulfill a longstanding engagement to a lecture tour in Canada
for 10 days in mid-August.  The inquiry will then have reached
the stage of discussing written evidence wit h those submitting
it.  It is doubtful that such meetings can be arranged for
August given that most people will be on holiday and Sir Peter
considers that his trip will therefore not affect the course of
the inquiry.

You may w ish to report the likely timing of the interim report
to No 10; a draft letter for this purpose is attached.
DR A F T LETTER TO A N D R E W TURNBULL ESQ


                                       copies Private Secretaries to:

                                                Secretary of State for
                                                 the Environment
                                                Lord President
                                                Lord Privy Seal
                                                Chief Whip
                                                Captain of the Gentleman
                                                 at Arms
                                                Sir Robin Butler


              LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY M R W ALTERS


H I L LS BOROUGH INQUIRY: FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


W e understand that Lord Justice Taylor hopes to complete hearing
oral evidence on events surrounding the Hillsborough disaster by
about the first w e e k of July.     He believes that it will then
take him about two weeks to prepare his interim report which
should thus be w ith Ministers towards the end of July.            At this
stage he envisages the interim report covering the conduct of
police operations and physical security measures at football
grounds.     As it will be based on evidence about what actually
happened/    not about what might have happened had the Football
Spectators Bill been in force/ Lord Justice Taylor does not
intend to say anything in his interim report about the possible
effect of an identity card scheme for football spectators.             Of
course he cannot rule out the possibility that some witness may
raise this at some stage in the hearings although none has done
so so far.    We will of course inform you of any changes in
Lord Justice Taylor's plans as soon as we hear of them.


I am copying this letter to the Private Secretaries to the
Secretary of State for the Environment,          the Lord President,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Chief Whip,          the Captain of the
Gentleman at Arms and Sir Robin Butler.
