                        S o u th Yorkshire

                        POLICE
                        JUSTICE         with   COURAGE




        Mr C Bone
        Hillsborough Scrutiny
        Room 1108                                                Our Ref:   D&C/AMH/EMR HD 114
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        LONDON
        S W 1H 9AT                                               Date:      21 October 1997




        Thank you for your composite letter of 15 October 1997 in which you deal with a number of
        issues. In this letter I am responding specifically to paragraphs 6 and 7 of the letter, policy and
        procedure for release of documents and information from the Hillsborough Archives.

        At paragraph 6A - Body files and other inquest material, I think it should be made clear that
        South Yorkshire Police act for and under the direction of Her Majesty's Coroner for
        South Yorkshire (W est) in releasing documentation from the body files and inquest material.
        In addition to the short paragraph at 6A in your letter, I would add a second paragraph as
        follows:-

         documents released include a post mortem examination report; a report of a special examination;
         statements presented in evidence; any statements referred to in the oral summaries given to a
         mini or main inquest; photographs, charts or other documents put in evidence at an inquest; a
         transcript of inquest proceedings.

         At paragraph 6B - Non inquest material, I would like to suggest that the line "if a 'properly
         interested' person asks for a post mortem report, you release it" should be deleted, as this is
         dealt with under paragraph 6A; that the release of a statement by a person who has since died
         should be included; that in order not to be accused of using exclusionary language, the words his
         and him should be replaced by their and them; that the words in brackets i.e. (it is
         'in the public domain') should appear after the words "the Taylor Inquiry", not at the end of the
         line; the word "document "in the final line should be replaced by "material".

         Your paragraph 6B would then read:-

         B - Non-inquest material

         if a person asks for their own statement - you release




                  \ .

 f           l{         Discipline and Complaints D epartm ent
' f / y ?,              W indsor Road
  I P ,$5               Sheffield S8 8UB

v W/ ' * 7              Tel: 01142202020Fax: 0114 252 3855
                        D irect D ial No:
                                                   2




if a person asks fo r someone else's statement - you release if the person who m ade the
statement agrees

if a person asks for the statement of someone who has since died - you release

if a person asks for their ticket back, you give it to them

if a person asks for a photograph or video still you will release it, except that:-

    you don't release post-mortem pictures

    you don't release pictures of the dead except to family or their legal representatives

    you only release material which belongs to the police

if a person asks for other material then

    you release it if it was submitted to the Taylor Inquiry (i.e. it is 'in the public domain')
    or it belongs to South Yorkshire Police.

     if neither of these things applies, you seek the advice of the owner of the material and
     act on it

Another point that I feel is worthy of mention in relation to the provision of material from body files
is that relatives, or more often their legal representatives, will write asking for the missing
statement o f         when the statement is not part of the body file, but the individual named is
mentioned in someone else's statement, for example a police officer may mention the names of
other officers who started work with them, or a doctor mentions the name of other doctors, or
nursing staff who were on duty at the hospital. In these cases we then write to the individual
named, seeking their authority to release their statement. This leads to delay in the provision of
a statement, or even non provision if the person named cannot be traced or declines to authorise
the release of their statement. I believe that in part this leads to the suspicion that we are
withholding information, when this is not the case.

 I trust this information will assist you in responding to the families.




 A M Hepworth
 Superintendent




                                                       The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                       Superintendent Hepworth

                                                       Te! (0114) 2 96 3084     Fax (0114) 2 96 3113
                                                                                                    (W)
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SW 1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


Superintendent A M Hepworth
Discipline & Complaints Dept                                   Your reference:
South Yorkshire Police
Windsor Road                                                   Our reference:
SHEFFIELD S8 8UB
                                                               Date:              October 1997




    4              Xv          'Hc.pUwOr'Hn

We discussed the letter I was going to write to Mr Fallon, who had asked, as a relative of
Andrew Sefton, for a complete copy of the VRM2 mortuary video. I have since written to
him on the lines we discussed (I enclose a copy of my letter to him for ease of reference).

My letter tells Mr Fallon, among other things, that the police do not release to relatives stills
from this video which show the bodies of other people who died - that is, the bodies of people
other than their own relative. If I may say so your grounds for not doing that seem perfectly
sensible in these very difficult circumstances.

 I have since been told that there have been occasions in the past - indeed right up to the time
 when the Home Secretary announced Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in the summer -
 when you did release stills from the video which showed more than one body. While I
 accept that the release of this material to relatives is entirely a matter for you, I should be
 grateful if you would confirm whether or not that is the case. If there has been a change o f
 approach here, what has prompted it?

 I look forward to hearing from you.

          Dm A'O o \



 C F BONE
 Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SYORKS.119
