                          MEMO

TO:      Tony Poole/Peter Craven, COI, Leeds
         Roy Sutherwood, Home Office Press Office, London

c.c.     Bob Whalley, Hillsborough Inquiry Secretariat,   Sheffield
         Peter Brazier, COI, London


FROM: Lynn Taylor, COI, Leeds




             REPORT ON WEEK 1 ON HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


I thought it would be useful to take advantage of today's
adjournment of the Inquiry to put down the events - and my
impressions - of week 1.

This will be in three sections:

1.  A rough chronology of events.  The pace has been so fast
that this cannot be complete because I didn't get the chance to
compare notes with Wendy on all the problems she dealt with.

2.  Problem areas which I feel should be flagged up for
attention.

3.  My personal on-the-spot views on the week and       - for what
they are worth - my views on the coming weeks.


SECTION ONE:_______ CHRONOLOGY

Monday     (Roy Sutherwood/Lynn Taylor)

We had approx 40 Journalists - mainly nationals, 7 TV channels
(BBC, I T N , TV AM, SKY, BBC Local. YTV, Granada) and 5 radio
(BBC, IRN. Radio City (Liverpool), Radio Hallam, Radio
Sheffield)

AM - Roy sorted out the Order of Proceedings and witness
statements with Treasury solicitors.  LT handled arrival of
Lord Justice Taylor (LJT) on town hall steps, ensured he paused
for photographers.  LT briefed by Andrew Collins QC to the
Inquiry on his opening address - relayed info to press
verbally.  LT set up filing systems for press office.  We had
technical problems with no sound on the press room TV monitor
   in the morning - the sound system was incorrectly wired but
   nothing could be done until the session ended and engineers
   could get into the Chamber.  There were also gremlins with the
   press incoming enquiry numbers we could not hear the caller.

  Lunchtime LT handled request for photocall with Andrew Collins,
  he agreed and we took him down to the town hall steps (so as
  not to break our own ban of filming in the building).

     PM - First batch of witness begin their evidence.       The
     logistics are that we watch the monitor, when a witness is
     called to the stand we distribute immediately to those in the
     press room and then go along the corridor and up the stairs to
     the press gallery to distribute to the press up there.        This
     needs to be done quickly.       A hiccup occurred when the running
     order was suddenly changed in the chamber without warning - we
^ n e a r l y gave out the wrong set of statements.     It showed up the
^ ^ c r u c i a l importance of at least one press officer being able to
     keep a very close eye on the TV monitor.       This has become
     slightly       easier since TV monitors were installed in the
     Secretariat office and Treasury solicitors rooms.

  At the same time we have to keep an eye on what is happening to
  the witness who has just left the stand - is he being harried
  by the press?

  Roy got agreement to a photocall in the Chamber itself for
  filming/stills of West Midlands Police model of Hillsborough
  stadium.  To be set up for Tuesday lunchtime.


  Tuesday    (LT/Wendy Millar, COI, Leeds)

  Press contingent as day 1

  AM  Issued Order of Proceedings/Operational Note on photocall
  for model.  Eleven witness today - which meant 11 delivery
  runs, and 11 potential harjfasment problems.

  Lunchtime         photocall at 1.15 coincided with the departure of a
  c o a c h l o a d of Liverpool witnesses.  Complaints made to me by
  Pat 0 Neil head of Inquiry Operations at Sheffield City Council
  about press crowding in the corridors and the presence of
  cameras in the building.         His second point was a
  misunderstanding which baffled me as I had spoken to him and
  his head of security at 9am telling them of the photocall.
  When I went down to check all was well at the main door just
  before 1pm I discovered that the doormen knew nothing about the
  event and I had to sort that one out to avoid the embarassment
  of cameramen being refused admission!

  PM The^corridor problem did need a solution.   With Bob
  Whalley s help, we got the police to agree a new system for
  witness departures.  The police would speak to them in the
chamber, tell them of the media interest and seek their views -
yes/no - on interviews.   If yes they would escort the person
to the main door where the TV cameras had set up camp.  If no
then the witness would be taken to any exit.  Once in the
street the witness was beyond our protection.  I explained new
ground rules to press.  At 5pm when the Liverpool fans left for
their coach no one wanted to speak to the press.  This caused
aggro with the Radio City reporter who said how could we trust
the police to put the question - more on him later.

Wednesday   (L T / W M )

Press contingent as day 1.

AM LJT dropped his bombshell at 10am (transcript attached to
those who haven't already seen copy).  My first action was to
inform Home Office that the media were livid and to arrange for

•
an urgent copy of page one of the transcript. This was fax'd
straight down to London.

Lunchtime    Peter Davenport of the Times asked to see LJT .
This was refused but LJT   called me in.  I had been standing
listening to a pow-wow in the press room on his statement (we
all had a copy by then) and I tried to put their points to LJT.
Namely, they were incensed at the word   slant', they resented
the blanket condemnation, they would prefer him to name names,
the statements were not given in 'advance' but simultaneous as
the witness took the stand, and finally   at the Cleveland
Inquiry   (which most in the press room had of course covered as
the northern corespondents) the witness statements were
evidence and quotable, they were confused and wanted
clarification.   LJT appeared unmoved but later word came that
Andrew Collins would come to the press room at 5pm to sort
things out.

PM Meanwhile 16 witnesses were giving their evidence and WM
was taking care of this side of the work.   Bob and I were in
constant touch with London  because we had no way of knowing
whether the damage was retrievable or where problems may
surface.  I was very worried that any irrate editor from the
nationals with friends in powerful places might ring a Minister
or MP and complain about LJT.  If the Inquiry's image was
dented on day 3 we were facing catastrophe.

At 5pm, there was a short meeting between Andrew Collins, Bob
Whalley and myself on the nature of the problem.  LJT was in
the room at the time.

Andrew Collins began by apologising to the press for the
confusion.  Our statements differed legally from those at
Cleveland and we should have explained in depth at the start.
Media were pacified at the 'slant' etc as Andrew promised to
relay their views to LJT.  However, the Daily Telegraph man
voicing an opinion many held felt that censorship was at issue.
If the witness made 10 points in writing, but only 2 were
discussed in the Chamber what happened to the other 8.  Many
others on grounds of sheer expediency said look if we can't use
this material we don't want it, it is just confusing.  They
asked that we expand the information on the daily Order of
Proceeding to include name, age, town, and occupation (we had
only been giving the name).  As these factual details seemed to
be the only usable material from the witness statements an
expanded running order was all they required.  This was agreed
and statements and transcripts would remain available to those
who wished.


Thursday   (LT/WM)

Press contingent broadly as before TV AM seemed to have dropped
out.                                                ^

AM LJT again wants to speak to the press from the chamber.    I
advised against for several reasons (a) no bad press had
occurred (b) calm was restored in the press room by Andrew
Collins and there was no need to reopen the matter (c) LJT
might appear inconsistant (d) it could become habit-forming the
the next occasion could be another bombshell.   However, for
honourable reasons, he wanted to put matters straight offically
on transcript.    As before we got urgent copies of the page of
transcript for all concerned.   LJT gained respect for being
big enough to retract.   I apol#gised to Garth Parry of the
Guardian for not being able to tip him off that all the furore
was ^over a Guardian headline.  He was very generous and said
don t worry its just fish and chip wrapping now.   The situation
ended with light-hearted banter in the press room about whether
the final score was 1 goal each or whether the LJT own goal
made it 2 to 1 in their favour.

PM  17 witness today and WM fully stretched keeping up with
events in the chamber.  My time was taken up with resolving a
problem with a Radio City reporter.  Everybody wanted to talk
to Mr Hicks, the witnesses who lost both daughters.  LJT showed
great sympathy towards Mr Hicks in chamber and in effect told
those questioning him to use kid gloves.  I sensed deep trouble
if word reached him of Mr Hicks being harrassed by the press.

In fact when I joined them in the corridor they were very
conscious of the need to do right by Mr Hicks and were
discussing how best to proceed if he would speak to them - they
thought a mini-press conference outside in the garden with only
one doing the questions and all sharing the material.

The policeman brought Mr Hicks out - he would talk after he had
 u  a CUP    ^ea and a few minutes break.  Word then came down
that he only wanted to talk to Radio City  (because of prior
contacts) but that others should have access to his story.
   The policeman thought Mrs Hicks needed some support from a
   social worker and Treasury solicitors started to make some
   arrangements.

   The TV and stills men asked if I could speak to Mr Hicks to see
   if he would allow them to take shots over the shoulder of the
   Radio City man during the interview.    That way there would be
   no need for a street chase and any upset.    Just as I was about
   to do this word came that Mr Hicks would talk to everybody and
   had gone off   somewhere with some of the press.  We searched the
   building but   could not find him and as a consequence could not
   get a social worker to Mrs Hicks.

     At around 2.30pm we started     to hear complaints that the Radio
     City man had not shared the     tape and had in fact disappeared.
     His fellow journalists were     very angry - even though they had
^ ^ g o t Mr Hicks  interview from   colleagues at the BBC and the PA.

   Renaging on an agreement of this type is unprofesssional and
   unthinkable and as one of the parties to the deal I felt some
   action was required.  I rang the News Editor at Radio City   in
   the presence of everybody in the press room to register a
   complaint.  Later Ian Key from Today rang  the station and said
   that speaking for the journalists they were furious and would
   lynch him if he ever reapp eared.

   His News Editor defended him, his character etc, and said that
   it was only due to technicial difficulties on the feed line in
   the press room (on which all reports had been filed up to that
   point and continue to be filed) that the reporteer had had to
   rush off to Radio Hallam to file but that he had passed a copy
   to Radio Sheffield who had played it to a few people.  Frankly,
   none of his peers believed the explanation.  In any case the
   deal was that he did the sharing and not that everybody should
   search for third or fourth parties.  I have had a series of
   pleading telephone calls from the station, the reporter and an
   IRN  reporter virtually accusing me of blackening the
   reporter's repution.

   I have assured Radio City that I have no quarrel with them,
   that my dealings with all media here have been straight and
   fair and that Radio City will continue to get that same service
   in future.  But I can not be their reporter's minder and he
   must come back and make his own peace with his colleagues.
   They still think he tried to stitch them up and the ensuing
   calls to me have been evesdropped with growing merriment.

   In the midst of this there were discussions between myself and
   Bob Whalley about potential embarassment to the Inquiry and the
   Home Office if the police - in coming to give their evidence -
   appeared to get any special protection from media attention
   during their arrivals and departures.  We had a meeting with
   Tony Pratt the PRO for South Yorkshire and I was called in over
   lunch for a brief word with LJT on the subject.
LJT announced that the West Midlands police compilation video
was to be screene<Jon Friday afternoon.  Simon Gallimore of the
BBC approached Andrew Collins QC to ask if they could have
access.  The answer was yes.    Andrew Collins got copyright
clearance from the South Yorks police and the football club in
respect of their material.

I came on the scene at this point and after discussions with
Bob  agreed verbally with the BBC that they could have access
on the basis that, as this was evidence to the Inquiry as if
given in chamber, they should make it available to all
broadcast media who wanted it and should give the PA access for
stills for use by any print media who wanted the material.

All this was agreed and discussions  started on what format the
video was in - the end point on Thursday being that the BBC
would contact West Midlands police directly to see if they
could have access to a Umatic original.   If not they would
collect a VHS copy from me at 9am Friday.   A transmission
embargo of 3.30pm Friday was also agreed verbally.


Friday   (LT/WM)

Press contingent broadly same as yesterday.

12 witnesses scheduled plus the video screening at 1.30pm.
Order of Proceeding prepared as usual plus Operational Note on
video putting the details and transmission embargo on paper.

I got a call from SKY TV checking on the day's proceedings and
mentioned in passing the access,to the video. They said they
did not need Umatic format from the BBC but could use VHS.   I
gave them a tape plus note of embargo at around 10am.

Shortly after 11am Bob started to get calls from West Midlands
police that they had not given the BBC a Umatic copy because
BBC solicitors would not let other breqdcast outlets have
copies.         This was the first we in Sheffield ha^fc heard of any
pro b l e m s .

No BBC people were around so I went outside the town hall found
a BBC cameraman and located Simon Gallimore on their mobile
phone.  He came in, we explained the problem with the BBC
lawyers and stood back whilst the BBC people in Sheffield
argued with their colleagues in London.  At first we were not
clear whether the BBC were saying no screenings at all - ie
that they intended to prevent LJT's Sheffield screening or
whether it was just a media usage problem.

My advise - if the BBC refused to allow their material  to be
given to others - was to offer the black and white footage from
the police and club cameras (for which we had clearance) to
another TV channel on the same sharing arrangement.  The BBC
people on the spot knew that Sky already had the material, knew
I was advising switching the material and the matter was
finally resolved at around 12.30 when the BBC said all they
wanted was for each user to clear BBC copyright individually so
that they could  retain some control.  In other words, the BBC
on the spot had not cleared with their own copyright with their
London colleagues.

Epilogue

Somehow - and I can't explain it - the only adjective that the
^>ress have used all week to describe the press facilities is
 superb'.   ITN have said its the best press facility they have
ever known at a public inquiry. Despite the many dramas trust
has been established that we are being very straight in our
dealings and good humour has prevailed in the press room.


SECTION TWO:   PROBLEM AREAS FOR ATTENTION

1.  There is still an unease about those points made in the
statements that do not appear in the transcript.  In effect to
cover themselves, the reporters are de facto operating ot\
normal rules of court reporting.  This is however meant to be a
public inquiry and not a law court.  The censorship issue hangs
in the air above us.

2.  Following on from this, both the statements and the
transcripts are available for press use.  A comparision could
be made between the two, either now or after the Inquiry
reports if anyone has the energy or inclination to do it.

3.  There is no room set aside for witnesses.   Once they come
out of the sanctuary of the chamber they emerge straight into
the corridor which the press must legitimately use for access
to the press gallery.   If anyone is distressed - and this is
why I've quoted the Hicks story at length - even the people who
are trying to give assistance don't know where to find them.

4.  The types of problems that I have detailed at length are
more profound than    ----- 1       **-----   air of 10s would
(a) decide without                             handle at such
speed.  There certainly needs to be a quick means of bouncing
ideas off more senior GIS staff - especially when tiredness
adds to the problem as was happening by the end of the week.
This is not whinging from those of us on the spot - it is just
common sense that the quality of our decisions must deteriorate
under these conditions.

5.  The logistics of simultaneous delivery of witness
statements in two locations and the need to monitor the screen
to do this means that  - even if press numbers drop - a
staffing level of two might have to be maintained throughout.
SECTION THREE:    PERSONAL VIEWS ON WHAT LIES AHEAD

1.  One of the first pieces of copy I heard filed by ITN said
that this    inquiry will be unique in the anals of public
enquiries because the disasterttfnxV and video.  What happened
is already known right down to the very second when it
occurred.  I've never worked on a public inqiry before so I
can't judge whether this one is unique or typical.  But I hope
on the facts related others with more experience can assess the
situation.

2.  On day three of the fans evidence there was a feeling in
the press room that it was a dead story until the police gave
evidence.   China was w i p i n g everything out.        By Friday, with
the release of the video''"’m a t e r i a l , Hillsborough was priority
news again.

3.  The praise received for the press facilities could be a
double edged sword.  Whilst we are offering this service and
quality news is coming out, the newsdesks will decide to keep
their people on the spot.  I think we could be faced with this
level of pressure and the large press numbers throughout.

4.  The deciding factor, I think, will be what they make of the
police evidence.  If they think  right we've now got to the
bottom of the problem' they will go away.  But if the police
leave the media w ith lots of mental question marks hanging
over others yet to give evidence  then they will stay in force
for the next installments.

5.  Finally, one of the parties - Liverpool FC - have handled
this disaster with unfailing genius.  Where others have been
wrong footed they, on every occasion, have done the right thing
with the right kind of emotion.  When I watched the aftermath
of their FA Cup win on Saturday, and saw the simple wreath at
Anfield with words saying  'you re not forgotten, we've brought
the cup back for you, we wish you were here to celebrate with
us' it struck me - sincerely and not cynically - that it was
the best piece of PR I've ever seen.  This is the yardstick
that all the rest of us will be measured against.

22 May 1989
