  Meeting with Dr James Burns (Head, Sub Department of Forensic Pathology,
   mversrty of Liverpool, Royal Liverpool University Hospital) with K J/ 26th


  Discussed the basic pathological assumptions underlying the inquests:

  1. That all of those who died would have been unconscious in -10-15 seconds and
  dead in 3 - 6 minutes.
 u   7^1  they would ^ have sustained the injuries which lead to their inevitable deaths
 be ore j. 15 therefore the success or otherwise of the rescue operation was irrelevant.

 Dr Burns says it is nonsense to assume that everyone was dead by 3 15

  In order to die wtihin minutes from traumatic asphyxia, there must be unrelieved
 pressure for around 3 minutes.
 (The brain would be unconscious within about half a minute. For brain death to occur
 in a healthy young adult, the brain must be deprived of oxygen for at least 3 minutes).

 The point about the Hillsborough victims was that some of them may have experienced
 in te r m itte n t p r e s s u r e f o r u p to h a l f a n hour.
This means it is impossible to say categorically how quickly they would have fallen
unconscious, and how quickly they would have died. It would have depended on manv
factors such as the size and strength of the individual, exactly where they were in the
crowd. Their ability to recover would also have varied enormously according to how
much crushing they would have sustained, how quickly they were lifted from the crush,
whether or not they were put in the recovery position etc.

With injuries of this kind, the most important thing is to put the victim in the recovery
position, and get an airway into the victim’s mouth as soon as possible.

It is quite possible that someone could survive 2 minutes of intense crushing if they get
 he right medical help quickly. There is no way one could assert categorically that the
deceased died 3 or 4 minutes after the compression began, unless the pressure they
sustained had been unrelieved.

With respect to deaths from traumatic asphyxia, it is impossible to tell from looking at
a dead body how long it took that person to die. If the pressure is intermittent then
death may have occured after some considerable time.

It trained personnel and equipment had been available at the scene of the disaster then
it is quite possible that more could have survived.



DaT : : :                 7        7tt%                              (Dr ,ames BumsX
f\f{& n d \yr   (|
tr "   *



                           DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                    GUY'S HOSPITAL '
                                                (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

   Dr. I.E. WEST, MJB., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., DAIJ.                    UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
   Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., MJB., B.S., M.R.C.Path., D.M.J.          GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                     LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
                                                                     TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000
   (Fax: 071-403 1232)




       SCO:21/92/IEW                                                             20th August 1992


       I have studied the papers that you have submitted to me regarding the
       tragic deaths of these young people.        They include the post mortem
       reports on Paul Carlisle, Gary Church, Ian Glover, Richard Jones, Michael
       David Kelly, Peter Toorxe, Kevin Daniel Williams and Philip Hammond.    I
       l^^e also studied the irelevant extract from the inquest, the overview
       fBrpared by Professor XJsher, the report prepared by Dr. Burns and the
       grounds on which appJl±£2 ±J.ons are to be made to set aside the original
       inquest.

       I have experience         substantial number of deaths from traumatic
       asphyxia, including vicrtims of the Clapham Rail distaster and explosion
       at the Grand Hotel, Brighton.

       It is clear from post mortem appearances that we are dealing with two
       different patterns of injury, namely a number of victims who showed the
       classic appearances of traumatic asphyxia and other where the classic
       signs of traumatic asphyxia were absent or slight.   The difference is,
       I think, relevant in respect of the precise mechanism by which each
       individual died.  It may well be that some confusion has developed over
       the use of the term traumatic asphyxia.

   In the classic sense traumatic asphyxia is taken to imply injuries caused
   by the application of mechanical pressure to the chest and, in some
    i^ktances, the abdomen, so that death results from asphyxiation.     The
   iSKnanism of asphyxiation in the classic case is thought to be twofold.
   First there is a mechanical impedence of the movement of the chest wall
   and diaphragm, thereby severely restricting inspiratory       respiratory
   movements.   The second mechanism and one which accounts for the most
   striking findings found in cases of traumatic asphyxiqa is compression
   of the chest and abdomen resulting in direct compression over the
   superior vena cava thereby causing a sudden and dramatic rise in      the
   pressure within the superior vena cava resulting in engorgement of the
   blood vessels in the head and neck.     It is this displacement of blood
   into the superior vena cava and the failure to drain blood from the
   superior vena cava which accounts for the swelling of the facial features
   and the gross petechial haemorrhages so regularly seen in the face, neck
   and chest above the level of constriction.

  Where no obstruction to the venous circulation occurs then the usual
  signs of asphyxia are present but not those of the classic traumatic
  asphyxial death. The face may be suffused and cyanosed and there may be
  fine petechial haemorrhages, in some instances scanty or even absent. The
  facial features do not appear strikingly swollen and the coarse petechial
  haemorrhages' are not apparent.
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                 GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                             (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

                                                                  UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr.LE.WEST, M.B., Ch-B.. F.R.CJ>ath., D.MJ.
                                                                  GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                              ................                    LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Line                                             TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext
(Fax: 071-403 7292)




 Unfortunately it has become a habit for pathologists to call a l l _such
 deaths traumatic asphyxia and it may well be correct in one sense-in as
 much as trauma to the chest has resulted in the mechanical obstruction^
 of respiration.. In pathological terms there is probably little relevance
 in distinguishing between the two mechanisms as the term merely implies
 that death has resulted from a mechanical obstruction to respiration^
 resulting from pressure being applied to the torso.                       «

 ]j^^:linical terms however there does seem to be a difference in the two
 different types of traumatic asphyxia with a much graver prognosis being
 present in those where there has been evidence of a sudden and acute
 severe rise in the venous pressure in the upper part of the body. In fact
 most of the individuals who suffer from this classic form of traumatic
 asphyxia do not survive if they are severely affected and not rescued
 rapidly.
/where the individual suffers primarily an obstruction to his movements
[of respiration death will occur as the result of hypoxic damage to the
 brain.  This may take a much longer time than in individuals who
 been crushed so impedence of the venous return to the heart occurred.
 Indeed   some  individuals   will  survive   but   remain  permanently
 neurologically damaged as a result of suffering severe anoxic cerebral
 injury.
 It is probable that a period of at least some 10 minutes or so would be
 necessary before one would be able to state categorically that absent
 r » > i r a t o r y movement would lead to death. Consciousness jaay be lost quite
 r l R d l y but where the obstruction has not been complete consciousness may
 take a considerable time to be lost.            I have experience of cases where
 individuals have died through anaesthetic accidents whereby no oxygen was
 being supplied to the lungs whilst they were paralysed during surgery.
 In two of the cases in excess of 10 minutes elapsed before the surgeon
 noticed that the heart action was in the terminal stages of failure.

 It is also known that individuals who have suffered severe hypoxic damage
 may not die immediately.     They may be recovered unconscious with an
 active circulation but the circulation rapidly fails despite all attempts
 at resuscitation. This may well represent concomitant damage to the n®art
 muscle leading to what is in effect a heart attack (anoxic myocardial
 infarction).    Severe hypoxia of several minutes duration would be
 necessary for this to occur.   It is therefore possible that a young man
 who had been asphyxiated by being crushed, would be capable, after being
 removed from danger, of some conscious activity but could still aie as
 a result of hypoxia in the ensuing minutes.
                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                  GUTS HOSPITAL
                                              (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

                                                                   UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr.LE.WEST, M i., Ch-B., F.R.C.Path., D.MJ.
                                                                   GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc.. M J., B.S., M.R.C-Path.. D .M.J.
                                                                   LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Line                                              TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext:
(Fax:071-403 7292)




 Anoxic brain damage could also be aggravated by the failure to maintain
 a patent airway in individuals who were unconscious but still capable of
 respiration when retrieved from the crowd.     The failure to Plac®
 individual in, the recovery position, for instance, could lead to
 subsequent respiratory obstruction.

 Experience from a number of instances where individuals have died from
 t ^ u m a t i c asphyxia has also demonstrated that not all
iflfciave teen effected at the same time.. Some could have ^ e g l g f f e c t e g ^ y j
movement oF~tTTe^crowcl irf~£he ~minirCBg’"af ter ~^Efie~disag^Eer^occurred'. Others
^ , u l d — Save had only partial or rrrcoisplete respiratory obstruction
 initially and then either suffered complete mechanical obstruction of
respiration or died as the result of prolonged incomplete respiratory
 obstruction. This could take many minutes to cause death and it is
 entirely possible that death would occur more than 15 minutes after the
 incident began.
 I have not seen the post mortem photographs and therefore am having to
 rely solely on the description provided in the post mortem reports.  I
 will deal with each case individually.

 1.       Paul Carlisle - He was examined by Professor Usher who describes
          suffusion of the upper body and petechial haemorrhages on the
          forehead,  eyelids and within the conjunctivae.   These would be
          consistent with the classic traumatic asphyxia whereby there has
          been a mechanical obstruction and mechanical interference with the
          circulation.

 2.       Richard Jones - He was examined by Professor Usher who again found
          signs which would be consistent with the classic features of
          traumatic asphyxia.   The petechial haemorrhages noted in his loins
          are probably the result of pressure causing local obstruction to the
          circulation in that area.

 3.      Ian Glover - Again examined by Professor Usher.    The examination
         revealed    changes of asphyxia,   ie the cyanosis and     visceral;
         haemorrhages.    The signs of venous obstruction were_ relatively
         slight and in the form of small petechial haemorrhages in the upper
         eyelids and conjunctiva of the left eye.        There were scan y
         petechiae also found in the larynx.     In my opinion he has died
         primarily as the result of impedence of respiration        and any
          interference with his venous circulation was minimal.

 4.      Peter Tootle - Was examined by Dr. S l a t e r D r . Slater described
         changes in Mr. Tootle which are consistent with a degree of classic
         traumatic asphyxia but I suspect that the main reason for death has
         been compression of the chest resulting in impedence of respiratory
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                               GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                           (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

                                                                UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. I.E. WEST, M i., Ch-B., F.R.CJ*ath., DAIJ.
                                                                GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc„ MJB-, B-S„ M.R.C.Path., D.M.J.
                                                                LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Line                                           TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext:
(Fax:071-403 7292)




          movement. Without the post mortem photographs I am not clear as to
          why Dr. Slater feels that there has been intensive blunt compression
          of the right side of his face.
                        i
 5.       Kevin Williams   -   Was examined by Dr. Slater^ who describes the
          external features of classic traumatic asphyxia with cyanosis of the
          face extending onto t h e chest with numerous petechial and larger
          haemorrhages on the face and neck. He found bilateral iiactures of
          the hyoid bone and of the superior horns of the thyroid cartilage
          on both sides of the larynx.    These appear related t o - S l u m b e r of
          linear abrasions over the front of his neck and on the umlersurface
          of the chin. There appears to have been local pressure-to^iiis neck.
          It was possible that when he was crushed in the crowd, the--front of
          his neck was pushed against some rigid structure.          It is also
          possible that, for instance, he could have been trodden on during
          the panic subsequent to the incident occurring.

         I do not believe it is possible to say how long consciousness would
         have been retained but he certainly^ would not have become
         unconscious between 3 and 5 seconds of being crushed. Again I would
         not agree with Dr. Slater in estimating how long the deceased would
         have survived. Although he has suffered injuries to the neck these
         are by no means invariably fatal and can be seen in those surviving
         strangulation and quite striking signs of classic traumatic asphyxia
         can be seen in individuals who survive crush incidents because they
        kare removed from danger in time to prevent death. As I have already
        Vindicated he could well have survived for a considerable period,
        |twell beyond 3.15 pm.

         He suffered convulsions as the result of anoxic^ brain damage.
         Whether Mr. Brooder saw convulsions or twitching is irrelevant.
         A dead body neither convulses or twitches. Dr. Gompert's point that
         bodies may twitch after brain stem death has taken place is, of
         course, correct and to some degree reflects the dilemma over
         precisely defining death.     One sees it in individuals who are
         maintained on a respirator but whose heart is still functioning.
         One also may see it during the process of dying as the heart is
         stopping and for a very short period after the heart stops.    This
         phenomenon only occurs for a very short period after death unless
         muscles are electrically stimulated. Twitching movements, however,
         suggest that one is much more likely to be dealing with a live bo y
         than with a dead one.

         The evidence of Special Constable Martin is-difficult to refute in
         some respects. Whilst it is possible for an individual examining a
         dead body to mistakenly feel an apparent pulse it is usually
         difficult to be mistaken over whether somebody is making breathing
                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                            (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr. IJE. WEST, MJB., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., D.MJ.                   UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., M 3., B.S., M.R.C.Path., D.MJ.          GUTS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                 LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Line                                            TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext
(Fax:071-403 7292)




          movements or not. I am, of course, making the assumption here that
          when the term breathing is used that we are referring to movements
          of respiration and not merely sounds.    Sounds frequently emanate
          from the >air passages of a recently dead body when it is being
          mov e d .

 6.       Gary Church   -  He was examined by Dr. Slater who found changes
          which would be consistent with classic traumatic asphyxia.. He had

  •       a dislocated right sternoclavicular joint. This type of injury is
          most likely to occur as the result of falling.    It would require
          very severe crush injuries to dislocate the sternoclavicular joint
          and the post mortem findings do not appear to reflect severe local
          pressure on the chest or shoulder area.     It is possible that he
          received this injury as the result of falling over in an attempt to
          escape and has suffered pain and discomfort consequent upon this
          injury.

 7.      Michael David Kelly - He was examined by Dr. John Clark who found
         non specific signs of asphyxia; the external appearances do not show
         evidence of classic traumatic asphyxia. The petechial haemorrhages
         on his right arm I am sure reflect a obstruction to the circulation
         in the arm caused by local pressure.      The internal examination
         revealed no other explanation for death other than it having,
         resulted from anoxia and it is probable here that we are dealing
         with a case where there is no evidence whatsoever of obstruction to
         the large veins in the body but where death has occurred as the
         result of progressive cerebral anoxia resulting from prolonged and

  •      severe compression of the chest.

        JIf Mr Kelly was treated as described by PC Maughan and apparently
         successfully resuscitated then it is possible that he has died as
         the result of hypoxic damage affecting his heart or as the result
         of some other form of respiratory obstruction.   He appears not to
         have been placed in the recovery position and this may well be
         material. There is nothing to indicate that this man was definitely
         dead by 3.15pm;    indeed the evidence available to me suggests
         otherwise.

8.       Philip Hammond   - this young boy does not bear the classic signs
         of traumatic asphyxia although there are generalised asphyxial signs
         and evidence of anoxic damage to the brain.         ^r *. Slater who
         performed the post mortem found extensive haemorrhage in both lungs
         and a laceration of the right lung associated with a fracture of the
         right 2nd rib.   I think the death of this young man is rather more
         complicated than some of the other cases. There is^ certainly
         evidence that he has suffered from asphyxia and there is evidence
         in his brain of anoxic damage.      However, the primary pathology
                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                 GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                             (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

 Dr. I.E. WEST, M 3., C h i . F.R.C.Path., D.MJ.                  UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
 Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., M 3., B.S., M.R.C-Path., DM.J.          GUTS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                  LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
 Direct Telephone Lira                                            TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext
 (Fax: 071-403 7292)




           appears to be in his lungs which were bruised with a laceration of
           the right lung associated with a rib injury.     The rib injury and
           bruising of the adjacent intercostal spaces suggests a localised
           pressure ,or impact in that region of the right chest.  It is likely
           to have been due to localised pressure, probably on the young man's
           back, forcing the right side of his chest against an object causing
           the right sided ribs to be forced inwards towards the spine.        If
           this pressure were maintained then death would undoubtedly occur
           very rapidly but I would have expected to have found s o m e ‘evidence
           of the more classic changes associated with traumatic asphyxia. If,
           however, the pressure is relieved then death from injuries of this
           type may take considerable time to supervene.    Unconsciousness is
           likely to be fairly rapid but death could have taken a substantial
           number of minutes and it would be impossible, from a medical point
           of view, to state that this boy was dead at 3.15 pm.

  In conclusion there is clear evidence that some of the victims have
  suffered severe traumatic asphyxia in the classic sense in which the term
  is employed.           Unconsciousness is likely to have occurred quite rapidly,
  in probably somewhere between 15 and 45 seconds but death would have been
  delayed for a number of minutes.           In those who where severely crushed so
  the venous drainage from the head was impeded then it is probable that
  death would have occurred within 10 minutes of sustain ed pressure
  commencing^.            If the pressure was not continuous suFvivaT^could be for
 If l o n g e r p e r i o d .

   Iiv the individuals who have scanty signs or no signs of traumatic
  c^Plyxia it is much more difficult to predict the survival time.         To
  reduce the survival time to a very short number of minutes would require
  'continuous sustained severe compression of the chest.      Becauseofthe
  nature- of the incident I t i s imposs~rtrTe in many instance to know ^when
  mechanical compression of the chest would have commenced.     I feel it is
  impossible to state purely from the medical point of view that a number
  of the young men that I have indicated above could not been alive at 3.15
  pm. Those dying as the result of anoxic damage consequent to their chests
  being crushed could well have survived for a much longer period only to
J die subsequently from the effects of irreversible anoxia.
                                        1



 Iain Eric West, M.B., Cfi'.B., F.R.CrPatfi., D.M.J.,
 Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
 Director, Department of Forensic Medicine,
 United Medical Schools of Guy's and St. Thomas',
 Guy's Hospital,
 London, SE1 9RT.
           .   '
               '       U     / / T       c      yTjy
                                               jj  /
                                                   k     PoC/c(z.
      The University of Sheffield SA/^~                                   )SSo^ .
      Department of Forensic Pathology                                       Medico-
                                                                        The Medico-Legal Centre,
                                                                                Stre
                                                                        W atery Street
                                                                        Sheffield S3 7ES
      Professor Alan Usher, 0 8 E.Maes.FRc p*th. dmj.
                                                 dmj.|c
                                                      {cim atp*thi      Tel:




                                       HILLSBOROUGH - 15 APRIL 1989

                                  PATHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF THE DISASTER



      My medical qualifications are MB, BS, FRC Path, DMJ (Clin et Path).                I have bee

      in active practice in Forensic Pathology for almost thirty years and have been




• •
      Consultant Pathologist to the Home Office for South Yorkshire and the East

      Midlands for twenty-five of those years.               During that time I have performed mon

      than twenty-six thousand post mortem examinations for Her Majesty's coroners an*

      have taken part in some seven hundred and sixty murder investigations.



      I have been asked by Mr Mervyn JCNES, Assistant Chief Constable of the West

      Midlands Police in charge of the Hillsborough Enquiry Team, to provide a genera]

      overview of the pathological aspects of the Hillsborough disaster in which some

      ninety-five persons were killed on the afternoon of Saturday, 15 April, 1989,

      during a cup semi-final match.
©
      I took part in the investigation of the deaths myself, being present at the

      request of Her Majesty's coroner at Hillsborough Stadium on the evening of 15

      April,. 1989, and at the Medico-Legal Centre on Sunday, 16 April and Monday, 17

      April.       I personally carried out nineteen of the ninety-five post mortems.              The

      other examinations were carried out by teams of pathologists working five or six

      at a time in the mortuary of the Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre at Watery Street

      - ic '.lowing the t> ~-fer of the bodies from the temporary mortuary               the
        gymnasium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.            Initially, I believe,

        some thirteen bodies were taken to the mortuary of the Northern General Hospita

        in Sheffield, but later they were removed from there and brought to the

        Medico-Legal Centre.        As far as I know, the only body autopsied at the Northern

        General Hospital was that of a Lee NICHOL (body No 95), aged 1-4 years, who

        survived, under treatment, until about 2 am on Tuesday, 18 April, and whose bod

        was examined that same day by Dr Shirley HOLT, Consultant Pathologist at the

        Northern General Hospital, Herries Road, Sheffield, S5 7AU             (Tel:

                     The work at- the Medico-Legal Centre was performed by five forensic

        pathologists and four clinical pathologists - all of consultant status.              They

•   •   were:-



          Dr John CLARK      Department of Forensic Medicine, The University, Glasgow,

                 G12 8GQ    Tel: 041 - 330 - 4574

                 (Bodies numbered 11, 16, 1 9 f 2 2 , 2 6 , 2 8 , 36f 41, 43, 46, 53, 58, 65, 71,

                 72, 79, 81, 86, 90 and 92)

          Dr Lloyd DENMARK        Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Leeds,

                 Clinical Sciences Building, St James' University Hospital, Beckett Street,

                 Leeds, LS9 7TF     Tel: 0532 - 431897

                 (Bodies numbered 12, 21, 83 and 89)

         Professor Laurence HENRY         University of Sheffield Medical School, Department

             of Pathology, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield S10 2RX             Tel: 0742 - 766222

                 (Bodies numbered 3 and 75)

         Professor J S P JONES         Department of Pathology-, City Hospital , •Hucknall

             Road, Nottingham, NG5 1PB          Tel: 0602 - 691169

             (Bodies numbered 8, 17, 25, 31, 35, 42, 50, 59, 68, 77, 78, SC              nd 94)

         Dr J R SH0RTLAND         University of Sheffield Medical School, D e p a r ;   \ - of

             Pathology,             Hill Road, Sheffield S10 2RX       Tel 0742 -



                                                      2   -
      (Bodies numbered 1, 10, 33, 56, 61, 74 and 76)
                                                            4


  Dr S SIVALOGANATHAN      Department of Forensic Medicine, University of Leeds,

      Clinical Sciences Building, St James' University Hospital, Beckett Street.

      Leeds, LS9 7TF      Tel: 0532 - 431897

      (Bodies numbered 5, 6, 7, 9,     34 and 54)

  Dr David SLATER      Department of Pathology, Rotherham District General

      Hospital, Moorgate Road, S60     2UD     Tel: Rotherham820000

      (Bodies numbered 14, 20, 2 k ,   27, 29, 39, 40, 45,-47,   48, 49,' 51, 55, 6 k ,

      67, 91 and 93)

  Professor J C E UNDERWOOD      University of Sheffield Medical School,

      Department of Pathology, Beech Hill Road, Sheffield, S10 2RX          Tel: 0742 -

      766222

      (Bodies numbered 15, 38, 57, 60, 69 and 82)

  Professor Alan USHER     Sheffield University Department of Forensic Pathology,

      Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ES         Tel: 0742 -

      738721.(Bodies numbered 2, k , 13, 18, 23, 30, 32, 37, k k , 52, 62, 63, 66,

      70, 73, 84, 85, 87 and 88).



I can only speak in a detailed way of the nineteen examinations which I

personally carried out.    However, having read all ninety-five post mortem

reports^and seen certain statements made by witnesses^ I believe I can speak in

a general way about the pathological conditions which proved fatal in the total

of ninety-five casds which were examined.      The details’of individual cases will

need to be obtained from the pathologists who examined them, which is why their

names and professional addresses, together with the body numbers, have been

provided above.
I




     SEX

     Of the ninety-five de.    -^nty-eight w-. . -ales and seven were female:

     in my view, merely ref   ..... the nature of the occasion.



     AGE                                                          :

    Of the ninety-five who died, the youngest was a 10 year old boy and the eldes'r

    67 year old man.
                                                           J.
      Thirty-eight persons (approximately 40%) were under 20 years of age

      Thirty—nine persons (41%) were between 20 and 29 years of age

      Twelve persons (13%) were between 30 and 39 years of age
I     Three persons (3%) were between 40 and 49 years of age

      One person (1%) was between 50 and 59 years

      Two persons (2%) were between 60 and 69 years old.

      Seventy-seven of the ninety-five (81%) dead were below 30 years of age. •

    Again, I imagine these figures probably reflect the composition of the average

    soccer crowd.



    CAUSE OF DEATH

    In virtually every case, the cause of death was basically compression of the

C   chest wall - against the bodies of the persons immediately around the deceased

    or against fixed structures such as the walls of the stadium and the crash

    barriers.   In the vast majority of the cases, this pressure caused the condition

    of traumatic or crush asphyxia - the two terms are synonymous.



    Asphyxia pathologically means some mechanical obstruction to normal breathing.

    That obstruction may be caused in a variety of ways - by a hand across the nose

    and mouth (suffocation), by a ligature tightened around the neck

    (strangulation), by a bolus of food which sticks in the airways (choking), or by



                                          -   4   -
 a    st:". r --   pressure   u: on   the chest wai:    so   that   it ber            rixed anc.                      move

 in          _ jc    to   enable   t he   person to draw breath.       W..                 i m p e c s . : i \-j cc


 respiration, the result is similar.                   The oxygen in         t he   air cannot be drawn intc

 the lungs and passed into the blood to be transported to the body tissues whicr

 require it for their normal function.                  The deoxygenated blood in the tissues

 turns a dark colour, giving the victim’s complexion a bluish or cyanotic hue.

 The heart begins to fail and the walls of the smallest vessels (capillaries)

 which are under pressure and themselves starved of oxygen, give way and allow

 spurts of red cells to pass into the surrounding tissues where they show as tin

 pin-point haemorrhages (petechiae) in the loose skin around the eyes, on/the

 forehead and behind the ears as well as on many of the internal organs. 1 Thus,

somewhat bloatd cyanotic appearance with'external and internal petechiae arises

If the impediment to breathing is not removed in some four to six minutes -

perhaps less if the victim is struggling and thus using up oxygen at a higher

rate - then the brain cells cease to function, unconsciousness supervenes and

ultimately the vital centres in the hind brain are damaged and die and then lif|

is no longer possible.



Appearances such as these were seen in almost every person who died at

Hillsborough, and in all but nine cases death was attributed solely to trauaati'

(or crush) asphyxia.               In one case (No 76) the force compressing the chest was

(perhaps momentarily) so great that the rear surface of the breast bone almost '

touched the anterior surface of the spine, nipping and splitting the aorta

between them so that the man bled to death internally before he could be

asphyxiated.          In only eight other cases (Nos 3, 27, 29, 48, -69, 9l‘» 93 and 95)                                     .

were factors other than traumatic asphyxia thought to have even contributed to

the death, and in six of these eight, the contributory factor arose out of

trauma to the chest, neck or head.                 In the remaining two cases (3 and 69) only,


                                                               ys>ib         w#?
    --y natural disease was believed to be a sign!          contributory factor in
 the death.



 INHALATION OF VOMIT

 In any form of asphyxia vomiting may occur before death and because of
                                     /

 .unconsciousness and the lack of the protective reflex mechanism, vomitus may be
                                                     t

•aspirated into the lungs, greatly increasing the likelihood of death.     Most

• pathologists regard this vomiting as merely a facet of death from asphyxia and

 though recording it in their post mortem reports, do not dignify it with a

 separate heading in the cause of death.     This is my view and the one I have

 adopted in compiling the simple statistics for this report.     It has, however, tc

be said that for purely mechanical and obvious reasons, vomiting is more likely

 to occur if the stomach is distended with food and/or drink and is subjected to

hard external mechanical compression.      Vomiting is also more likely to occur in

those persons intoxicateo witn alcohol.



OTHER INJURIES

In eighteen cases bones were broken - mostly ribs (thirteen cases), but in

addition the bones and/or cartilages of the larynx (voice box) were fractured in

three cases (47» \^lj and 81) - perhaps suggesting that the throat of these

persons had been trodden on accidentally ie that they were on the ground when

they sustained that injury.



In only two cases were long bones fractured.     In one of these cases (18), both

bones in a woman's forearm were broken and in one (11) a young boy's femur was

broken.   Both injuries could have occurred as the result of accidental

trampling.
 In two cases impacts' to the chest wall were so severe as to cause extensive

) bruising to the underlying lungs, affecting the victim’s ability to breathe and '

 in one of these the ribs were actually fractured and their ends tore the

 underlying lung allowing air to escape from the lung into the chest

 (pneumothorax) and seriously adversely affect the victim’s breathing.



 In one case damage to the nose with subsequent bleeding allowed the inhalation

 of blood into the lungs and this was thought to be a significant factor in the

 death.



 As one would perhaps have suspected, a very high proportion of these bodies bore

 superficial grazes and scratches - evidence of blunt impact against all manner

 of solid objects such as walls, concrete flooring, barriers and fences. These

 injuries are too numerous to be described or interpreted here and details should

 be obtained in each individual case from the pathologist who actually performed

 the post mortem (see above).



 ALCOHOL

 In discussing this matter, my irapres,sion is that the dead came mostly from the

 front (ie near to the pitch) areas of the Leppings Lane end, from amongst

' persons who had arrived early in order to get a good view and thus their blood

 alcohols are not necessarily an indication of the alcoholic status of those who

. arrived later and were pushing to get in at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.



 No blood was taken from^the victim who died last ie no 95, because of the

 interval of time which had passed between the accident and his death.

 No alcohol was found in the bodies of any of the seven female victims.

 Of the refining eighty-seven men and boys, fifty-one (58%) were shown to have
  nor acre than 10 mg% in their blood, which is n e gligee, but fifteen had

  than 80 mg* in their blood, which means they could not legally have driven

  car, and six had upwards of i2Q mg% in their blood.




                                                        *
 EYE HAEMORRHAGES


 I have been asked to comment on the proposition that a distinction can be made

 in this case between those persons who died from traumatic asphyxia standing up

 in the crowd and those dying from the same cause lying down.      The latter, it is

 said, will have petechial haemorrhages in their eyes whilst the former will not

 I have seen a very large nL»ber of cases of traumatic asphyxia and I am certain

 that no such distinction can be made - both groups will tn all probability have

 petechial haemorrhages in their eyes.



GENERAL COMMENT

The Hillsborough disaster occurred between 3 pm and 3.30 pm on Saturday, 15

April, 1989.   By 2 pm on Monday, IT April, ie less than forty-eight hours later,

all ninety-four of the victims who were then dead had been examined post mortem

and had a blood sample taken for analysis, so that their bodies were ready for

release to relatives.   I believe that several factors were responsible for this
feat:-




          excellence of Her Majesty's Coroner's arrangements and organisation.

 2.   The immediate availability of the Football Club's gymnasium, sited just a

          yards from the pitch.   This h u g e ■   was easily compartmentalised

      into three large chambers, each invisi.v- from the others.    One was useo
T


           as a mortuary for temporary body storage, one as a makeshift canteen and

           the third as a reception area for relatives where they were greeted and

           assisted by padres of various denominations, social workers and

           ancillaries.

    3.     The fact that the victims' bodies were not fragmented nor greatly

           disfigured as might have happened in an explosion or an aircraft crash.

           This meant that the initial identification,was possible from polaroid

           photographs taken by the police, which made the identification process

           rapid and meant that relatives were generally required to view only one

          body and were spared the harrowing task of entering the main mortuary and

           searching for their dead.

    A.     The use of the facilities available at the Sheffield Medico-Legal Centre -

           the only building of its kind in the United Kingdom.          This meant that in

          one day it was possible for up to six teams of pathologists and their

           assistants to work simultaneously in excellent conditions with modern

          equipment so that they were able to perform seventy autopsies on Sunday

           alone.   This building was designed with an emergency, facility to deal with

           disaster involving up to one hundred bodies, and when the disaster

           arrived, the building worked well.          Sheffield City Council are to be

          congratulated on their provision of such a building.




         Professor and Head of Depaptat^nt
         Consultant Pathologis      the Home Office




                                           -   9   -
