                                                             31 JAK9(rt-
        d >              U | M ^ ‘

                                                                  JMJ/VSC

                                                                  25 January    1990

     Letters Sent To:                                           s m
oX   Captain E N Taylor
     M G Kennedy
     C Cleugh
                                                                           fVvv_£L
     G Williams QC
     P Birts
     R M W h a l 1ey    Information
     Dr Popper

     CONFIDENTIAL                                      %                               Ut-

                                                                                       IW

                                                ^M.Cyv^«'v            ^3-C       <-^V"
     HILLSBOROUGH INVESTIGATION

     Following recent discussions on the progress of the police investigation
                                                                                             KW
     into the Hillsborough disaster I can now confirm a timetable for the
     submission of the Final Report to the Police Complaints Authority and the
     Director of Public Prosecutions.  The timetable I propose is as follows
                                                                                              1
     Friday 30 March 1990               Submission of the report, together with
                                        the supporting library of material
                                        statements and relevant documents.

     Thursday 12 April 1990             Conference proposed between Director of
                                        Public Prosecutions, Police Complaints
                                        Authority and ourselves to discuss the
                                        proposed interview plan.

     Tuesday 17 April 1990              Commence interviews in Sheffield.  We
                                        would propose to video and audio record
                                        these interviews and would have on hand a
                                        transcription service so that records of
                                        the interview, together with accompanying
                                        tapes can be supplied to the interested
                                        parties as they are completed.

     Friday 4 May 1990                  We would hope to have completed the
                                        interviews by this time.

     Friday 18 May 1990                We would hope that all the transcripts
                                       will have been supplied by this stage, if
                                       not earlier.




                                      Lloyd House, Birmingham
                                   -   2   -




The above timetable is our best assessment at this time.   We hope to
achieve the target dates set, however, they cannot be guaranteed.   If
there is any slippage in the process of the investigation and reporting,
then we will give the earliest indication that we can.   However, we are
confident that the report will be ready by the end of March.   The first
two weeks of April would be a appropriate for interested parties to
reserve time in their diaries for reading the report and supporting
mat erial.

I would be pleased to receive your reaction to the proposed timetable and
also an indication as to whether a conference would be appropriate on
Thursday 12 April 1990.  If it is acceptable I would suggest that we
could meet in London at a venue to be determined at say 1100 hours.
                                            Mr    Yates^/
                                            Mr    Cnllxiot """
                                            Mr    Mcjfiarty
                                            Mr    Boys Smith
                                            Mr    Turney
                                            Mr    BoIcon
                                            Mr    Goddard
                                          \ Mr    Wnalley
                                          ) Mr    Martin
                                             Mr   Mould
                                             Mr   Smith, F8
                                             Mr   Mower
                                             Mr   Godfrey




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT    \

I attach a suggested timetable of the Parliamentary events
leading up to the statement on Monday 29 January.

As there is no time for conventional CFR copies of the Report
to be printed Parliamentary Section will have to produce
copies for use in advance of publication by removing the
outside covers and placing an embargo label over the
publication date (so that details are embargoed until the
Home Secretary stands up).

However, in the absence of proper CFRs Ministers may wish to
consider whether in fact we should issue CFRs to the press in
any numbers at all.  There could be points of order raised
before the Statement about their precise status and also
adverse comment in the House about the pains evidently taken
to inform journalists in advance of Members themselves.
Whatever is decided we should, I suggest, lay the report
before Parliament slightly before CFRs are given to the press.

We have also considered whether we need to make advance copies
of the Report available for parties to the Inquiry, most of
whom are based in Sheffield.  However, in view of the fact
that the contents of the Final Report are less dedicated to
the circumstances of the disaster itself than the interim
report was, we have agreed with the inquiry team that making
courtesy final copies available to these parties on
publication will be perfectly adequate.




                                          J A GILBERT
                                          Parliamentary Clerk

24 January 1990
Private Office
SUGGESTED TIMETABLE FOR STATEMENT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:
FINAL REPORT


25/26 January         S of S Office to circulate draft of
                      statement to No 10, and other Cabinet
                      colleagues, in particular the
                      Lord President, Lord Chancellor,
                      Secretaries of State for Wales,
                      Scotland,. Northern Ireland, DoE, DM and
                      the Chancellor of the Exchequer.


29 January 10 am       Parliamentary Section to telephone the
                       Speaker's Office and Lords Whip's
                       Office to put them on notice for a
                       statement after Questions.

                       S of S Office to telephone Roy
                       Hattersley MP, Sir Jc5nn Wheeler M P ,
                       David Blunkett MP and Denis Howell MP
                       to confirm that»statement will be made.


           12 noon     Parliamentary Section to deliver CFRs
                       of the Report to Mr Hattersley,
                       Mr Blunkett, Mr Howell and
                       Sir John Wheeler on a strict in­
                       confidence basis.  (In order to assist
                       Mr Blunkett we would also provide him
                       with^copa   of Lord Justice Taylor's
                       press release.)


                       Parliamentary Section to arrange for
                       Lords Whip's Office to offer repeat to
                       the Opposition.

                       Parliamentary Section to fax round to
                       Ministerial colleagues final text of
                       statement, if revised over the week­
                       end .. ...

           3.00 pm     Parliamentary Section to deliver copies
                       of the statement to Roy Hattersley MP
                       and Sir John Wheeler M P .

                       Report to be laid before both Houses
                       (arranged by Parliamentary Section).

                       ? Press Office to release a limited
                       number of advance copies to selected
                       correspondents.                   %


           3.30 pm     Statement (repeated in the Lords) with
           (approx)    any Press interviews afterwards.
