      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY 1
      FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                                 FRESHFIELDS
                      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




           WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY (1)




I, GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association; 16 Lancaster

Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows



Personal Details



          I am 43 years of age and have qualified as a

Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and

Administrators.    I am the Chief Executive of the Football

Association Limited ("FA").    I have held that post for three

months, having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in

February 1989.     I was previously Secretary of the Football

League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968

and progressed through the post of Assistant Secretary from

1973 to 1979.     I came to the FA in September 1988 for a

short transitional period before assuming the Post of Chief

Executive on 14 February 1989.
2. The Events of 15 April 1989



I should say something about my personal feelings about the

incident which occurred at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.      I

have a deep and lasting memory of the events of that day.

On behalf of the FA and people in football generally I

should like to express my great regret that such an incident

occurred.   I have offered sincere condolences to various

families of the bereaved and injured.    Needless to say the

events of 15 April 1989 have left a lasting impression upon

me and left me feeling shocked, and distressed. I should

like to say that I feel very deeply indeed for those people

who have been so tragically affected by the incident. Both I

and my wife have not yet fully come to terms with what

happened.



3   .       i attended the Match with Glen Kirton, who is head

of external affairs at the FA.    We were the only officials

"on duty" as it were.    I am informed by Glen Kirton that he

arrived at the ground at 10.35am.    I arrived at about 12.20

p.m. I believe that about 35 Council members were present.

There was a build up of traffic at exit 34 and I left the Ml

Motorway at Junction 35 and went through Ecclesfield,

joining the traffic from Liverpool at a traffic lights

controlled by police officers.    I was not stopped by police

 as I had been the year before.
    4   .        I am informed by Glen Kirton that he contacted

    Graham Mackrell and went to the VIP accommodation, the

    dressing room area and pitch to familiarise himself with the

    layout of the ground.        I met various people and attended a

    lunch hosted by the Sheffield Wednesday directors.



    5   .        I am also informed by Glen Kirton that at 2.40pm

    Graham Mackrell and he were on the perimeter track by the

    player's tunnel.        The ground was nowhere near full at that

    stage.     Graham Mackrell said to Kirton that he thought about

    20,000    people were still outside at that stage.



    6   .        Glen Kirton tells me that he asked Mackrell

    whether the police had asked to delay the kick off.

    Mackrell told him they had not because delaying the kick off

    caused all sorts of organisational problems at the end of

    the game.         I was unaware of this conversation at the time.

    Both Glen Kirton and myself were unaware of any danger to

    spectators at that stage.         If a request for a delay was

    received we would of course approve the recommendation from

    either the Police or the Club.         The 1987 semi-finals at

    Villa Park and Hillsborough were both delayed at the request

        of the Police as was the replay at Old Trafford on
m       7 May 1989.


w
m
m
                                        -3-

m
d
m
      7>           soon after kick-off my attention was diverted from
m     the game and I noticed that fans were scaling the perimeter

      fence at the Leppings Lane end.       I saw a number of people on
m     the running track in front of the stand.       In fact I did not

m     see the incident when Peter Beardsley hit the bar because I

      was looking at the Leppings Lane crowd.       My first thought
« •   was to-question what had happened to cause the problem.

      Hooliganism did not spring to mind.




m     8   .        a Police Officer came over to speak to a linesman

      on my side of the ground.        I should mention that I was
m     sitting in the South Stand so that the Leppings Lane end was

      on my left.        The linesman carried on and did not stop or
m     take any other action.        At 6 minutes past 3pm another

m     policeman walked onto the pitch from behind the goal at the

      Leppings Lane end and then the referee Mr Ray Lewis,

m      suspended play-


m      9   .       After about 15-minutes I went to the Police


m      Control Box with Graham Mackrell and Glen Kirton which is

       situated between the South Stand and the West Stand and

       affords a good view of the terraces in question looking

          directly along the goal— line from the corner of the stadium.
m         Closed circuit television cameras placed at various places


UN        around the ground scan the terraces and areas just outside

          the grounds.

Hi
■I
                                          -4-
Bl
H1181J3
             10.          The Police in the Control Box were apparently

             under the impression that a gate or gates had been forced.

             They told me so and showed me a picture which purported to

             represent this.     They said that the match would have to be

             abandoned because there had been fatalities.      They did not

             know how many.     The Police Commander was present in the

             Control Box together with the Assistant Chief Constable,

             Mr Jackson.     The Police Commander was Chief Superintendent

             David Duckenfield.     We were told that when the gate had been
M1 1 1




             forced there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters.



             11.          About 1 0 -minutes later I convened a meeting of the

             three clubs concerned together with the referee and the

             Police Commander in the main boardroom of the club.      The

             police at that stage were not ruling out a possibility that

             the match would go on having moved slightly away from their
11 J i 1 1




             previous indication to me that it would have to be

             abandoned.     In my view this was because they were probably

             worried as to what would happen if the full extent of the

             situation became known to the supporters still inside the

             ground at that stage.      I imagine they also wanted time for

             the emergency vehicles to have access to the ground.       There

              followed a long period of uncertainty with people from all

              three clubs and the media milling around not knowing what to

              do or what to say as it became apparent that the number of

              fatalities and casualties were higher than previously

              realised.
Ill




                                              -5-
12.          I requested the Police Commander to s t a y .in close

contact with the referee with regard to whether the match

should continue or not.      I do not know whether they had any

further contact.     My concern was to keep administrative

control over what was obviously a very confusing and

difficult situation.



13.          I am informed that the two team managers gave a

tannoyed announcement over the ground's system but I did not

hear this.     Also I did not see what was happening on the

pitch because I was behind the scenes dealing with the

various parties.      At 3.45pm I went back to the directors box

to check that my wife was OK.       I saw a lot of activity on

the pitch but did not stay very long to survey the scene.



14.          Mr Brian Clough, the Manager of Nottingham Forest

sent out word that he wanted to take his players home and I

went into the dressing-room to explain to him and to the

players that although there was a less than 50:50 chance at

that stage of the match being resumed we ought not to say it

was abandoned until the police said so.        This was at about

4pm.   At about 4:25pm I understand that an announcement was

made to the effect that the match had been abandoned.         I

 believe that the crowd were told that there had been a

 serious incident and that people were requested to keep

 their places.
          j had been informed at that stage that there had

been about 50 deaths.   The media had been trying to get an

interview from me for some time and I spoke to BBC

television and radio and gave a short press conference to

the waiting reporters at about 4:40pm.



16-       i understand that throughout this period of

uncertainty the back-room staff, many of them who were young

boys and girls on the staff of Sheffield Wednesday, were

involved in supplying hot water and stretcher facilities.

In my view they gave a super-human performance.



17>        i did see Alan Smith, the Sheffield Wednesday

physiotherapist running up and down the pitch in the middle

 tending to the injured.



 10        when the two teams had departed the Chairman    of

 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Mr McGee,was persuaded

 to leave the ground by his relatives.



 19.       Later that evening I was called to   a meeting of

 the remaining directors of Sheffield Wednesday together with

 the Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell.   I was also

 interviewed subsequently extensively on TV and radio.     Later

 on that evening I met Mr Colin Moynihan the Sports Minister

 and Irving Patnick, M.P. who were touring the ground with

  police officials.
     20.          I have been asked to give my responses to a

     questionnaire provided to me by officers of the West

     Midlands Police Force acting on behalf of the judicial

     Inquiry.     I gave my answers to Chief Superintendent Baker

     and Superintendent Fancott at a meeting at the FA on 9 May


■u   1989 at which the FA's solicitor was also present.

     in this statement deal with those matters raised in the
                                                             I should



     questionnaire which have not already been dealt with in my

     statement.



     21.          I did attend the same fixture last year.

     Dealing with the events of this year:-



             i)   I did not witness any disorder or consumption

                  of alcohol in the streets.



            ii)   I did not see any crowd build up or crushing

                  at the Leppings Lane entrance because I used a

                  different route.



           iii)   I did not view any of the turnstiles at any

                  of the entrances to the grounds.
■


            iv)   I did not witness alcohol being brought into

                  the ground or being consumed inside the grounds.




                                      -8-
Bl
■I
       v)    I did not witness any situation which I
m            thought at the time was of a disorderly nature.


m     vi)    As I have explained I did see the standing

             area in front of the west stand clearly.     I did
rm
             not see any incident in that standing area which

mm           could have contributed to the disaster.


4    vii)    I did not see anything which I believe was

PI           directly concerned with the breaking of a barrier



m    viii)
             in Pen 3.



             I did not see any unusual crowd surge in either
m            Pen 3 or Pen 4.


m            I did not witness the death of any person.

m
             I did not assist any of the deceased or injured.
m
              I did not witness any act by supporters which

              obstructed either the police, stewards or medical

4             persons. However I did see a supporter who

              distracted the police.   A male person ran from the
m             Leppings Lane end to the Nottingham Forest


m             supporters stand at the Kop end and danced in

              front of them.   After a little while he was

m             apprehended in the centre circle.
       xii)    With regard to the question relating    to

               any comment I have about the actions    of the police

               officers at the time of the disaster    I would only

               make one comment of a general nature.        Immediately

               after the disaster everyone was looking to the

               police for direction.   I should say that I did not

               personally receive the reassurances I was looking

                for. No doubt this was because of the commitment

                of the police to the needs of the situation.       For

                instance I asked the senior police officer to keep

p               in touch with the referee but the referee and I

                seemed to be left "in the air" for quite a long

                time. However I should add that I have no

                experience of a similar situation and so have no

                yard stick to measure this comment by.




r
I
       xiii)    I was subjected to verbal abuse on two occasions

                from supporters who were positioned in the stands

                I passed.
j
        xiv)    I did not witness anything that I considered

m               to be a criminal act (apart perhaps from this

                abuse).




m
p^ _                               -10-

14
   xv)     I have never been present at or had

           personal experience of any other football tragedy.

           The only significant thing I can think of

           different from last year's match was that last

           year I was stopped by the police some way from the

           ground and my ticket was checked.     This year I was

           not checked on my journey.   This may have been

           because I took a different route to the ground or

           that officers were stationed at different check

           points.




 Graham Kelly




(31127L)




                               -11-
      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY 2
      FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                                 FRESHFIELDS
                          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY (2)


«            ----------------------------------------------------



    I, GRAHAM KELLY of th£ Football Association,        16 Lancaster

    Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows



    Personal Details



    1   .     I am the Chief Executive of the Football

    Association Limited ("FA").      I have held that post for 3

    months having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in

    February 1989.     I was previously Secretary of the Football

    League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968

    and progressed through the post of assistant secretary from

    1973 to 1979.



    2   .     I have already made a statement about events at

    Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 and have, I hope, made clear

    my feelings about what happened.       In this statement I deal

    with further matters possibly material to the first phase of

    the Inquiry, the functions of the FA and the allocation by

    the FA of the match to Hillsborough.        The FA wish to put in
considerable further evidence to the second phase of the

Inquiry dealing with the wider issues.



The FA



3.        The   FA is a company limited by shares, most of

which are held by representatives of associations with

football clubs in England and Wales.     The share capital

consists of £100 divided into 2,000 shares of 5p each.       A

shareholder is not entitled to any dividend, bonus or

profit.   The FA acts through its Council and Committees.

The Inquiry will have been provided with the FA Handbook

which is amended and re-printed every year and contains

amongst other material the Memorandum, Articles of

Association and Rules of the FA, Standing Orders, Powers and

Duties of Committees, Laws of the Game and Rules of the FA

Cup.



The FA's Activities



4.         The FA is the governing body of the game of

Association Football in England and Wales and has been

established as such since 1863.    It sanctions, directly or

through one or more of its affiliated County Football

Associations,   in excess of of 2,000 leagues and

competitions.   Best known of these is the Football League.

The Football Association is governed by a Council, which is
made up of nominees and elected representatives of various

bodies involved in the game including those Clubs in full

membership of the Football Association, County Football

Associations and the Management Committee of the Football

League.   All major decisions including those involving

policy are made by the Council, which meets approximately 6

times a year.



5.        The FA's major object is to promote the sport of

Association Football in the UK in all its various aspects.

It aims to ensure that the game is played to the highest

possible standards, both in terms of skill and behaviour, by

the greatest number of people and tries at all times to

present the game to the public in the best possible light.

It is concerned with raising'standards through the

organisation of coaching and other educational activities

and encourages early participation by children in football

through grants and loans.



6   .     We organise 6 national competitions,   including the

Football Association Challenge Cup ("FA Cup") and an

annual charity match called the Football Association Charity

Shield Match, played at the beginning of the football year

between the FA Cup Winners and the Football League champions

for the previous year.
7.           The FA is responsible for all arrangements

concerning teams representing England at all levels,

(senior,   "B", under 21, semi-professional and youth),        it is

responsible through the County Football Associations for the

recruitment and promotion of referees and operates a referee

training programme within its coaching activities.        It

enforces the Laws of the Game.     In conjunction with the

Football League it controls the broadcasting of all football

matches in England.



8   .        The main income of the FA derives from revenues

generated from international matches and competitions, from

interests in investments,    from royalties received from the

Pool Promoters Association and other organisations and from

fees paid by broadcasting organisations,    in particular

television.     This income is put back into football.



9.           Because of problems of crowd safety and control

both here and abroad, the FA now employs three experienced

ex-policemen; Sir James Starritt; Mr Leslie Walker and

Mr Ken Evans, as consultants who visit matches thought

likely to cause problems and advise generally.     Mr Evans

attended the 1988 semi-final at Hillsborough between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.     His report is at pages 1

to 3 attached and as can be seen he reported that the tie

went well.     The identical 1989 tie was not regarded as a
"problem1* match and the three consultants were deployed

elsewhere.



The FA Cup



10.          Briefly, the FA Cup is a knock-out competition in

which opposing teams are decided by a draw in every round

and (prior to the semi-final) the matches are played on the

grounds of the teams whose names are drawn first.     The FA

can order a tie to be played elsewhere.     The major teams

(the Football League First and Second Division teams) are

brought into the competition only in the Third Round.        At

later stages there may be smaller "non-League" clubs or

Third or Fourth Division Clubs which have survived.        There

are therefore on occasion ties in which a large established

club must play a very small one on the small club's ground.

The contest between the smaller and larger clubs (with the

chance of the smaller winning on the day) is widely held to

be one of the main attractions of the FA Cup.



11.          The final of the FA Cup is played at Wembley

Stadium in London.     Semi-finals are played on neutral

grounds   (ie not on the ground of either contestant).



12.          Most Cup ties are keenly followed by the fans of

the clubs involved and semi-finals are big occasions in the

football year often with a great demand for tickets.
The Competitions Department at the FA



13.       This Department consists of the Competitions

Secretary, Mr Steve Clark, with one assistant.    He has held

this position for 6 years.    Prior to this Adrian Titcombe

held the position for 10 years and now supervises Mr Clark's

Department, among others.    They liaise closely, and Mr Clark

draws on Mr Titcombe's considerable experience.    I have

spoken to both Adrian Titcombe and Steve Clark and the

information contained in this section is either derived from

my own knowledge or from matters I have learnt from

documents or in my discussions with them.



14.       Mr Clark deals with the mechanics of organisation

of the various FA competitions including the FA Cup, under

the direction of Mr Titcombe, the Chief Executive or the

appropriate Cup Committee.    In the case of the FA Cup

semi-finals this includes establishing which of the clubs

whose grounds are likely to be suitable are willing to stage

a tie and gathering necessary data about those grounds.       He

then liaises as may be necessary with the clubs involved.

He has little involvement once the grounds have been

selected for the two ties.
15.       The staging of an FA Cup semi-final must obviously

take account of all the problems usually associated with

staging a major football match in modern conditions, but

each semi-final tie will or should have been allocated to

the ground of a staging club familiar with such problems.

The main problem in modern times has been the necessity to

segregate rival supporters both at the match and while

coming to and departing from the ground, and this requires

substantial planning aind co-operation with the local police.



16.       The FA, therefore, having chosen two staging clubs

(and clubs for possible replays) does not seek to control

the direct organisation of a semi-final tie (in the sense of

police provision, crowd control, medical support, etc) which

are dealt with     by the staging club.    We are not equipped in

terms of staff     and local knowledge to deal with these

matters, and I think it would be unwise, and would only

cause confusion,    if the FA became involved in them.      We

appoint the match officials and are involved with

arrangements for press and television.        We also print a

booklet entitled "FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Arrangements"

sent to the competing and staging clubs which is up-dated

every year.   A    copy of the booklet sent out for this year's

semi-finals is     attached at pages 4    to 11.
17.          Accordingly the FA is not normally invited to or

involved in planning meetings between the staging club and

the relevant authorities and is not copied with resulting

documents,    for instance Police Operations Orders for the

ties.   We did not attend meetings or receive documents for

Hillsborough this year.     However, after the 1988 semi-final

venue had been chosen as Hillsborough,    for the Liverpool

Nottingham Forest tie,     Mr Titcombe did attend a meeting

there between representatives of Sheffield Wednesday,

Liverpool, Nottingham Forest and the police at which

Liverpool sought unsuccessfully to persuade the police to

reverse their decision on allocation of ends of the ground.

Liverpool's position was that they as the club with greater

support were being allocated fewer tickets because -of •'the-' ~

allocation of ends and other parts of the ground.     The FA

would have been content if this attempt had succeeded.



18.          I should perhaps add that the organisation of the

Cup Final at Wembley Stadium is different because there is

no "staging Club" and the FA is involved in meetings with

the company which owns the stadium and which organises

events there both for Cup Finals and International Matches

(as well as many non-football events).
Ticket Allocation



19.        The purpose of Rule 2 6 (b) of FA Challenge and Cup

Rules, which provides that subject to variation by the FA

each competing club should have 50% of the tickets sold, is

that there should not be a "home ground" atmosphere for one

club from obtaining a markedly greater number of tickets.

In practice the allocation to competing clubs is now

dictated by the need for segregation and the capacity of the

sections of the ground allocated to each club's supporters

on police advice to the staging club, which will be dictated

by the configuration of the stands and terraces. Both at

Hillsborough and at Villa Park this results in an imbalance

of about 4,000 tickets between the two clubs.



20.        Accordingly, the staging clubs consult the police

in the usual way, accept their advice on allocation of ends

and then liaise direct with the competing clubs.    They also

print the tickets for the tie and distribute them to the two

clubs   (after reservation of some tickets for the FA and for

themselves).   The two clubs would then have sold those

tickets.   Unless there is a particular problem which cannot

be resolved the FA is not consulted during this process.
Procedure for Selecting Venue



2 1.      A list of grounds at which semi-finals have been

staged over the last twenty years has been prepared and is

at page 12 attached.    It will be seen that excluding this

year, Hillsborough had staged 13 ties and Villa Park (at

Aston Villa in Birmingham)   12 with 5 replays.    The F.A.

Challenge Cup Committee decides venue.      The Committee

members when deciding the venue in 1989 did have amongst

their papers for another item a sheet which sets out venues

and attendances for the last 1 0 years.



22.       There was an incident at Hillsborough at the 1981

semi-final between Spurs 'arid'Wolves which appears' '€o ''have"

involved a crowd surge with some 38 injuries requiring

medical treatment.     I learned about this but not the detail

of it from Glen Kirton, the Head of External affairs at the

F.A. on Sunday 16 April. I now refer to the letter from the

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to my predecessor

Mr Croker dated 3 June 1981 at pages 13-15 for details.         The

crowd capacity was different then because considerable

changes have been made to the ground between 1981-9 .         This

 incident appeared to have had its origin in fans being able

 to buy tickets allocated to their rivals.      It coincided with

 a campaign by local residents and the local MP to stop
semi-finals being held at Hillsborough.      No semi-finals were

played there for some years.      In 1986, Hillsborough was

selected for a possible semi final replay which was not

needed.    In 1987, Hillsborough appeared convenient for the

semi-final between Leeds United and Coventry City and was

again selected.



23.       Mr Clark followed normal procedure this year.         A

letter in standard form was sent to 13 clubs on

24 February 1989    (pages 16-17) and replies were received

from all of them of which those from the two selected

staging clubs Sheffield Wednesday and Aston Villa are

included at pages 18-21 and are fairly typical.         A list was

compiled ,qn the .basis of. the replies giving- -relevant’detail's-"

of the 13 grounds    (page 22).   We do sometimes get

representations from a club asking to be considered, since

it is a matter of prestige and financial benefit to stage a

semi-final tie.



24.        The draw for the semi-final ties was made on BBC

TV and radio at 7.45am on Monday 20 March 1989.         Liverpool

were drawn to play Nottingham Forest.      Everton were drawn to

play the winners of a replay between Norwich and West Ham.




                                  11
25.      The decision as to venue was to be taken by the FA

Challenge Cup Committee at a meeting at 11.30am on the same

day, there being a sub-committee meeting concerned with

artificial pitches at 11am.



26.       I consider that as Chief Executive I should have a

recommendation for the Committee on matters such as this.       I

had discussed grounds with Mr Titcombe and Mr Clark on the

previous Friday and I again discussed the matter with Mr

Clark after the draw but before the Committee meeting.     We

came to a provisional view that the Everton tie should go to

Villa Park and the Liverpool tie should be a repeat of the

previous year at Hillsborough which had gone well.    I was

told by Mr Clark later that morning of a telephone call made

to him by Mr Peter Robinson of Liverpool FC concerning the

possible selection of Hillsborough for their tie asking for

the Penistone Road End of the ground and not the Leppings

Lane end (ie reversing the allocations for the previous

year, which Liverpool had complained gave them a lesser

allocation of tickets).   As I understood it, Mr.

Robinson was pointing out that we could expect complaints

from Liverpool supporters if they got less tickets for the

second year running when Liverpool were known to have the

larger support, and that this would be raised in the press

and we should realise this.   Mr Clark had telephoned

Mr Mackrell at Sheffield Wednesday to see if the police

would allow allocation of the Penistone Road End to
Liverpool.     Just before 11am the return call from

Mr Mackrell    (who had spoken to the police)       indicated that

the police would require the allocation to remain as last

year in order to avoid a clash of rival supporters

approaching or leaving the ground.           On matters like this the

staging club and the FA are really bound to accept the view

of the police.



27.          we did not feel that Liverpool's point outweighed

the reasons for staging the tie at Hillsborough.           The

factors on which I would place weight in deciding venue, and

which I understand from FA staff and committee members are

considered significant, are as follows (not in any order of

importance):                 ' •*'



 (i)     Geography, not only of the two clubs but of travel

routes   (hooliganism en route can be a problem)



 (ii)    Capacity.    This tie needed a big ground and

 Hillsborough is one of the largest, holding 6,000 more that

 Villa Park.



 (iii)   Experience as a staging club.          Obviously Sheffield

 Wednesday are very experienced.



 (iv)    Security at the ground.          Mr Evans’ report had been

 favourable in the previous year.




                                     13
(v)      Whether the club was playing at home in the League

on the day of the tie and would have to postpone the League

match.   This is not of any great weight, and indeed Aston

Villa , Sheffield Wednesday and Manchester United were all

playing at home.



(vi)     the feeling that it was better not to play a tie in

the home city of one of the competing clubs, eg a tie

involving Liverpool at Everton.       It gives "home advantage"

from a travelling point of view, and the last three

instances (Wolves-Spurs replay at Highbury (Arsenal) in

1981, Liverpool-Manchester United at Goodison Park (Everton)

in 1985 and the same tie replay at Maine Road (Manchester

City in 1985) all involved crowd trouble with, in two of the

ties, damage to local residential areas.



 28.        I knew that Mr Jack Wiseman would attend the

meeting and that the Committee would seek his advice.       He is

 Chairman of the Match and Grounds Committee (since 1980) and

 has great experience.     X am told that his recommendation is

 usually adopted.   I spoke to him a few moments before the

 meeting began at 11.30.     He told me he favoured Villa Park

 and Hillsborough because last year had gone well.      I told

 him about the point raised by Liverpool that they would

 again get less tickets.     He indicated that this did not

 change his view.




                                 14
29.       At 11.30am the Challenge Cap Committee met with

Mr Ernest Brown in the chair.    A copy of relevant parts of

the agenda and Minutes is at pages 23-29. Apart from the

agenda the committee would have no other relevant documents

before them.



30.        It is difficult for me to recollect exactly what

points were raised.    Mr Wiseman’s advice was sought, and

Villa Park was immediately agreed for the Everton tie.       One

member raised Manchester, and on request Mr Clark indicated

that it was the turn of Manchester United of the two

Manchester clubs.     I believe that the main point which

prevailed with members, some of whom I believe had attended

'Hillsborough..jin 19.8S,,was .that the identical tie had bee^v

well handled then.     There was no dissent to allocation of

the tie to Hillsborough and the replay to Old Trafford.

Neither I nor Jack Wiseman mentioned the call from

Mr Robinson in the Committee meeting.



31.        Immediately afterwards Mr Clark was instructed to

contact the clubs involved as soon as possible, which I

understand he did.     He later sent the arrangements booklet

 for 1988/9 in the normal way.    As I have said the FA did not

 participate in any meetings about the arrangements at

 Hillsborough (or Villa Park) and were not copied with

 documents concerning arrangements.




                                 15
32.         Since the tragedy I have heard criticism of the

choice of Hillsborough for the tie.    In view of what has

happened, I do not want to speak of "right" or "wrong"

choices, but I do think that it was natural to allocate the

tie to Hillsborough as a repeat of the previous year.     It is

particularly shocking for me and I believe many people

involved in organising major football matches that this

should have occurred at an all-ticket match on a ground

where so many previous big matches had been played.




      Graham Kelly



(28315L)




                                16
   INDEX



Description



Report of Ken Evans of 10 April
1988


The Football Association
F.A. Challenge Cup 1988-1989
Booklet


F.A. Cup Semi-Final Venues
for last twenty years


Letter dated 3 June 1981
from Chief Constable Brownlow
to E.A. Croker and Reply dated
12 June 1981.


Letter from S.R. Clark to
13 various Football Clubs


Letter dated 2 March 1989
from the Secretary to Aston Villa
Football Club and letter from
the Secretary to Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club of 27 February 1989.


F.A. Challenge Cup Competition
Semi-Final Grounds details.


The Football Assocation Challenge
Cup Committee Agenda for meeting on
20 March 1989 and Minutes of the
Meeting.
                        • 'THE' FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

                            THE F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL
                         NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL
                       PLAYED AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD
                             SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988


INTRODUCTION: A near capacity gate was expected for this attractive semi­
final between two leading teams in the First Division.

GROUND CAPACITY: 54,000
LOCATION OF GROUND: On the A61 Penistone Road North about three miles
North-West of the city centre.
ACCESS TO THE GROUND: Liverpool supporters travelled the M62/M1 to
junction 36 and followed the A61 to the ground. Nottingham supporters
t r a v e l l e d the M1 to junction 34 from where the route was sign posted to the
parking areas. The police used a 'spotter' plane to direct traffic on to
alternative routes if required.
There were three special trains (550 on each) from Liverpool to Wadsley
Bridge Railway Station from where they walked the half mile to the ground
under police supervision. A further 1100 Liverpool supporters travelled on
scheduled services to Sheffield (Midland) from where they were transported
by special 'buses.
There were five special trains (550 on each) from Nottingham to Sheffield
(Midland) from where they were transported by special 'buses.

There were about 75 coaches carrying Liverpool supporters and a similar
number for Nottingham. Many supporters travelled by mini-bus or transit
van.
PARKING: Liverpool coaches parked in Claywheels Lane, a long cul-de-
sac and the overspill was parked on a dual carriageway in Halifax Road.
Nottingham coaches parked in the South Yorkshire Transport Garage, Herries
Road South which is close to the ground with the overspill on a road
nearby.
Transit vans and private motorists were directed to designated areas on
housing estates within    reasonable walking distance of the ground. The
parking areas for each set of supporters were some distance apart.
LAYOUT OF THE STADIUM:   The Main Stand (8877 seats) runs the whole length _
of the South side of the pitch. To the right is the covered Spion Kog (21,000).
Both these areas were allocated to Nottingham supporters.
 The impressive North Stand (9882 seats), the West Stand (4465 seats), the
 West Terrace (4465) and North West Corner Terrace (2906) were allocated to
 Liverpool supporters. Sections of the North and South Stands which were
 adjacent to supporters of the opposing team behind each goal were allocate
 to neutral supporters to minimise possible conflict. The whole of the
 stadium is covered except the North West Corner Terrace.
 ALLOCATION OF SPACE:    This was determined by the direction of travel of the
 supporters.
TURNSTILES: There were 90 turnstiles in operation which were adequate for
this all-ticket game. Most people were in the ground in time for the kick-
off. I saw a trickle of Liverpool supporters entering the West Terrace up
to five minutes after kick-off.
FENCING: Stout narrow gauge fencing to a height of about 10' with inward
facing angled section at the top behind the goal at each-end of the ground.
Even so at the end of the game the jubilant Liverpool supporters managed to
scale the fence to join others who gained access to the pitch from the
North Stand to congratulate their Liverpool heroes. The police had advised
that players should leave the pitch immediately after the final whistle but
a few Liverpool players stayed on the pitch to acknowledge their supporters
and they soon found themselves engulfed by well wishers.
SEGREGATION:   Satisfactory.   I saw no mixing of rival supporters.

POLICE CONTROL ROOM: A separate elevated construction in the Sout.i-
West corner of the ground with a good view of most of the stadium. It is
just big enough for the purpose. It has the usual facilities including a
P.A. override.
C.C.T.V.: A four camera scheme - two colour inside the ground and two
monochrome covering outside including the A61 Penistone Road. After the
game about 5 youths were spotted on C.C.T.V. waiting on a grassed area near
the railway line probably waiting to throw missiles at passing trains.
Police were despatched to investigate - it would have been difficult to
spot them from the road.
CLUB CONTROL ROOM: The club has a separate CCTV control room with 2U
cameras covering all exits and turnstiles and other key areas. They are
also able to monitor the pictures from the Police Control Room. The VDU
for the computer controlled turnstile counter is also in this room. The
operator is a club official but there is a police liaison officer in the
room and there is a regular exchange of information including updating
crowd figures for each section of the ground.
STEWARDS: Ample stewards on duty wearing numbered tabards.        They were
v i s i b l e and active where necessary.

 INTOXICATING LIQUOR: No public bars at the ground. The public houses in
 the city were well patronised by supporters who arrived as early as 10.30 am.
 It was difficult to judge whether high spirits were linked to drink or the
 soecial occasion of a semi-final but walking around outside the ground I
 saw no drink related offences. A few of the arrests inside the ground were
 drink related but there weren't many.
 RACIAL:   One black player in each team - no problems.
 POLICE/CLUB LIAISON: Excellent. The lively and alert club secretary and
 the local police work well together.
 CROWD BEHAVIOUR: It was an entertaining game played in a good spirit
 a l t h o u g h three Liverpool players were booked by the referee in t he first
 half. Crowd behaviour was good. I heard no obscene chanting and both sets
 of supporters concentrated in the main on supporting their team rat er
 taunting the opposition supporters - there was the usual good natured
 banter but nothing to give cause for concern.
                                               - 3 -



     CROWD BEHAVIOUR CONTINUED: About 250 or more Liverpool supporters managed
     to gain access to the pitch after the game despite the presence of a large
     contingent of police in front of the low fenced North Stand and the fencing
     behind the goal. They were joyful and good natured but a sizeable number
     v e n t u r e d towards the opposite end to taunt the Nottingham supporters who
     were slowly leaving the ground. The Nottingham supporters didn't really
     respond - they were too downhearted. The police moved in with a cordon and
     calmly and effectively cleared the pitch. There was no serious disorder or
     conflict and their behaviour was good natured - however it doesn't take
     much to turn a crowd nasty and we could do without them on the playing
     area.
19   ARRESTS; There were only 28 arrests and 41 ejections. There was a
     stabbing incident in a nearby park after the game. My impression was that
     it wasn't a serious injury - a person was arrested for the offence. I
     thougi’-t it was a well planned police operation and well executfi.dj. The
     t o t a l police manpower employed on duties connected with this semi-final was
     47 Insoectors 109 Sergeants and 731 Constables plus chief inspectors and
     above. C h i e f ' s u p e r i n t e n d e n t Brian Birch was in charge but ACC (Ops) Mr Jackson
     was also present in uni form.

20   RREAKDOWN OF ATTENDANCE: Spion Kop 18,564; North Stand 9335; South Stand
     (both sections) 9519; and West Stand and Terraces 15204. Attendance 51,622

21   RESULT:    Nottingham Forest 1 Liverpool 2




     K.J. Evans
     10 April 1988
                    The Football Association
                        COMPETITIONS DEPARTMENT


               FA CHALLENGE CUP




                    SEASON 1988-1989

                         SEMI-FINAL
                     ARRANGEMENTS




16 LANCASTER GATE
LONDON W2
                                           R.H.G.KELLY
Tel: 01-262 4542/b l-402 7151         CHIEF EXECUTIVE
FACSIMILE : 01 4 02 04 8 6
                              TWS TOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

                    FA CHALLENGE CUP COMPETITION   -    SEASON 1988-1989

                            PROVISIONS FOR SEMI-FINAL TIES

TO : COMPETING AMD STAGINC CLUBS

     This booklet should be studied carefully by Competing and Staging Clubs
     In order that the Seal-Final Ties are played without any dlfficultles.

RE : FA CHALLEMCE CUP COMPETITION
     SEASON 1988-1989
     SEMI-FINAL TIES

     SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989 - EICX-OFF 3,00
     EVEXTON    v WEST HAM UNITED or   NORWICH CITYat A*ton Villa      FC
    LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST                      at SheffieldWednesday FC
    Should the following ties result in a draw aftar extra tine, th* raplays
    will be played aa follows:-
    WEST HAM UNITED or NORWICH CITY v EVZRTOtf
     at Aston Villa FC, on Wednesday 18 April 1989, KO 7,45
    NOTTINGHAM FOREST v LIVERPOOL
    at Manchester United FC, on Wednesday 18 April 1989, KO 7,45


    PROVISIONS FOR STAGING CLUBS
    We should be obliged If the following arrangeaenta could be Mid* by
    the Staging Club*. Please read carefully and should any queries arise,
    please contact the Competitions Department for clarification.
    ADMISSION         Seats - £14, £12 A £10 Standing - £6 at Aston Villa FC
                      Seats - £14, £12 A £10 Standing - £6 at Sheffield Wed FC
                      «o reduced prices for children or OAP's.
     BROADCASTING     Provide U C TV if and when they contact your Club, with
                      any eaaentlal facilities they require.
    DOCTORS           Staging Clubs auat arrange for a qualified Medical
                      practitioner to be In attendance at least 30 elrrutes prior
                      to the kick off and throughout the natch. Also ensure that
                      he la afforded reedy acca-ss to the playing area. Coeipetlng
                      Club* aay also require their own Doctor to be In attendance
                      and staging Clubs are asked to co-operata with any special
                      facllltiea required by the competing Cluba. Provision
                      should be eede for a place to D* available on the touch-
                      line for the Doctor.
DRESSING ROOMS J|Hoae" Teaa Dressing Rooa:- Everton ft Liverpool
                Away" Teaa Dressing Rooa:- West Has United or Norwich City
                                              ft Nottlnghaa Forest
E m u TIME     When a Seal-Final Tie has resulted in a draw, an extra half-
               hour a u s t be played. If the maCch Is still a draw, 1C oust
               be replayed on the above daces. When s replayed natch has
               resulted In a draw, an extra half-hour aust be played.
FOOTBALLS       The Football Association will provide Three Match Balls.
                Additional balls for the pre-aatch klck-ebout should be
                provided by the Staging Clubs. The practice balls ere to
                be taken to the respective dressing rooas before the aatch.
                These balls will then be returned to the dressing rooas
                laediately after the "klck-about". During the gaae the
                spare aatch balls will be In the charge of the substitute
                Llnesaan.
GUESTS          Staging Clubs are entitled to invite up to three local
                notabilities plus one guest each. A personal Invitation
                will be extended from this Office upon receipt of the runes
                and addresses froa your Club. Six Directors Box tickets will
                be allocated to your guests and additional tickets/car park
                for attendants/chaufferua should be allocated froa your
                Club's allocation of tickets.
MATCH           Details of th* Match Officials will be provided by
OFFICIALS       Mr. C Downey of the Referees’ Departaent.
                Please ensure that the necesaary fees and expenses
                are paid to the Match Officials in accordance with
                Competition Rule 21 (lv) c.
                Please send the Match Officials a Dressing Rooa pasa each.
                This Office will provide th* Match Officials with B a t c h
                tickets.
MUSICAL         Arrange for the usual entertainment before the B atch and
ENTERTAINMENT   during the Interval.
PAYMENT OF      Staging Clubs will be entitled to 10X of the gross gate
EXPENSES        less vat for the hlr* of .th* ground, plus usual expenses.
PHOTOGRAPHY     Refer all applicants f o r still photography to thia Office
                and infora us of the optlm« nuaber of passea to be
                issued but, in any case, not less than 40. Applicants for
                cinematic filaa should b« r*f*rr*d to this Offlc*. If any
                problems ar* envisaged concerning phocographers obstructing
                •*v*rtlalng boards, please contact Mr G Klrton of this
                Office.
POLICE          Arrang* for an adequate miaber to be provided to control
                the crowds both ins Id* and outsld* th* ground, according
                to your noraal practlc*.
PXSSS           Print and issue *11 tickets to r*pr*s*ntatlv*s of th*
                National and Local Prass and plaas* arrang* for * press
                interview rooa to be available after the Batch.
PftOCXAKCS      Print your usual style of prograam* and arrange for approx
                20 copies to be sent to this Offlc* as soon after the
                Batch aa possible. The editor can apply to th* competing
                Clubs for special copy.
                Pleas* ensure that possible replay ticket arrangeaents are
                printed in the Batch prograam* In a prominent position.
HEJTIESHMEMTS   P ic a s* a r r a n g . f o r Ch. T .a a* *nd H atch O f f i c i a l * to b .
                pro v id ed w ith C«a In Ch. d r .* * l n * roo « *C
                • c c h . c o n c lu s io n o f c h . g u * *nd f ° * c*« O M l c U l j * "d
                tu**C*        to b . p ro v id ed w ith C.« *C h « lf -C l» « *nd d rin k *
                • « . , r -w . • • » . in Ch. b o ard room o r a room o f • * l . l l * r
                n a c u rc Al*o • r r * n g . f o r Ch. Te*«* *nd Match O f f i c i a l *
                £ p r w l d . d w ith .f n d w lc h .* , «cc In Ch. d r .* * ln « r o c . « f c e r
                 C h . «*Cch o r In *noch*r * u l c * b l . ro c * .

                T lc k .C * f o r a d a l s s l o n s h o u ld b . p r l n c d f o r          Ch.    v**1™ *
                r o c ! « n d f o r v a r d . d Co u * f o r d l . C r l b u C l o n .        A ll   r.fr..h « « n c
                ro o as     In c lu d in g   Ch.   b o ard   ro c*   m i* C    b .   » lx * d .

                _      .         out                f o r ch. S.**cm w. would r . q u l r . •
SPECIAL BOXES                 ?o O il               n>*b«r of . . « C . «C tl4, w h ll. in Ch.
                Pt7T l t      hlriS                outon Ch. on.-off ba.l* for Ch. n-cch,
                ca*. of box** hlr*a                o        1#<J co r#caln 50! „ich ch. r..c
                Sc.jlnj Club* will                       h      lpt|i th,,, a*junc*, how.v.r,
                 • h o u f d 'n o C   £   : tn S S d “ 'I n  th . «$o*.        « « C r .c ^ p c .       w h .n
                 S le u u S S * eh.            f . . f o r eh. h l r . o f     Ch. p o u n d .

                 •n*. Pr.n D *p*rt««nc of C h i. Offic. w i l l b . c o n c .c c i n f
 SOCCEX STAB
 SCHEME          S“ f l ^ i 1lo r , C,o ,Pt h r L : c ? h r : y r f f nSny J S b l S - « . •ncount-
                 ssrvfin                                                  «a     k    . (*««.
 tickets         PURCHASE
                  a) Princ *nd l**u. *11 cick.c*.
                    b) Civ. eh. co«p.cinj Club. ch. opportuaicy co purcha*.
                       501 of th. clck.c* «c M c h pric..
                    c) U i . m and *.nd ch. followin* co chi* Offic..
                        400 # 11* (200 from « c h Club'* *lloe*clon)
                          200»112 doo                ;■      ;;      ;;                  „
                           is s 5u = ..............!
                    - srss
                      fro* ch.ir oppon«ic • *lloc*cioo.
                                                        s s^srass*1'

                           i!S V £ £ 5 rt.r.. n ..» pryrtd. J.C.U. of T~r
                           C lu b '* Clck.C r . q u i r M m C , i f *»y.

                     ccw uw w tam

                     Princ *nd r**«rv« ch. followin* clck*c*.-
                     *) Hc m and Vl*lcor* Dlr.ccor*' Box.*. PI.**, prwvid.
                        chi* Offic. wich a •••tin* plan.
                     b)      350 clck*c* n**r co ch. Dir^cor*’ *o* for u*. of
                            Council M«ib.r* *nd gu.sc*.
                CAR PARK
                Print and Issue as follows:-
                a) 60 labels for our us*.
                b) An adequace number for Ch* Competing Clubs.
                DRESSING ROOMS
                Princ and lssu* as follows:-
                a) 20 co *ach Club.
                b)    4 co ch* Macch Officials.
                c)    6 co chis Offlc*.
                RZFRXSHMEMTS
                Print and forward all clckecs Co Chls Offlc*.

Provisions for Coapeclng Clubs
U* should b* obliged If ch* following arrangeaencs could b* B a d e by ch*
coapeclng Club*. Pl**s* r*ad carefully and should you have any queries
pl*as* contact ch* Coapecltlons Departa*nc for clarlflcaclon.
ARRIVAL         Please ensure that both ceaas arrive at Ch* (round ac
                 l*asc 90 alnuces b«for* ch* kick-off.
COLOURS         Picas* confirm your Clubs Colours Co chls Offlc* and ch*
                 Scaglng Club, a* soon as posalblc.
DOCTORS         Staging Club* will ensure chac a qualified medical
                 praccloner Is In actendance and chac h* has access co ch*
                 playing area. How*v*r, If Coap«clng Club* wish for chair
                 own Doccor Co b* In accandanc*, pl*as* Hals* with ch*
                 staging Club If any spaclal arrangements or faclllclas
                 ar* r*^ilr*d.
GUESTS          Competing Club* ar* *nclcl*d to lnvlc* up co chr** local
                 notabllltlas plua on* guasc *ach. A personal Invitation
                will b* extended fro* chls Offlc* upon receipc of ch* names
                a«i addr*ss«s froa your Club. Six Directors Box clck*cs will
                 ba allocated co your gu*scs and addlclonal clck*cs/car park,
                 for acceodancs/chaufferu* should b* allocated froa your
                 Club'a allocaclon of clckacs.
NATCH           Club* will b* lnfor— d of Macch Officials appolnc*d
OTTICIAU        by Mr. C Downey of ch* R*f*r**s' Department.
PROCEEDS        Pl*aa* not* ch* requlr*m*nc of Coap*ciclon Rul* 23(v    - Ix) .
                 v)     In th* Seal-Final * Final Ties & Replay* 5.51 of
                        ch* nec proceeds shall b* allocated for dlscrlbuclon
                        co ch* County Foocball Association* In accordanc*
                        with FA Rul* 16(*). Th* remainder shall b* divided
                        in accordanc* wich ch* pr*s*nc divisions contained
                        in Sections (vi-lx).
                vi)   In the Seal-Final Ties the net proceeds shall be
                      pooled and divided a* follows:-
                        25 per cant to The Football Assoclstlon
                        65 per cant to b« divided equally between the
                           four Club*
                        10 per cent to the Pool
               vil)   In a Snl-Flnel Tie Replay the net proceed* ahull
                      be divided a* follows:-
                        25 per cent to The Football Association
                        32 1/2 per cent to each Club
                        10 per cent to the Pool
               vl11) In the event of both Seal-Final Ties being replayed
                     the net proceeds shall be divided as follows
                        25 per cent to The Football Aasoclstlon
                        65 per cent to be divided equally between the
                           four Club*
                        10 per cent to the Pool
               lx)    in (v), (vi), (vll) and (vill) Clubs staging
                      Seal-Final Ties shall be entitled to a peyaent
                      of 10 per cent of the gross receipts less V.A.T.
SUBSTITUTE     Two substitute players are ellowed to be noalnated and
                used.
TEAM SHEET     Each Club aust exchange Teaa Sheets In the presence of the
                Referee and also provide the Referee with a copy of your
                Teaa together with the naaes of the two noalnated
                substitutes. Teaa Sheets aust be handed In at least
                30 ainuces before the kick-off.
TICKETS        Coapeting Clubs will be allocated the following tickets by
                this Offlee:-
               Director's lex    24 plus 6 for Club Guests.
               Coapllaentary     50 (26 of which for the players,two each)
               Competing Club* are also permitted to a*ke available to
               their playing staff for re-issue at face value to relations
               and friends not aore than 200 purchase tickets.
               Competing Club* Ticket Sales aust be asde slaultaneously
               to ensure supporters are not able to purchase tickets froa
               their opponen t1s allocation.


Provisions for Match Officials

APPOINTMENT    Tbs Referees Departaent of Th* Football Assoclstlon will be
               responsible for the appolntanet of th* Match Offllals and
               will notify the Staglnf and Competing Clubs of the naaes
               and addresses of the Officials in due course. This Office
               will provide two coapllaentary tickets for each Match
               Official.




                                         -s-
   ARRIVAL           Macch Official* (hould miuri chac Chey reporc Co Cha ground
                     ac laaac Two hour* b«fora Cha kick-off.
   EQUIPMENT         Thla Offlca will provide a naw Match Ball    plua two
                     •candby ball*, cha*a ball* Co b* taken Co    cha Macch
                     Official* dr***lng rooai noc laCar Chan 30   alnuc** bafora
                     Cha kick-off. Flag* for Ch* Llne*aen will    b* provided by
                     cha Scaglng Club.
   EXPENSES           The Scaglng Club* will b* re*pon*lb!e for Che paya*nc of
                      fee* and *xp*n*«* Co ch* Macch Official* In accordance
                      wlch Coapatltlon Rul* 21.        ^

   GROUND             Th* Scaglng Club will b* r**pon*lbl* for noclfylng Official*
   DIRECTIONS         of Che locaclon of Che jTound and will al*o *upply dratilng
                      rooa pa**e*.
   REFRESHMENTS       Refre*ha*nc* will b* provided for Ch* Official* In Chair
                      dre**lng rooa ac half-claa and ac Che end of Che aacch by
                      Official* of che Scaglng Club.


  Should you hav* any qucrl** or requlr* any ocher lnfoi •Cion pleaaa do noc
  healcace Co concacc che Coaq>«clcion* Dcparcaanc.




FA CHALLDRC CUT C O M O T T n

U T Annable                                F   J Peart
E A lrown (Chalraan)                       ?   Rushton
W Fox                                      I   A Scholar
W C McKaag                                 S   Sayaour
A D McMullen (Vic* Chalraan of Cornell)    T   W Shlpaan
F A Mlllchlp (Chalraan of Council)         L   Saart
Dr J O ’Hara                               A   L Saleh (Vice Chalraan)
STACING CLUBS
ASTON VIUA
Secretary:     Steve Stride.Villa P.rk, Blr»ln«h«, 86 6HE.
               TEL: 021 327 6604
               TELEX: 334695 VILLA C
               FAX: 021 322 2107
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

Secreeary:     Grahan Mackrell, Hillsborough, Sheffield, S6 1SW
               TEL: 0742 343122
               TELEX: 547709 WEDNES G
               FAX: 0742 337145


COMPETING CLUBS
EVERTON

Secretary:   Jim Greenwood, Coodlson Park, Liverpool, L4 4EL
             TEL: 051 521 2020
             TELEX: 265971 CJJS11
             FAX: 051 523 9666
LIVEXPOOL

Secretary:   Peter Robinson, Anfleld load, Anfleld, Liverpool. U   0TH
             TEL: 051 263 2361
             TELEX: 627661 lfc t
             FAX: 051 260 8813
NORWICH CITY

Secretary:   Andrew Neville, Carrot# load, Norwich, Nil 1JE
             TEL: 0603 612131
             FAX: 0603 665510
NOTTINGHAM FOXEST
Secretary:   Paul White, City Ground, Nottlngiua, NG2 5FJ
             TEL: 0602 822202
             FAX: 0602 455581
WEST HAM UNITES

Secretary:   To* T Inn, Boleyn Ground, Green Street, Upton Park, London E13 9AZ
             TEL: 01 472 2740
             fAX: 01 471 2997


POSSIBLE REPLAY VENUES
MANCHESTER UNITES

Secretary:   K m Hcrrett, Old Trafford, Manchester, Ml6 0XA
             TEL: 061 872 11661
             TELEX: 666564 united g
             FAX: 061 873 7210
THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
TEL: 01 262 4542     01 402 7151
TELEX: 261110
FAX: 01 402 0486




                                   -u-
FA CUP SEMI-FINAL VENUES - LAST TWENTY YEARS


1989 - Hillsborough, Villa Park
1988  - Hillsborough, White Hart Lane
1987 - Hillsborough, Villa Park
1986 - Villa Park, White Hart Lane
1985 - Villa Park, Goodison Park (Maine Road)
1984 - Villa Park, Highbury
1983 - Villa Park, Highbury
1982 - Villa Park, Highbury

•
1981
I98Q
     - Villa Park, Hillsborough (Highbury)
     - Villa Park (Elland Road), Hillsborough (Villa Park,
       Villa Park, Highfield Road)
1979 - Villa Park, Maine Road (Goodiscn Park)
1978 - Highbury, Stamford Bridge
1977 - Hillsborough, Maine Road (Maine Road)
1976 - Stamford Bridge, Hillsborough
1975 - Villa Park (Stamford Bridge), Hillsborough (Maine Road)
1974 - Old Trafford (Villa Park), Hillsborough
1973 - Hillsborough, Maine Road
1972 - Hillsborough, Villa Park (Goodison Park)
1971 - Hillsborough (Villa Park), Old Trafford
1970 - White Hart Lane, Hillsborough (Villa Park, Bumden Park)
1969 - Villa Park, Hillsborough


Sunwary of previous tventy years:

Original Choice as semi-final venue = Hillsborough 13 times,
Villa Park 12, Highbury 4, Maine Road 3, Viiite Hart Lane 3, Old
Stamford Bridge 2, Goodiscn Park I
TtLIfMONI:
SHdWCLO (0742) 7 M 2 2


                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                    SNIG HILL
                                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

J. H. BROWNLOW. Q.P.M.
cm iw c o n s t a » l»                           3 June 1981


The Secretary (E A Croker Esq)
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
02 3LW




Dear Sir

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL        -   11 APRIL 1981

I would refer to the FA Cup Semi-Final match between Wolverhampton
Wanderers Football Club and Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, held at
Hillsborough Stadium, the home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on
Saturday 11 April 1981.

As you will no doubt be aware many similar Semi-Final matches have been
held at this ground without previous problems. The stadium is issued with
a certificate under the provisions of the Safety in Sports Grounds Act 1975.
This limits the total capacity of the ground to 50,174. The area of the
Leppihgs Lane enclosure has a capacity of 10,100.

 Priori to the match itself, difficulties were envisaged because both sets
 of supporters were obliged to use the Ml Motorway. This problem was added
 to when a major road accident occurred on the Ml near to its junction with
 the A38. The problem was exacerbated by a coach breaking down further along
 the motorway, and by extensive road works. This set of circumstances
 caused a large number of spectators, predominantly Tottenham Hotspur fans,
 to be held up on the motorway for some 90 minutes. As you will appreciate
 traffic jams built up and resulted in a sudden influx of large numbers of
 football supporters to the area of the ground at around the time for the
 start of the match when a fairly steady build up of support throughout the
 afternoon could have been anticipated.

 I now wish to outline an aspect of the problem which could have been avoided
 and which should be anticipated for future similar occasions.

 On the day before the Wolverhampton ticket allocation was put on sale to
 the public, Tottenham Hotspur played Coventry City Football Club at Coventry
 in a league match. Many Tottenham Hotspur supporters stayed overnight in
 Coventry and travelled the short distance to Wolverhampton to obtain tickets
 which were at a premium in London. Others also made the journey from London
 to Wolverhampton on the Sunday. This completely defeated the spectator
 policy which is put into effect at these matches and which places the largest
 groups of standing supporters at opposite ends of the ground. Neither of
E A Croker Esq                                             3 June 1981



the two participating Semi-Final clubs saw fit to inform the South
Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football club or the Football
Association about this situation and in that event the mixing of supporters
was not properly catered for. The result of this was that some 400
Tottenham fans had to be removed from the Spion Kop, in the interests
of general safety and public order, and were accomodated in the Leppings
Lane end of the ground, which had been designated for use by Spurs
supporters.

The capacity at the Leppings Lane end is 10,100 and this obviously contains
a safety factor. At a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
gained entry into this part of the ground and were absorbed without any
apparent difficulty.  However, on this date turnstile readings showed
that 10,435 people were admitted to this part of the ground.

A policy of packing spectators occurs at most football grounds where
large crowds are in attendance so that all the available space is utilised.
On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur fans, who had arrived early in the
day and taken up advantageous viewing points, refused to move into the
centre of this enclosure, thereby creating a jamning effect at the
extremeties of it. The late arrivals caused an immediate problem upon
gaining access to the Leppings Lane area because of rushing forward
immediately upon entering after Tottenham Hotspur had scored a goal soon
after kick off. This resulted in a number of crushing injuries on this
terrace including broken arms, legs and crushed ribs. In all, some 38
fans received treatment either at hospital or from the St John Ambulance
representatives present at the game.

 As a result of this the safety gates at the front of the Leppings Lane
 enclosure were opened and spectators at the front were allowed to go
 onto the playing area perimeter track to relieve the pressure within the
 terrace. Due to the problems being created by crushing, my officers also
 refused access to the Leppings,Lane enclosure to spectators waiting to
 get in. In my view no other course of action could have been adopted in
 the interest of public safety.

 During the half time interval my officers attempted to move the spectators
 who were standing or seated within the tracks around onto the normal
 spectator areas. During this manoeuvre some rather foolish youngsters
 did run onto the pitch but the situation was quickly brought under control
 by officers within the ground.

 In conclusion I would add that there were no other incidents either
 inside or outside the ground other than those caused by the circumstances
 I have described. The circumstances I have outlined have been discussed
 at length and will be borne in mind in the planning of future similar
 events. Discussions are to take place with my officers and officials^
 of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club regarding suggestions for obviating
 the problems caused within the Leppings Lane terrace on this occasion.

 Yours faithfully




  Chief aonstable
       e a c /j ::y / i i s o                   12th June, 1931.

Mr. J.H. Erovnlow, Q . P . M . ,
Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Snig ” 111,
Sheffield,
S3 SLY.


Dear Sir,

                       F.A. Cun Seml-?lnal - 11th April 1981


     Thank «ou for your letter dated 3rd June, referring
to the various arrangements for the match at Hillsborough
Stadium.  I note the Doints you make and appreciate the
details that you have provided.

     '•Jith particular reference to the nethod of ticket
allocation an*J. the reason why tickets got into the wrong
hands, I assume that you are suggesting that it would be
far more appropriate if ticket distribution could be
controlled more carefully, preferably to ensure that
both Semi-Finalists carried out public distribution at
the same time, so that no fan can be in two places at
once and secondly, that care should be taken to ensure
that the supporters of the other team are not in the
vacinity of a club when their distribution is
anticipated.

     I will ensure that the latter is brought to the
attention of the appropriate Committee when further
consideration is given to the siting of the Semi-Finals
and the ticket distribution system is considered.'

                                Tours faithfully,




                                  E.A. Croker
                                   Secretary
c.c. Sir James Starritt,
     Mr.H.N. Bird
     Mr. A.R. Titcombe
       Competitions Dept



24 February 1989



Sent To:   Arsenal FC             Manchester United FC
           Aston Villa FC         Nottingham Forest FC
           Birmingham City FC     Sheffield United FC
           Chelsea FC             Sheffield Wednesday FC
           Everton FC             Tottenham Hotspur FC
           Leeds United FC        West Bromwich Albion FC
           Manchester City FC




Dear
FA CHALLENGE CUP COMPETITION
SEASON 1988 - 89
SEMI-FINAL TIES
SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989
As is customary this time of the Season, I am writing to
enquire whether your Club would be interested in staging
an FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Tie on Saturday 15 April
1989 or a replay during the following mid-wefek.

 I would inform you that you may charge 107. of all gross
 gate receipts, less V.A.T., for the hire of the ground.
 I would also like to take this opportunity of clarifying
 the position with regard to Executive Boxes. For Boxes
 leased out for the season, we would require a payment equal
 to the number of seats at top ticket price, while in ch®
 case of Boxes hired out on the °ne-°f£J?as*-s fo7 che “aCch>
 your Club will be entitled to retain 507. with the rest
 being paid into match receipts. These amounts, however, shou
 not be included in the gross gate receipts when calculating
  the fee for the hire of the ground.



 continued
In the event of your Club playing in a Semi-Final Tie, would
you still be prepared to take the other Semi-Final Tie on
your ground the same day, bearing in mind the administrative
cost involved?
Please indicate if your Club has the necessary insurance cover
for matches of this nature. Clubs should also note the
requirements of Challenge Cup Rule 26(b) whereby the two
competing Clubs shall be entitled to 501 of the tickets for
sale. The Association in its absolute discretion may vary these
allocations.
Details of spectator segregation should be provided together
with details of the present ground capacity, number of seats
and standing places also indicating if safety fencing is
provided around the pitch.
Clubs should also note that any special areas such as Executive
Vice-President, family or any similar seated or standing area
cannot be retained by the staging Club. All parts of the ground
must be allocated entirely for the two competing Clubs with
the exception of Directors Box, which will be controlled by thi
Office.
An early reply would be appreciated as the Challenge Cup
Committee will be selecting the venues at their meeting to be
held on Monday 20 March 1989 and it is essential for the
above information to be prepared for the Committee prior to
the meeting.

Yours sincerely




S R Clark
Competitions Secretary
                               *
                                                                        A S T O N VtLLA
    The Secretary                                                       F O O T B A L L C L U B PLC
                                                                        - •si.-.-nO".-
                                                                        Villa Park. Birmingham B6 6H £




                     AstonVilla
                                                                        Telephone       021 -3 2 7 6 6 0 4
                                                                        Telex: 3 3 4 6 9 5 VILLA G
                                                                        Fax N o .: 0 2 1 - 3 2 2 2 1 0 7


                                                                                                             s
     SMS/PAS

     2nd March 1989



     The Football Association,
     16 Lancaster Gate,
     London W2 3LW.




      Dear Sir,

      FA Challenge Cup Competition
      Season 1988/89 - S«»i-Final Tie*
      Saturday 15th April 1989________ _
      In response to your letter of 24th February 1989, I confirm
      we would be honoured to stage an FA Cup Semi-Final Tie at
      Villa Park on either Saturday 15th April 1989 and/or a
      replay during the following mid-week.

          I note your comments regarding Executive Boxes, family
          areas, etc. and set out below our present capacities.  I
          can also confirm that there are fences preventing_spectators
          gaining access to the pitch in front of all standing areas
          and along approximately half of the Witton Lane Stand.

          The allocation of each club would be as follows, with Club A
          normally being the Southern club and Club B the Northern club.


                                Club A                         Club B


                                 9, 318                          8,871
               Seats
                                11,300                          16,800
               Standing

                                20,618                          25,671




                                                                        (Continued               .••)




 Chfttmin                                         iff
Dovgiat                                Q t j t u m Tayk*   St«v*nSt*>
                                                                                                             /

                                   -   18-
                                        -2-




     Ground Capacity

           Seats           1 8 ,1 8 9
           Standing        2 8 ,1 0 0
           Directors Box        143
           Executive Box        4 76

                           4 6 ,9 0 8



     Yours faithfully,




     S.M. Stride
ff   SECRETARY
                                 Sheffield
                                Wednesday
                                        "botballClubpIc
                                    Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
                      Telephone: (0742) 343122 Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                            Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145
Our Ref:        GHM/JB/F3/2982

27th February 1989

Mr. S.R. Clark,
Competitions Secretary,
The Football Association,
16 Lancaster Gate,
London.

Dear Steve,

Thank you for your letter dated 24th February 1989.

I would confirm that Sheffield Wednesday would be honoured to host an F.A.
Challenge cup Semi-Final tie on Saturday 15th April or a replay during the
following mid-week.

The requirements of Challenge Cup Rule 26(b) are noted and I confirm that our
insurance cover extends to sue* matches.

The capacity of Hillsborough is 54,101, safety fences are in front of the
standing spectators only. A breakdown of this capacity is as follows:-

Seating

North Stand       _                             9702
South Stand covered                             5524
South Stand uncovered                           3310
West Stand                                      4465
                                                                            23001

Standing

Spion Kop                                     21000
Leppings Lane                                 10000
                                                                            31100

                                                                            54101

                                                                       continued



                                                           -a© "
                      Chairman: H. E. McGee, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell. F C.C.A. Manager: P. Eustace
 Directors: M. Sheppard. J.P.. F.C.A. (Vice-Chairman). S. L. Spetght. O.B.E.. C. Woodward. K. T. Addy. E. Barron. G. K. HuMey.
                                                                          diva                                 ___       ___
In addition we have a Disabled Enclosure which holds 60 persons.

A diagram of the ground is enclosed for your reference. If I can be of any
further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely,




  icretary




                                   -At-
     FA CHALLENGE CUP COMPETITION - SEASON 1988-1989 - SEMI-FINAL G R O U N D S


                                   SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989


                          YES/NO     HOME/AWAY         CAPACITY   SEATS    STANDING


1. ARSENAL                  NO       HOME(New)         57,000     17,250   39,750


2. ASTON VILLA              YES      HOME(S'ton) 46,908           18,808   28,100


3. BIRMINGHAM CITY          YES      AWAY(Barns) 38,408            8,660   29,748


4.<' ^ : l s e a            YES      AWAY(Leic)        39,127     19,427   19,700


5. EVERTON                  YES      HOME(Chari) 49,618           26,118   23,500

                       YES FOR
6. LEEDS UNITED         REPLAY       HOME(Brigh) 40,176           15,081   25,095


7. MANCHESTER CITY          YES      AWAY (B 'b u m )49,2 57      24,302   24,955


8. MANCHESTER UNITED        YES      HOME(Derby)       54,719     24,020   30,702

                     YES FOR
9. NOTTINGHAM FOREST REPLAY          HO M E (W H U )   35,417     14,561   20,856


10. SHEFFIELD UNITED        YES      AWAY(N'ham) 44,010           13,597   30,413


11. SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY YES          HOME(Norw)        54,101     23,001   31,100


U.    TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR     YES      AWAY ( W don) 33,887         15,717   18,650


13. WEST BROMWICH ALB       YES      HOME (Plymo) 35,296          11,596   23,700




Competitions Department(March 89)




                                              -a*-
     THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



     CHALLENGE CUP COMMITTEE




         MEETING TO BE HELD
  at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2
on Monday 20 March 1989 at 11.30 a




            A G E N D A
              THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


              CHALLENGE CUP COMMITTEE


                 MEETING TO BE HELD
          at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2
        on Monday 20 March 1989 at 11.30 a.m.




                     A G E N D A
                     ***★★★**★★*




MINUTES To confirm the Minutes of the Meetings held on
  9 January 1989.                      (Section A)



RESULTS To receive a report of the Fourth, Fifth and
  Sixth Round Proper results.



REFEREES' MARKS To receive a report of the marks awarded
  to Referees by Clubs' and Assessors' for the Third,
  Fourth and Fifth Round Proper ties.   (Section B)



FIFTH ROUND PROPER DRAW To receive a report that the draw
  for the Fifth Round Proper had been made on Monday 30
  January 1989 at the Office by Messrs E A Brown and F A
  Millichip and that the draw had been broadcast live on
  BBC Television Breakfast Time and BBC Radio 2 at 7.45 a.m.
  The Match Officials had subsequently been appointed by
  Mr M M Armstrong and Major A Dobson of the Referees
  Committee. Mr A L Smith was also present as the reserve
  member.


 SIXTH ROUND PROPER DRAW To receive a report c£acjche.^raw
   for the Sixth Round Proper had been made on Monday zu
   February 1989 at the Office by Messrs E A Brown and F A
   Millichip and that the draw had been broadcast live on
   BBC Television Breakfast Time and BBC Radio 2 at 7.'45 a.m.
   The Match Officials had subsequently been appointed by
   Messrs G W Daulby and L A M Mackay of the RefeIJ**
   Committee. Mr W T Annable was also present as the reserve
   member.
LIVE TELEVISING OF CHALLENGE CUP TIES To receive a report
  that the following ties had been broadcast live on
  BBC Television.

  Fourth Round Proper - Sunday 29 January 1989

  Millwall v Liverpool

  Fifth Round Proper - Sunday 19 February 1989

  Watford v Nottingham Forest

  Sixth Round Proper - Sunday 19 March 1989

  Everton v Wimbledon


SEMI-FINAL TIES - 15 APRIL 1989
  a) To receive a report that the draw had been made earlier
     In the morning at the Office and that the draw had been
     broadcast live on BBC Television Breakfast Time and BBC
     Radio 2 at 7.45 a.m.

  b) To select the venues.

  c) To select the venues for possible replays.

  d) To appoint the Members to attend.


SEMI-FINAL TIES - REFEREE APPOINTMENT   To receive the
  following Minute of the Referee's Committee.

     FA CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL APPOINTMENTS
     Minute 59 - 21 February 1989

      It was agreed that the FA Challenge Cup Committee be
      requested to reconsider existing policy regarding the
      appointment of Semi-Final match officials, and allow
      th* same referee to be re-appointed to a possible
      replay.

 MATCH OFFICIALS   To appoint the Match Officials for:-

   a) Semi-Final Ties

   b) Final Tie

 FINAL TIE REPLAY To receive a report that a possible replay
   has been arranged for Thursday 25 May 1989 to be played
   at Wembley Stadium, KO 7.30 p.m*
11   COMPETITION RULES.- SEASON 1989-90

       a) Minute 23 (b) - 9 January 1989

          To agree the following alteration to Competition
          Rule 27.

          RULE 27


          Present Rule                     Proposed Rule
          It is the responsibility of      It is responsibility of
          the Home or Host Club in         the Home or Host Club in
          the Competition Proper to        the Competition Proper to
          ensure that a qualified          ensure that a qualified
          medical practitioner is in       medical practitioner is in
          attendance throughout the        attendance at least 30
          match.                           minutes prior to kick-off
                                           and throughout the match.
       b) Minute 33 (b) - 9 January 1989

          To further discuss any possible alteration to
          Competition Rule 23 (vi) and (viii). (Section C)




12   ANY OTHER BUSINESS




 Referees* Committee Representatives:-


 A W Brett and G W Daulby


 Match & Grounds Representative:-


 J F Wiseman
                     THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION           -      ^
                                                               V.
                     CHALLENGE CUP COMMITTEE


                      MINUTES OF A MEETING
              held at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2
                     on Monday 20 March 1989

Present:   Messrs E A Brown (in the Chair), W T Annable, W Fox,
           A D McMullen, W G McKeag, Dr J O'Hara, Messrs F J Peart
           P Rushton, I A Scholar, S Seymour, L Smart, and A L Smith

           Mr J F Wiseman represented the Match & Grounds Committee.

           Messrs A W Brett and G W Daulby represented the
           Referees Committee.

           Messrs R H G Kelly, S R Clark, C Downey, G Kirton
           and Miss S J Ball.
An apology for absence was received from Mr T W Shipman.

(Items marked by * contain a recommendation)



41    MINUTES The Minutes of the Meeting held on 9 January
         1989 were confirmed.
42    SUB-COMMITTEE ON ARTIFICIAL PITCHES The Committee
         received And confirmed the recommendation of the
         Challenge Cup Sub-Committee Meeting, held earlier in
         the morning, on Artificial Pitches, that a survey
         should b« cotmnissioned to ascertain spectator opinion
         on the subject. It was noted that this would involve
         costs in the region of £4,000.

43    RESULTS Reports were received of the Fourth, Fifth, and
         Sixth Round Proper results.

 44   REFEREES' MARKS A report was received of the Clubs' and
         Assessors' marks for Referees for the Third, Fourth,
         and Fifth Round Proper Ties.
 45   FIFTH ROUND PROPER DRAW A report was received that the
         draw for the Fifth Round Proper had been made on Monday
         30 January 1989 at the Office by Messrs E A Brown and F
         Millichip and that the draw had                        a.m.
         BBC Television Breakfast Tine and BBC Radio 2 at 7.
         The Match Officials had subsequently been appointed oy
         Mr M M Armstrong and Major A Dobson of the R®£ere®*
         Committee. Mr A L Smith was also present as the reserve
         member.
 46    SIXTH ROUND PROPER DRAW A report was                           d W
         for the Sixth Round Proper had been made .      on Monday 20
         February 1989 at the Office by Messrs E A Brown and F A
         Millichip and that the draw had                      at 7 45 a m.
         BBC Television Breakfast Time and BBC Radio 2 at 7.
         t v - u-► n**.! ,.< ■! « v»arf «ubseauently been appointed by -A 7
 Messrs G W Daulby and L A M Mackay of Che Referees'
 Committee. Mr W T Annable was also present as the reserve
 member.

LIVE TELEVISING OF CHALLENGE CUP TIES A report was received
  that the following ties had been broadcast live on BBC
  Television.

  Fourth Round Proper - Sunday 29 January 1989

  Millwall v Liverpool

  Fifth Round Proper - Sunday 19 February 1989

  Watford v Nottingham Forest

  Sixth Round Proper - Sunday 19 March 1989

  Everton v Wimbledon


SEMI-FINAL TIES - 15 APRIL 1989

  a) A report was received tht the draw had been made earlier
     in the morning at the Office, by Messrs F A Millichip
     and E A Brown, and that the draw had been broadcast live
     on BBC Television Breakfast Time and BBC Radio 2 at 7.45am
     Mr L Smart was also present as the Reserve Member.

  b) The Kick-Off times were confirmed.

  c) The venues were selected as follows:-

     (i)   Everton v West Ham United or Norwich City at Aston
           Villa FC with a possible replay also at Aston Villa
           FC, on Wednesday 19 April 1989, kick-off 7,45pm.

      (ii) Liverpool v Nottingham Forest at Sheffield Wednesday
           FC with a possible replay at Manchester United FC,
           on Wednesday 19 April 1989, kick-off 7,45pm.

  d) Tht Members of the Committee were appointed to attend the
     tits, and it was agreed that members of the Committee
     would b« able to submit expense claims for attending
     Seal-Final ties.


 SEMI-FINAL TIES - REFEREE APPOINTMENT The following Minute
   of the Referees' Committee was received.

      FA CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL APPOINTMENTS
      Minute 59 - 21 February 1989
      It was agreed that the FA Challenge Cup Committee be
    - requested to reconsider existing policy regarding the
      appointment of Semi-Final match officials, a n d allow
      tne same referee to be re-appointed to a possible
      replay.
   The Committee agreed with the recommendation of the Referees'
   Committee to allow the same Referee to be re-appointed for
   replays in Semi-Final ties.


 MATCH OFFICIALS
   a) The Match Officials for the Semi-Final ties were
      appointed.
   v) t - ....       f n   i    rh# aooointment of the Match   -AS
            Officials for Che Final Tie Co the Chairman, the
            Chairman of the Referees' Committee and the Office.

 51    FINAL TIE REPLAY Ic was agreed that a possible replay
         would be played on Thursday 25 May 1989 at Wembley
         Stadium, KO 7,30pm.


*52    COMPETITION RULES

         a) It was decided that the following Rules should be
            amended.

            RULE 27


            Present Rule                     Proposed Rule

            It is the responsibility of      It is the responsibility
            the Home or Host Club in         of the Home or Host Club
            the Competition Proper to        in the Competition Proper
            ensure that a qualified          to ensure that a qualified
            medical practitioner is in       medical practitioner is in
            attendance throughout the        attendance at least 30
            match.                           minutes prior to kick-off
                                             and throughout the match,
                                             and that he is afforded
                                             ready access to the playing
                                             area.

            RULE 21(iv)(c)


            Present Rule                     Proposed Rule

            The Competition Proper.          The Competition Proper
            All rounds prior to tht          All rounds prior to the
            Final Tit:                       Final Tie:
            R t f t r t t , £60,00;          Referee, £60,00;
            Lintsatn £30,00 each             Linesmen £30,00 each
                                             Reserve Official, £15,00

         b) Minutt 33 (b) - 9 January 1989
            Pos«iblt alterations to Competition Rule 23(vi) and (viii)
            were discussed, as further information was available for
            the Committee to consider. It was agreed not to alter the
            Rules to allow tht net proceeds in Semi-Final ties to be
          - divided amongst the two Clubs competing in an individual
            tie, and not pooled as at present.

  53    COMPETITION RULE 8(111) A report was received that Che
          following Clubs are in breach of Competition Rule BliiiJ.
          It was agreed that each Club be fined the sum of £50,00.

          Caernarfon Town     Whyteleafe
      HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY 2
      FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                                                                                                                      ::

  ;   ’


                  :           i ;:k : :r ; -         j. i                                                                     ■■

                  13®c
                   - ‘
                       ■=■.: S, w■" SfiS lI®
                                         ■ . .
                                               s:- :■'                                                                                 ;
                                                                               ■          '                           :
                                                                  t:v:
                          Vi■?■■•
                                :\. ■•   ■     ■•.                   ■■■■:.    .■   ' ■.■V .   ■ ■ < ■ ■ ■ ■' ’


                        iv-      v^ri:                 I'i;**-5
                                                              : '’
                                                                 i ^-V1
                                                                                                      ,

                                                                                    FRESHFIELDS

                                                                                                                          ■


                                                                              •■;                      , . •. ”, ;
           •   '-i •'                                       . - ■ ' - •{;■/
                                                                                                     11 V
                                                                                          : ; ; U h r ■ • ' Y5‘ > '           ,    '       •
                       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




              WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY (2)




I, GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association,    16 Lancaster

Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows



Personal Details



1.        I am the Chief Executive of the Football

Association Limited (''FA") .   I have held that post for 3

months having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in

February 1989.     I was previously Secretary of the Football

League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968

and progressed through the post of assistant secretary from

1973 to 1979.



2.        I   have already made a statement about events at

Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 and have, I hope, made clear

my feelings about what happened.     In this statement I deal

with further matters possibly material to the first phase of

the Inquiry, the functions of the FA and the allocation by

the FA of the match to Hillsborough.    The FA wish to put in
considerable further evidence to the second phase of the

Inquiry dealing with the wider issues.



The FA



3.         The FA is   a company limited by shares, most of

which are held by representatives of associations with

football clubs in England and Wales.     The share capital

consists of £100 divided into 2,000 shares of 5p each.       A

shareholder is not entitled to any dividend, bonus or

profit.   The FA acts through its Council and Committees.

The Inquiry will have been provided with the FA Handbook

which is amended and re-printed every year and contains

amongst other material the Memorandum, Articles of

Association and Rules of the FA, Standing Orders, Powers and

Duties of Committees, Laws of the Game and Rules of the FA

Cup.



The FA's Activities



4.        The FA is the governing body of the game of

Association Football in England and Wales and has been

established as such since 1863.    It sanctions, directly or

through one or more of its affiliated County Football

Associations,   in excess of of 2,000 leagues and

competitions.   Best known of these is the Football League.

The Football Association is governed by a Council, which is
Jjp-aifiWSui.'.




m
                  made up of nominees and elected representatives of various

m                 bodies involved in the game including those Clubs in full

                  membership of the Football Association, County Football
k                 Associations and the Management Committee of the Football

m                 League.   All major decisions including those involving

                  policy are made by the Council, which meets approximately 6

m                 times a year.


m                 5.        The FA's major object is to promote the sport of

                  Association Football in the UK in all its various aspects.

                  It aims to ensure that the game is played to the highest

m                 possible standards, both in terms of skill and behaviour, by

                  the greatest number of people and tries at all times to
m                 present the game to the public in the best possible light.

                  It is concerned with raising standards through the

                  organisation of coaching and other educational activities

U                 and encourages early participation by children in football

                  through grants and loans.

H
                  6.        We organise 6 national competitions, including the
 r     f
                  Football Association Challenge Cup ("FA Cup") and an


 H                annual charity match called the Football Association Charity

                  Shield Match, played at the beginning of the football year

 M                between the FA Cup Winners and the Football League champions

                  for the previous year.




 U

 f                                              3

 w
 frtf
7.           The FA is responsible for all arrangements

concerning teams representing England at all levels,

(senior, "B", under 21, semi-professional and youth).          It is

responsible through the County Football Associations for the

recruitment and promotion of referees and operates a referee

training programme within its coaching activities.        It

enforces the Laws of the Game.       In conjunction with the

Football League it controls the broadcasting of all football

matches in England.



8.           The main income of the FA derives from revenues

generated from international matches and competitions, from

interests in investments, from royalties received from the

Pool Promoters Association and other organisations and from

fees paid by broadcasting organisations,      in particular

television.     This income is put back into football.



9.           Because of problems of crowd safety and control

both here and abroad, the FA now employs three experienced

ex-policemen; Sir James Starritt; Mr Leslie Walker and

Mr Ken Evans, as consultants who visit matches thought

likely to cause problems and advise generally.      Mr Evans

attended the 1988 semi-final at Hillsborough between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.      His report is at pages 1

to 3 attached and as can be seen he reported that the tie

went well.     The identical 1989 tie was not regarded as a




                                 4
"problem" match and the three consultants were deployed

elsewhere.



The FA Cup



10.          Briefly, the FA Cup is a knock-out competition in

which opposing teams are decided by a draw in every round

and (prior to the semi-final) the matches are played on the

grounds of the teams whose names are drawn first.     The FA

can order a tie to be played elsewhere.     The major teams

(the Football League First and Second Division teams)       are

brought into the competition only in the Third Round.        At

later stages there may be smaller "non-League" clubs or

Third or Fourth Division Clubs which have survived.        There

are therefore on occasion ties in which a large established

club must play a very small one on the small club's ground.

The contest between the smaller and larger clubs (with the

chance of the smaller winning on the day) is widely held to

be one of the main attractions of the FA Cup.



11*          The final of the FA Cup is played at Wembley

Stadium in London.     Semi-finals are played on neutral

grounds (ie not on the ground of either contestant).



12.      Most Cup ties are keenly followed by the fans of

the clubs involved and semi-finals are big occasions in the

football year often with a great demand for tickets.




                                 5
The Competitions Department at the FA



13.       This Department consists of the Competitions

Secretary, Mr Steve Clark, with one assistant.    He has held

this position for 6 years.    Prior to this Adrian Titcombe

held the position for 10 years and now supervises Mr Clark's

Department, among others.    They liaise closely, and Mr Clark

draws on Mr Titcombe's considerable experience.    I have

spoken to both Adrian Titcombe and Steve Clark and the

information contained in this section is either derived from

my own knowledge or from matters I have learnt from

documents or in my discussions with them.



14.       Mr Clark deals with the mechanics of organisation

of the various FA competitions including the FA Cup, under

the direction of Mr Titcombe, the Chief Executive or the

appropriate Cup Committee.   In the case of the FA Cup

semi-finals this includes establishing which of the clubs

whose grounds are likely to be suitable are willing to stage

a tie and gathering necessary data about those grounds.     He

then liaises as may be necessary with the clubs involved.

He has little involvement once the grounds have been

selected for the two ties.




                               6
15.       The staging of an FA Cup semi-final must obviously

take account of all the problems usually associated with

staging a major football match in modern conditions, but

each semi-final tie will or should have been allocated to

the ground of a staging club familiar with such problems.

The main problem in modern times has been the necessity to

segregate rival supporters both at the match and while

coming to and departing from the ground, and this requires

substantial planning and co-operation with the local police.



16.       The FA, therefore, having chosen two staging clubs

(and clubs for possible replays) does not seek to control

the direct organisation of a semi-final tie (in the sense of

police provision, crowd control, medical support, etc) which

are dealt with by the staging club.    We are   not equipped in

terms of staff and local knowledge to deal with    these

matters, and I think it would be unwise, and would only

cause confusion,   if the FA became involved in them.      We

appoint the match officials and are involved with

arrangements for press and television.    We also print a

booklet entitled "FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Arrangements"

sent to the competing and staging clubs which is up-dated

every year.   A copy of the booklet   sent out for this year's

semi-finals is attached at pages 4 to 11.




                               7
17.          Accordingly the FA is not normally invited to or

involved in planning meetings between the staging club and

the relevant authorities and is not copied with resulting

documents,    for instance Police Operations Orders for the

ties.   We did not attend meetings or receive documents for

Hillsborough this year.     However, after the 1988 semi-final

venue had been chosen as Hillsborough,    for the Liverpool

Nottingham Forest tie,    Mr Titcombe did attend a meeting

there between representatives of Sheffield Wednesday,

Liverpool, Nottingham Forest and the police at which

Liverpool sought unsuccessfully to persuade the police to

reverse their decision on allocation of ends of the ground.

Liverpool's position was that they as the club with greater

support were being allocated fewer tickets because of the

allocation of ends and other parts of the ground.     The FA

would have been content if this attempt had succeeded.



18.          I should perhaps add that the organisation of the

Cup Final at Wembley Stadium is different because there is

no "staging Club" and the FA is involved in meetings with

the company which owns the stadium and which organises

events there both for Cup Finals and International Matches

(as well as many non-football events).




                                8
Ticket Allocation



19.        The purpose of Rule 26(b) of FA challenge and Cup

Rules, which provides that subject to variation by the FA

each competing club should have 50% of the tickets sold, is

that there should not be a "home ground" atmosphere for one

club from obtaining a markedly greater number of tickets.

In practice the allocation to competing clubs is now

dictated by the need for segregation and the capacity of the

sections of the ground allocated to each club's supporters

on police advice to the staging club, which will be dictated

by the configuration of the stands and terraces. Both at

Hillsborough and at Villa Park this results in an imbalance

of about 4,000 tickets between the two clubs.



20.        Accordingly, the staging clubs consult the police

in the usual way, accept their advice on allocation of ends

and then liaise direct with the competing clubs.   They also

print the tickets for the tie and distribute them to the two

clubs (after reservation of some tickets for the FA and for

themselves).   The two clubs would then have sold those

tickets.   Unless there is a particular problem which cannot

be resolved the FA is not consulted during this process.
Procedure for Selecting Venue



21.       A list of grounds at which semi-finals have been

staged over the last twenty years has been prepared and is

at page 12 attached.     It will be seen that excluding this

year, Hillsborough had staged 13 ties and Villa Park (at

Aston Villa in Birmingham)    12 with 5 replays.   The F.A.

Challenge Cup Committee decides venue.     The Committee

members when deciding the venue in 1989 did have amongst

their papers for another item a sheet which sets out venues

and attendances for the last 10 years.



22.       There was an incident at Hillsborough at the 1981

semi-final between Spurs and Wolves which appears to have

involved a crowd surge with some 38 injuries requiring

medical treatment.     I learned about this but not the detail

of it from Glen Kirton, the Head of External affairs at the

F.A. on Sunday 16 April. I now refer to the letter from the

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire to my predecessor

Mr Croker dated 3 June 1981 at pages 13-15 for details.         The

crowd capacity was different then because considerable

changes have been made to the ground between 1981-9 .         This

incident appeared to have had its origin in fans being able

to buy tickets allocated to their rivals.     It coincided with

a campaign by local residents and the local MP to stop




                                10
semi-finals being held at Hillsborough.     No semi-finals were

played there for some years.    In 1986, Hillsborough was

selected for a possible semi final replay which was not

needed.   In 1987, Hillsborough appeared convenient for the

semi-final between Leeds United and Coventry City and was

again selected.



23.       Mr Clark followed normal procedure this year.       A

letter in standard form was sent to 13 clubs on

24 February 1989   (pages 16-17) and replies were received

from all of them of which those from the two selected

staging clubs Sheffield Wednesday and Aston Villa are

included at pages 18-21 and are fairly typical.       A list was

compiled on the basis of the replies giving relevant details

of the 13 grounds (page 22).    We do sometimes get

representations from a club asking to be considered, since

it is a matter of prestige and financial benefit to stage a

semi-final tie.



24.       The draw for the semi-final ties was made on BBC

TV and radio at 7.45am on Monday 20 March 1989.       Liverpool

were drawn to play Nottingham Forest.     Everton were drawn to

play the winners of a replay between Norwich and West Ham.




                               11
25.       The decision as to venue was to be taken by the FA

Challenge Cup Committee at a meeting at 11.30am on the same

day, there being a sub-committee meeting concerned with

artificial pitches at 11am.



26.       I consider that as Chief Executive I should have a

recommendation for the Committee on matters such as this.        I

had discussed grounds with Mr Titcombe and Mr Clark on the

previous Friday and I again discussed the matter with Mr

Clark after the draw but before the Committee meeting.      We

came to a provisional view that the Everton tie should go to

Villa Park and the Liverpool tie should be a repeat of the

previous year at Hillsborough which had gone well.      I was

told by Mr Clark later that morning of a telephone call made

to him by Mr Peter Robinson of Liverpool FC concerning the

possible selection of Hillsborough for their tie asking for

the Penistone Road End of the ground and not the Leppings

Lane end (ie reversing the allocations for the previous

year, which Liverpool had complained gave them a lesser

allocation of tickets).   As I understood it, Mr.

Robinson was pointing out that we could expect complaints

from Liverpool supporters if they got less tickets for the

second year running when Liverpool were known to have the

larger support, and that this would be raised in the press

and we should realise this.   Mr Clark had telephoned

Mr Mackrell at Sheffield Wednesday to see if the police

would allow allocation of the Penistone Road End to




                              12
Liverpool.     Just before 11am the return call from

Mr Mackrell    (who had spoken to the police)   indicated that

the police would require the allocation to remain as last

year in order to avoid a clash of rival supporters

approaching or leaving the ground.     On matters like this the

staging club and the FA are really bound to accept the view

of the police.



27.          We did not feel that Liverpool's point outweighed

the reasons for staging the tie at Hillsborough.       The

factors on which I would place weight in deciding venue, and

which I understand from FA staff and committee members are

considered significant, are as follows (not in any order of

importance):



(i)     Geography, not only of the two clubs but of travel

routes (hooliganism en route can be a problem)



(ii)    Capacity.    This tie needed a big ground and

Hillsborough is one of the largest, holding 6,000 more that

Villa Park.



(iii)   Experience as a staging club.     Obviously Sheffield

Wednesday are very experienced.



(iv)    Security at the ground.    Mr Evans' report had been

favourable in the previous year.
(v)      Whether the club was playing at home in the League

on the day of the tie and would have to postpone the League

match.   This is not of any great weight, and indeed Aston

Villa , Sheffield Wednesday and Manchester United were all

playing at home.



(vi)     the feeling that it was better not to play a tie in

the home city of one of the competing clubs, eg a tie

involving Liverpool at Everton.      It gives "home advantage"

from a travelling point of view, and the last three

instances (Wolves-Spurs replay at Highbury (Arsenal)     in

1981, Liverpool-Manchester United at Goodison Park (Everton)

in 1985 and the same tie replay at Maine Road (Manchester

City in 1985) all involved crowd trouble with, in two of the

ties, damage to local residential areas.



28.        I knew that Mr Jack Wiseman would attend the

meeting and that the Committee would seek his advice.         He is

Chairman of the Match and Grounds Committee (since 1980) and

has great experience.     I am told that his recommendation is

usually adopted.   I spoke to him a few moments before the

meeting began at 11.30.    He told me he favoured Villa Park

and Hillsborough because last year had gone well.      I told

him about the point raised by Liverpool that they would

again get less tickets.    He indicated that this did not

change his view.




                                14
29.       At 11.30am the Challenge Cup Committee met with

Mr Ernest Brown in the chair.     A copy of relevant parts of

the agenda and Minutes is at pages 23-29. Apart from the

agenda the committee would have no other relevant documents

before them.



30.      It is difficult for me to recollect exactly what

points were raised.    Mr Wiseman's advice was sought, and

Villa Park was immediately agreed for the Everton tie.       One

member raised Manchester, and on request Mr Clark indicated

that it was the turn of Manchester United of the two

Manchester clubs.     I believe that the main point which

prevailed with members, some of whom I believe had attended

Hillsborough in 1988, was that the identical tie had been

well handled then.    There was no dissent to allocation of

the tie to Hillsborough and the replay to Old Trafford.

Neither I nor Jack Wiseman mentioned the call from

Mr Robinson in the Committee meeting.



31.      Immediately afterwards Mr Clark was instructed to

contact the clubs involved as soon as possible, which I

understand he did.     He later sent the arrangements booklet

for 1988/9 in the normal way.     As I have said the FA did not

participate in any meetings about the arrangements at

Hillsborough (or Villa Park) and were not copied with

documents concerning arrangements.
32.          Since the tragedy I have heard criticism of the

choice of Hillsborough for the tie.     In view of what has

happened, I do not want to speak of "right" or "wrong"

choices, but I do think that it was natural to allocate the

tie to Hillsborough as a repeat of the previous year.     It is

particularly shocking for me and I believe many people

involved in organising major football matches that this

should have occurred at an all-ticket match on a ground

where so many previous big matches had been played.




      Graham Kelly



(28315L)




                                16
