    I am a single man living at the above address.     On Saturday 15th April, 1989

1 went to Hillsborough, the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ground to watch

the F.A. Cup semi-final between my club, Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.     I

have been a life-long Liverpool fan and was a season ticket holder until last

year.   I met my travelling companions for the day outside the Bcw and Arrow

Public House, West Derby.     I travelled down with

who I call            We left Liverpool between 11.30 and 11.45 a.m. in my pick-up.

We only had one hold-up on the motorway near Stockport where we spent about 3/4

hour travelling a mile.     We didn't stop on the way and arrived in Sheffield at

2.20 p.m.    We parked the pick-up in either      Withens      Avenueor Crofton Avenueabout

2 minutes walk to the ground.     I had been injured seme days before the trip and

was in fact on crutches on the day.     None of us had tickets for the match but we

were confident we would get sane because there are always spare tickets at these

sort of matches.   As a matter of fact I went to the same fixture last year and

managed to get a ticket outside the ground.     On the way to the ground it was

very relaxed, but there were fans drinking        from cans.   Wegot outside the

Leppings Lane entrance about 2.30 p.m.     The crowdsaround the entrance were

backed up into Leppings Lane itself.     I took one look at the crowd, and as I

was on crutches thought to myself I'm not going in there.      My two mates went

into the crowd to try and get sane tickets then came back about ten minutes

later and told me there wasn't any to be had.     I stood away from the main crowd

on a little rise just over the bridge on the river. Fran here I could see all

the turnstiles and turnstile area in front of me. Numerous people were milling

round by me, all asking for spare tickets.     At about 2.40 - 2.45 p.m. the crowd

outside was chocka and many fans were starting to walk away, realising they

weren't getting in.    All of a sudden the gate on the right hand side of the
"standing" turnstiles opened.     Fans started to rush through this gate and

people were shouting that the gate was open.     Everybody in earshot turned round

and made a run towards the gate.     People were ccming fran every side.   The gate

stopped open for 30 seconds to one minute then it closed. This made the

situation worse outside because people had the expectation of getting in and

they all crowded round.         went into this crowd and I didn't see him again

till the evening.                  stayed where we were, we could see the crowd

building up.   At the time the right hand gate was open, the gate on the left of

the North stand turnstiles was trying to be forced open.     I then heard an

announcement over loud speakers asking the fans at the Liverpool end to move

back as the people at the front were getting crushed.     Near to 3 o'clock I saw

the gates at the left hand side of the North stand turnstiles, the left and

right of the "standing" turnstiles open.     All these three gates were open at

the same time, and within a minute or so everyone around the turnstile area had

disappeared into the ground.     Thousands of people were there one minute and the

next it was e m p t y I thought about hobbling in when the crowd had gone but

decided against it.    I'm glad I did.   As I said earlier, I went to the same

match last year.    I arrived at the ground about 2.30.   I hung around outside

and about 2.55 people with spare tickets were selling than at below face value.

Last year there were two lines of policemen outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles checking tickets and searching people.     This slowed peoples approach

to the turnstiles which allowed than to queue.     This year when I got to the

entrance, all I could see by way of police were three mounted officers and a

bobby with a flat cap.
