M EM ORANDUM



From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:     10 November 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith


Meeting with M r Wells

I have arranged a meeting for you with Mr Wells, Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police, on
Tuesday 25 November, at 4 p.m. He is coming to see you here.

       I have assumed that your meeting will last for an hour or so. If you think you will
need to see him for significantly longer than that we will have to set up another date but given
Mr Wells’s other commitments this will be later, probably next month.

3.      I have told Mr Wells’s office that you were not going to confront him with a ‘smoking
gun’ of any sort - you wanted to discuss South Yorkshire’s apology and how this is perceived
by the Hillsborough families. If there is any other major issue you would like to put to Mr
Wells (or if we come across one in the next couple of weeks) I think it would be as well to
give his office an idea of what it is in advance of the meeting.

4.      I have also assumed that you do not want your meeting with Mr Wells transcribed. Is
that right? If not, I will lay the transcribers on (and alert Mr Wells).


Letter from .Toe Benton M P

5.     We spoke briefly last week about the attached letter you have had from Joe Benton
MP. He asks you allow Mr and Mrs Church, his constituents, to see the BBC videotapes.
Mr and Mrs Church’s son, Gary, died in the disaster, and they had a private meeting with us
in Liverpool. They think that the BBC footage will shed some light on what happened to
him.

 6.      We have copy correspondence from the Church family which shows that the BBC
 sent their solicitors a copy of their footage in 1993. This was on the conditions that ‘they
 are on loan to be used only in connection with ... the case o f Gary Church      are not to be
 copied without specific prior permission (or) allowed out o f your firm ’s possession in
 circumstances where any copying might take place.... (and) are not to be shown to persons
 other than (Mr & Mrs Church), their legal advisers and expert witnesses’.




 G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\030. DOC
7.     Mr and Mrs Church - and now Mr Benton - refer to these conditions as an ‘injunction’
but there has to my knowledge been no Court ruling on the matter. The BBC charged the
Church’s lawyers £80 for copying the tapes, and Mr and Mrs Church regard themselves as
having purchased them. They told us in Liverpool that they have not seen the BBC tapes,
because their solicitor thought there was nothing to gain for their case.

8.      But a letter they sent me on 24 October (also attached) says that the tapes contain
‘vital evidence’ which is so important that their lawyer ‘clamped restrictions’ on it to stop
other families seeing it. Their letter also says that Dr Iain West now has the tapes and that
their lawyer told them about a month ago that the BBC wanted them back so as to pass them
on to us. They have also written separately to you (dated 6 November) - 1 attach this also,
but without the copy of Gary’s body file. This letter talks about the BBC tapes as well as
some of the other things they mentioned to us in our meeting with them in Liverpool.

9.    My conclusion about the BBC tapes business is that it is a complete mess and not
something in which you can become involved. You cannot make the BBC give a copy of this
material to the Church’s, or make their lawyers do so. I have drafted a reply to Mr Benton
(which I have discussed with Paul Pugh). Please sign if you are content. I will then reply
■myself to Mr and Mrs Church’s letters of 24 October (to me) and 6 November (to you).


Dr Popper

10.   You may wish to see the attached letter from Dr Popper confirming that he will see
you next Monday. I am not proposing to acknowledge this unless you would like me to.


Family Support Group

11.     You should see the attached note from Ann Adlington. We have already written to
Paul Taylor (his phone is ex-directory) and I assume you do not want to see any of the other
people she mentions. Ms Adlington refers to the Home Secretary talking about ambulances
not being allowed on the pitch. I have picked out Mr Straw’s reference to that in the attached
transcript of his interview on 30 June with the BBC (as shown on the local news programme,
‘North-West Tonight").


12.    There is also a copy letter from Trevor Hicks to the Home Secretary. Ann Adlington
rang me at home on Saturday night to warn me about it, at some length. The burden of it is
that

         a)      families are not getting material from the police quickly enough;

         b)      therefore they cannot give it to you;

         c)      therefore the timetable for your scrutiny must be extended.

 13.     I expect that the Home Secretary will ask Paul Pugh for advice on how to reply to this
 - Paul will then approach me. I should be grateful for your views, but it seems to me that

 G:\HiLLSBOR\S-S\030. DOC
the time is coming when Mr Hicks and his friends are told where to get off. They came to
the Government and said they had new evidence. The Government appointed you to look at
it. You asked the group for their new evidence, but what they gave you (after a long delay)
was not new at all. Now that they suspect that you will come to a conclusion which they do
not like they are saying that the new evidence does exist but is locked in police files and they
cannot get at it.

14.     We have not seen the letter to the Home Secretary about your terms of reference yet.
But Hicks has told me over the phone that this has to do with the extent to which you will
revisit the questions which the Divisional Court looked at in 1993.


Andrew Worslev

15.    You asked for Mr Worsley’s statement and the Support Group have sent it (attached).
Presumably the point here as far as the Group are concerned is that
survived even though he had been ‘completely lifeless’.


 4 r Fraser

16.     The Support Group have also sent us the attached bundle of papers about Mr Fraser’s
role as solicitor to the Hillsborough Steering committee. I have had a brief look through them
and do not think they are of any particular value to us. But Ann Adlington was going on
about Fraser when she rang me on Saturday night. In as far as I could follow her she said
that he agreed to the ‘mini-inquest’ format on behalf of all the families, but should not have
done since he only represented some of them.

17.      Mr Fraser has acknowledged your recent letter to him.


Louise Brookes

18.    You have the attached letter from Louise Brookes - dated 16 October, it arrived only
today (and I detect Professor Scraton’s fingerprints all over it). I don’t see anything vital
here which has not been touched on before in the context of other victims. But she asks for a
meeting, and I will if you agree write to her offering her one.


Mr and Mrs Pemberton

19.     They have also written to you. Sad though it is their letter seems to me to be of no
interest to us whatever. I propose to acknowledge briefly.


South Yorkshire police

20.    Superintendent Hepworth’s letter of 5 November, put together with his 24 September
one, does it seems to me do what he says it does - i.e. give a full account of the decision that

 G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\030. DOC
South Yorkshire police would complete ‘personal accounts’ of the day for ‘vetting’ and
making up into statements, and show that the people who needed to know about this did
know about it.

 21.    The 6 November letter covers statements frord                      Philip Saxton, and
               [ambulancemen) and Ian McDermott and Norman Langley (supporters). Mr
McDermott passed out but survived. Mr Langley says he was helped by, and then helped,
Christopher Traynor, who died. Mrs Traynor has asked South Yorkshire police for Mr
Langley’s statement, but they have not given it to her yet because they are waiting for him to
agree to that.  It does not form part of Christopher’s body file


 Two minutes silence

22.      The Home Office is observing this at 11 a.m. on Tuesday morning.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\030. DOC
