                            H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                  L O N D O N SW 1A0AA
                                   DAVID EVANS, M.P.




  16th November, 1989

Lord Justice Taylor,
6th Floor,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London.
SW1H 9AT




I thought I should make you aware that those present at the meeting you
attended with members of the All-Party Football Group provided an un­
representative and misleading reflection of Parliamentary opinion in the
House of Commons and in the Group.

A number of well established procedures and guidelines were breached.
The meeting was not advertised on the All-Party Whip, and in the experience
of myself and colleages meetings of such Groups are always open for all
members, particularly when membership is subject to a fee.       It was not
a meeting of Officers as in addition to Tom Pendry, Joe Ashton, Jim Lester
and Alan Meale;   Simon Hughes and John Greenway were invited and all were
united against the Membership Scheme.    Only after strong representations
and just a few hours before the meeting was John Carlisle allowed to attend.
I and a number of colleagues were prevented from providing a balance to
their views.

This meant that we were not in a position to answer some of your reported
remarks including "it will cost a lot of money" and "it will result in
a loss of revenue".   It goes without saying that neither of these remarks
can be substantiated.    First, as you may be aware, seven companies have
been short-listed by the F.A. and the Football League to produce a National
Membership Scheme which is to be within the parameters of the legislation
and football friendly and I quote "at no cost to football". As the football
authorities will confirm these companies believe the scheme can be an income
generator and not a cost to football;    given the membership card fee will
create revenue sufficient to pay for the scheme.     Second, it is patently
inaccurate to argue that the scheme will necessarily result in a loss of
revenue when every partial membership scheme including our 100% home only
supporters at Luton, has increased income to the game.     The vast majority
of those in the game believed Luton's scheme would fail completely in that
it would be impossible to get sufficient members to join.       Even if they
joined it was doubted that the computer readers could cope with a 10,000
crowd with only thirty turnstiles.    They were proved to be wrong.      At


                 Telephone Hatfield (07072) 66261 or Hatfield (07072) 62632
                                    .2 .


Manchester United about 50% of spectators    are members   and their   system
of entry for them is also claimed to work.

This was comprehensively highlighted in the Parliamentary debates on the
Bill which received a substantial majority in favour.    You may care to
read the attached Hansards.

Those of my colleagues and myself who were barred from attending the meeting
feel it would be impossible for you to form a balanced judgement without
attending a conventional open meeting of all interested M.P's and preferably
under the auspices of the All-Party Group.

If you felt unable or unwilling to do this I only hope that you seek full
answers to the concerns you were reported to have expressed directly from
the Minister for Sport.
