                                      C James Andeston CBE, CStJ, QPM, D t, CBIM
                                      Chief Constable

                                      Chief Constable's Office
                                      PO Box 22 (S.West PDO)
                                      Chester House
                                      Boyer Street
                                      Manchester M 16 ORE
                                      Telephone 061 872 5050




CC/MCJ                                   29th June 1989



                                                                            V


                                                          -1NA/   ^ 4 H / I Jts




            Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

Enclosed  for your    information is a copy of the ACPO
Submission to the above-mentioned Inquiry. A copy has also
gone to Frank Smith in F.8 Division.

If you require additional copies of the submission (rather
than all the appendices) for the benefit of H.M. Inspectors
of Constabulary, please let me know.

The papers will, of course,      be     forwarded         to      all     Chief
Constables in due course.




                       Chief Constable




Sir Richard Barratt CBE QPM
H.M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London. SW1H 9AT
                                                        CC                         ^(ASt)ce<u
                       hoc   Mr storr      e
                             Mr Yates,
                             Mr Chil/ot                    H   ome    O   ffic e

                             EMC1C /                    QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                             Mr Boys Smith              LONDON SW1H 9AT
                              Mr Malone-Lee
 4 69A/LF/MT                  Miss Edwards
                              Mr Nagler
                              Mr Sandiford
                              Mr Whalley
                              Mr Addison
                              Mr Archer              2~7       June   1989
                              Ms Ransford
                              Mr Durbin

                                                    /
        SL JdU-,


X said that I would write to you following our recent meeting on
     subset.    I much enjoyed meeting you and the other members of
your Police Authority and I am only so sorry that it should have
been the distressing events at Hillsborough which occasioned the
meeting.  May I again express my sympathy for all of you at this
difficult time.

I was very grateful for the clear and courteous way in which you
explained your Authority* s position.

You agreed that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially
decided that another force should be called in to investigate the
events at Hillsborough, because it was desirable that the
investigation should be seen to be independent of South Yorkshire
police.

You also take the view that, when it was subsequently decided to
establish the enquiry^under Lord Justice Taylor and to place the
results of the investigation at the service of that enquiry, this
so chan 9®d the character of the investigation, and its scope, that
as a matter of principle the South Yorkshire Police Authority
should no longer be expected to bear the cost s.

You also made the point that the expected scale of costs could be
such as seriously to threaten the efficiency of the South Yorkshire
poiice force and could not be absorbed within the Authority's own
resources.



                                               /I explained that




Sir John Layden JP
I explained that the Home Secretary accepts that, because of the
scale of the investigation and its unexpected nature, the likely
costs could not be absorbed by South Yorkshire within the usual
police funding arrangements without serious detriment to the
efficiency of the force.

He also recognises that, as a result of the decision to make the
results of the investigation directly available to Lord Justice
Taylor, it has been widened to cover national aspects which go
wider than the concerns of South Yorkshire, or even South Yorkshire
policing.

Nevertheless, it remains the case that much of the investigation
will be concerned with the policing of events on the day, a matter
which is inescapably the concern of the South Yorkshire police.  We
have looked, therefore, for a solution which reflects the statutory
responsibility, which is shared between police authorities and the
Home Secretary, for meeting the costs of police operations in
England and Wales.

Taking all these considerations into account, the Government is
prepared to offer South Yorkshire Police Authority a special
payment towards the costs of the investigation.  This would apply
to costs, which are incurred by South Yorkshire Police Authority in
reimbursing additional costs incurred by West Midlands Police as a
result of the investigation.  (By additional costs we mean costs
such as overtime, travel, subsistence and accommodation of
personnel directly involved in the investigation, together with
consequential overtime costs incurred as a result of the need to
provide cover for the officers assigned to the investigation - but
not basic pay.)
                                                       y^_
The level of assistance, which we are prepared to officer, would be
for the Government to meet 90% of all costs above the product of a
lp rate (which we understand would be around £1.3 million).  Up to
the £1.3 million mark the normal police grant of 51% would apply.

A limit would be placed on the total amount which South Yorkshire
Police Authority would have to contribute.  Whatever the total
costs of the investigation, South Yorkshire would have to
contribute no more than the product of a 3/4p rate, which we
calculate would be about £975,000.  Beyond that point the
Government would meet 100% of the cost.

Special payments have previously been made in only a small number
of cases.  The Government already contributes substantially to
police expenditure through police grant and block grant.  In South
Yorkshire's case the contribution amounts to some 75% of the Police
Authority's budget.




                                          /This would be
This would be the first special payment provided since the increase
in police grant from 50% to 51%, which was intended in part to
leave police authorities in a better position to meet unexpected
expenditure.                                              v

There is no pre-determined formula for special payments.  In
deciding to adopt the formula, which was used in the miners'
strike, we are taking into account the particular circumstances of
this case.

I have considered very carefully the points which you made to me at
the meeting.  I have reflected in particular on what you told me
about South Yorkshire Police Authority's operational contingency
fund and its balances.  I appreciate that the position here is
tight.

Nevertheless I think that the terms of the offer recognise South
Yorkshire's position and the fact that the investigation is
contributing to the enquiry by Lord Justice Taylor as well as being
of relevance to South Yorkshire Police.   No more than £975,000
would need to be contributed by the Authority whatever the costs.
On present estimates, the costs may reach £4 to £5 million.   At
               costs the authority would be contributing between 20%
ana 23-s of the total costs, and the Government between 77% to 80%.

I do not think that South Yorkshire can reasonably be excused
meeting any of the costs.       For all its awfulness and subsequent
events, it was essentially a policing matter, and the arrangements
tor the financing of police authorities are designed to allow for
some of the unexpected.       We have endeavoured to recognise the
e* . r®-? r<^inary c ircumstances of this case by making a proposal
which is more generous than normal, and I hope that you will be
able to agree that we have done so.

I would be grateful if you would be kind enough to let me know that
your Authority would be content to proceed on these terms.

As we agreed at the meeting, it is important that we move quickly
       r t0 reimbur?e the West Midlands Police Authority for the
additional costs which it has incurred.

My officials would be happy to discuss with yours any queries which
they may have about the details of what would qualify for payment.




                              FERRERS
