                                                 21
INQUIRY    INTO         THE       HILLSBOROUGH

       S T A D I U M           D I S A S T E R




                        Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

                PR< F . L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

            Thursday,    15th June,   1989




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Afternoon Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield S1 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                        (AFTERNOON SE SS IO N Y




MR. COLLINS   (cont.)

ALAN KEITH SEAMAN,      called

     Examined by MR. COLLINS
             TWENTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                Thursday,   15th June,   1989

                    (Afternoon Sess io n)

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, before I go on, there is one
matter that perhaps I ought to have referred to in the
Safety Certificate and did not specifically, and it is
on page 114, Condition 24, but it rather looks as if the
draftsman of the Safety Certificate may not fully have
appreciated what he was doing because if one reads
Paragraph 24, it reads thus:

     "The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to
     be inspected by a suitably qualified chartered
     engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
     Si representative of the County Council within
     7 months of the date of the Certificate and at
     least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
     and the Holder shall as eoon as possible after
     each inspection supply to the County Council a
     Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer as
     to the current compliance or non-oompliance
     with good engineering and building practices
     and with the relevant British Standard Specifications
     and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
     provisions and recommendations of the Guide of
     all structural parts of the Stadium excluding the
     crush barriers and handrails."

So there should have been an indication, it would seem,
from the Certificate provided - I think Dr. Eastwood
appears to have been the person who was providing the
Certificates under Paragraph 24 - as to whether the stadium
complied with the green Guide in all structural respects,
not of course the crush barriers and handrails.   One of
the aspects there, of course, is the ramp or gradient of the
tunnel, which is never referred to anywhere in the documentation
apart from that reference to ramps generally that we saw
at page 3 of the bundle.

     May I now go back to page 245, which is where we had
reached, which is Dr. Eastwood indicating to Mr. Chester
that discussion would be needed about the gates in the
radial fences.

     Sir, there is then a Board Meeting of 22nd May, 1985.
It is I fear a document that perhaps ought to have been
but was not included in this bundle.   it may perhaps be
convenient for you to note, sir, that it appears in the
Sheffield Wednesday volume at page 257 which is a record
of the relevant part of the minutes of the Meeting of the
Board of 22nd May and if you look, sir, at 2 (c) towards
the bottom of that page you will see that there is
reference to reorganisation of turnstiles and new toilet
facilities at Leppings Lane end.   "Matter left in abeyance
pending further discussions.   Initial estimated price
deemed to be excessive."
                                         MR. C O L L I N S

     Then we have on page 246 the letter of 4th June
from Mr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester in providing the
relevant drawings showing two possible alternative
arrangements for the turnstiles and toilets at the
back of the West Stand and those two possibilities are
at pages 248 and 249 respectively.

     The point was made that on 248 there is the
possibility of a sort of - I think it is described
as a pinch point where you have to go round a corner
to get to turnstiles 17-19 and so it was that the
alternative at /8 - and that is the one, of course,
that was eventually constructed, as we know.   The
only relevant amendment which we will see coming is you
will note that the new wall inside does not have any
gate in it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No gap,   yes.

     MR. COLLINS:   Or any gap in it and, in fact, there
is now, and we will see in the correspondence that there
was a decision and this I think was a decision which came
as a result of Police input, if I remember correctly,
which led to the installation of that gate.

     250 and 251 are duplicates of those pages.    Then we
have a letter on 252 which is from Eastwood to the Club
referring to a meeting with Chief Superintendent Mfiisfeley
and the second paragraph:

     "Superintendent Moseley was very cpnuerned alpout   a ,
the segregation of the two lots of spectators on the
West Terrace on, those occasions when the centre of the
terrace will be filled by visitors.    He said that on
the occasion of the Liverpool match he had had to
station policemen in pairs down the full length of the
dividing fence and this had been a very uncomfortable
situation for the Officers.    Not least of his difficulties
was that it was not easy for the officers to get in and
out of tht particular area if the ground was packed with
spectators.   He felt that a higher fence than the present
one or a double fence was necessary.    I suggested that
we should have a double fence with a gap between so as
to keep the spectators apart and to provide a space in
which his Officers sould stand.    Fewer policemen would
be needed if the spectators had a gap between them.
It so happens that right alongside the existing fence
there is a gate on to the pitcH1 and that is, of course,
Gate 5 or what is now Gate 5 - "and if the second fence
were placed on the other side of the gate it will provide
an easy access gangway for the police and they will be
able to move in and out of the gap depending on the
siutation.   Mr. Moseley was clearly very pleased by
this suggestion and subject to your approval we are
including the work in the contract for segregating
the spectators at Leppings Lane end.
                                       MR. C O L L I N S

    "I should point out that it will mean losing about
    a metre of advertising space beeagse the hoardings
    carry straight on past that particular gate at
    preseetio   There will have to be a gap in the
    hoardings to enable the police to get in and out
    and of course to evacuate the crowd in emergency."

Well, it may be important to consider the effect on the
advertising hoardings but, of course, the effect of
creating that area was to reduce the amount available for
spectators on the terrace and no-one seems to have taken
into account that this might affect the capacity of the
terrace and, indeed, of the pens.

     The other thing, of course, is that if there was an
advertising hoarding in front of that gate at that time it
rather suggests that no-one thought of using that gate,
certainly as a matter of routine, for any evacuation
purposes, but that may not be a fair point.   It depends,
of course, on how the advertising hoarding was set up.
It may be that it was possible to open it, notwithstanding
its existence.

     Then there is a telephone note,     a call     from Mr.   Strange
to Sharon on 17th Junes

     "Did Dick give agreement to reorganisation of
     Lepping Lane?   Yes, in principle.  Which scheme?
     Don't know."

Then there was a confirmation in a letter to Inspector
Calvert of the suggested provision of the double fencing.
On page 256 a note of a call from Inspector Calvert to
Mr. Strange, 27th June.

     "He has looked at our drawing of the proposal.
     1. Could personnel doors be fitted into the two
     new walls.        Don't see why not. (Not a bad
     idea, otherwise ground staff have to go all the
     way round if they want to go from one side of stand
     to the o t h e r .)

That is, of course, the door in the internal wall and
Inspector Calvert does, indeed, seem to have made a very
sensible suggestion.

     "2. Wants central radial fence to be added to
     the one 2 metres away from the right hand
     fence.    Don't necessarily agree.   He said that
     Inspector   Moseley and Dick said yes.

     3. Gate in perimeter   fence between 2 metre gap OK."

Then we have the application on 5th July for planning
permission for the scheme.   Tbe plan we see on 258, the
plan of the situation as it now is.   The application
then follows, and the relevant copjes 8a, Sa, etc., we
                                        MR. C O L L I N S

have not put in but we know what the scheme was.

     On 16th July, 1985, again not in the bundle there
is  another Board Meeting which records, this time at page
258, the very bottom of 258 ---     I am sorry, sir, this
is the only other document that I am having to go outside
our bundle for but it is really just to complete the story,
it  does not add anything particularly material.     It just
records quotations received for the alterafeidQBi at the
Leppings Lane end and agreement to accept a quotation in
the sum of some £ 7 3 , 000-odd. "Secretary requested to
urge early completion and formal ate claim Ivia the Football
Grounds Improvement Trust."

        Sir, then I go on to a letter at 262 in the main
bundle from the County Council to Eastwoods.      The third
p a ra gra ph:

     "The Officer Working Party considered and gave
     approval in principle to the rear of the West  Stand
     reorganisation proposals in May but other than
     brief mentions by the Club or yourselves at routine
     meetings of the possibility of the Spion Kop being
     enclosed, no outline plans or details of such
     proposals have be^nconsidered to date."

Now,   the proposals or the approval given in principle
in May refers back to the letter on page 235 and of course
the scheme involving 29 turnstiles and not the one that
they were actually applying for, and so it is that on
25th July the County Council get details of what is
in fact going to be done, although by then the die had
I think been cast.

     Sir, somewhere in your bundle - I do not quite
know where - there should be copies of drawings 67058A
and 6705/6.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    In this vicinity?

     MR.   COLLINS:   I am not sure where    they have been
put.     I am told they are right at the    front.   I do not
think it is necessary to ---     It shows    the scheme at
the turnstiles in slightly more detail,      that is all.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is of the existing        ?

     MR. COLLINS:    No, that is the proposed,       /8A.



                                  /Drawing 6705/8A.
                                              MR. COLLINS

 Drawing 6705/8A is what was proposed at the turnstiles.
6705/6 are details of the new central fence on the West
Terrace.

     LORD JUSTICE ESILOR:   Yes.

     MR. COLLINS:   And the other one is ansindication
of the existing crush barriers at the time that I - I
forget the exact time which that one is ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          1980.

     MR. COLLINS:   But updated.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLAOR:   I see that on that there are
marked capacities for the various pens.

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Central pen, presumably
 that had not yet been divided.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right.  All I can say, sir,
about the capacities of the pens, whether divided or un­
divided, is this.  We have been given the figures of
2,200, I think, for the ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   3 and 4 as they now are.

     MR. COLLINS:    3 and 4 as they now are and that
is Slvided into one thousand and twelve hundred and
those are figures which seem to have been accepted by
everyone, indeed, appear on the original plan of the
ground which was - those are plans that were put in at
the very early stage of the Inquiry, including, you will
recall, the plan 6f the barriers on the terrace.   There
was a little bundle of plans which included one of the
ground which had those capacities.   There is nothing in
the documentation which I have been able to find which
 indicates who assessed those quantities, how they were
assessed or when they were assessed.   It appears that it
may have been - I know not - simply a question of someone
when the railings were put in effectively working out
the areas and dividing the figure of 7,900 by the
relevant areas or 10,100 if you include the whole but I
am afraid I cannot help any more than that because
certainly so far as the documents are concerned there
does not appear to be any indication of anyone re­
considering in detail the capacity.   Indeed, that is
one of the matters which will have to be considered
in relation to the approach of the City Council and,
indeed, of the County Council before it to the question
of the proper capacities for the terrace and for the
pens on the terrace.   It certainly has never been
                                              MR. COLLINS

reflected anywhere in the safety certificate which, as
you know, simply refers to the totality of the terrace.

     265, the working party of the 29th of July.
Consideration of proposals.  These plans.  2(a)
Plan /6 - for both security access and emergency
egress purposes, a pitch perimeter fence gate to
be provided.  That in fact would be or would become
the gate to pen 3 because one of the requirements, as
you will recall, or one of the matters that was done,m
was to divide that central pen into what is now 3 and
4 as part of the proposals.  When that was done that
would have meant that there would be no exit gate in
pen 3 at all through the perimeter because the gates
as they originally were went from 2 to 4 and that of
co&rse&also explains why the gate in pen 4 is positioned
not central to that pen but, if you look down from the
tunnel, to the right of the pen because that was the
original gate in the original perimeter fence before
there were any pens at all and was roughly towards the
middle of the pen.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Composite pen.

     MR. COLLINS:   Of the composite pen.   When pen 3
was created it was necessary, so the working party
quite rightly believed, to add a gate in that perimeter
fence and that was done roughly centrally but of course
the pen 4 gate was not central.  That sounds a bit
muddled but I hope it is clear enough.  Then (b) /8A -
the new handrail by Turnstile 23 to be either shortened
or re-aligned so as to maintain the exit width between
the outer (river) wall and Turnstile 23 - that is of
course & ~ and the exit width between Turnstile 16 and
the new handrail not to be less than the widtha6f the
roller shutter gate between Turnstiles 16 and 17.
The purpose of that of course being that you cannot let
people out of the gate and then have a narrowing because
that will cause congestion at the exit.   And then £j)
over the page, stewarding of new gates - as mentioned in
my letter of the 2ndof May, it is essential that all
the new gates are fully supervised by Stewards, who
must be fit, able and properly trained.

     Again, sir, it is plain in context, one goes back
to the letter of the 2nd of May, 1985, that is
referring to the outside gates and not to the gates
in the new, or in any of the radial fences on the
terracing.

     267 is simply that being passed on to the club.
269, Eastwood to the County, referring to receipt of
the Working Party comments.
                   82


                                                 MR. COLLINS

    "(a) We are not sure of the location on
     the West terrace of the proposed extra
     security gate;*. Tlere is already a gate
     in ithe 2m wide gap formed by the new
     radial fence for use by the police.   This
     same gate will still be available for the
     spectators in emergency as there are gates
     into the 2m gap from the terrace which
     will be under the control of the police.
     This point may perhaps be clarified during
     the Working Party's visit."

And he says the fence is inyany event aligned.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is contemplating peopleg
going out of pen 4, round the gate in the radial fence
at the back, down 5 and out on to the pitch?

     MR. COLLINS:   That is precisely.   From 3 too, from
3 rather than from 4, yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   From 3?

     MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry.  Well, from 4 and from 3
perhaps. Certainly ....   Then we have 271, meeting of
the Working Party.  Ground inspection.   Leppings Lane.
Progress of the works to segregate visiting supporters
behind and on the West Terrace and stand were inspected
with particular reference to the points raised at the
meeting on the 29th of July.   Then there is a reference
lto alleged poor workmanship on the wall.   That is the
wall at the rear of the stand.   And certain comments
about irrelevant matters.   Then over the page, fourth
paragraph:

    "On the terrace itself it was noted that there
     was an existing gate in the new 2 m. wide gap
     formed by the new radial fence for use by the
     Police.  This gate would still be available
     for the use of spectators in an emergency as
     the gates at the top of the terrace under the
     control of the Police would enable spectators
     to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap.
     However, it was agreed that steps or a longer
     gate would be required.  It was also agreed
     that a new gate would be required from the
     new South Central Terrace Pen."

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That is 3.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is 8^ .Then reference on 274 in
a aletter from the council to the club referring to the
discussion and the Interim Popplewell Report and over
the page after reference to safety stewards and require­
ments arising from Popplewell we have:
SVT?> •
i\)VP                         83


                                                          MR. COLLINS

              “(c) adequate first aid and first aid room
               facilities should be available (NOTE - para­
               graph 8 of your Club's General Safety Certificate
               requires that a suitably equipped First Aid Room
               must be provided and maintaianed, that such First
               Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may
               require - and not less than one such assistant
               for each 2,000 spectators - shall be available,
               a doctor employed or retained by the Club is
               available to attend at the First Aid Room if
               required and that his whereabouts are known
               to those in the Police Central Control Room,
               and that the First Aid Room is adequately
               signed and capable of being lit by the
               emergency power ismpply)."

          So despite what was being said, as we saw in relation
          to the 1980 season it does not appear the first aid
          room had got properly off the ground.   We have the
          letter in reply to that on page 276.   It confirms
          arrangements have been finalised with South Yorkshire
          Police  for the staff concerned to be briefed on
          matters relating to safety/emergency prior to the
           first home game ®s?the 17th of August and I think
          the rest is not relevant.

                Then there is a letter, copy letter, at 277.
          This is a letter written by Mr./Eastwood as one can
          see by the reference at the top right.    Indeed, it
           is signed W.E.   There is a note at the top.    'I hadn't
          seen this until after I had estimated" -eiseit -
          "Gleesons" - oh, n o - "instructed Gleesons to do a"
          something "different to the one Dr. E wants."     Fencing
          I think it probably is.    "What about letting me see
          letters before they go on file?" That, I think, is
          in the writing of Mr. Strange.    This is a letter, copy
          of a letter, rather, from Dr. Eastwood to Mr. Chester,
          the SfeaaMmry of the Club.   He deals with the complaints
          about the brickwork.   And then the bottom of the page,
          "Turning to matters on the second page:- 'It was agreed'
          My comments on the points you have in mind are as
          follows:-   (b) This refers to the existing gate
          between the new 2m wide gap formed by the radial
          fence which will be used for police access only.
          You will notice from the wording of David's minute
          I persuaded them that steps could be used.    I have
          interpreted this as being from the inside only which
          means that we will not lose any of your advertising
          space.   We have added the provision of some timber
          steps on the inside to the work being carried by
          Gleeson."

               From that it looks as if the advertising board
<;m   ^
*JS                          84


                                                         MR. COLLINS

          was able to be opened, that is to say, if the gate   opened
          so the advertising board would swing away and thus   one
          would not lose any space.  That perhaps is of less   import­
          ance.  What is perhaps significant is what appears   now.

              "(c)  The other radial fence forming the small
               visitors pen has left a length of terrace
               without a direct access on to the pitch.   There
               is of course a gate at thlt top of the terrace
               connecting into the next pen and we had hoped
               that the police would accept that as an adequate
               means of exit in emergency.   However at the
               meeting they made the point very strongly that
               if someone had to be got out of the pen which
               has no gate or if there was misbehaviour the
               police would only be able to get in via the
               neighbouring pen, passing up the terrace through
               the gate at the back and then down again in the
               isolated pen.  They considered this unacceptable.
               I think that this particular item can be paid
               for out of the contingency sum and suggest that
               it be added to Gleeson's work."

          So one canonly perhaps express some surprise anyone
          should have thought it was acceptable and recognition
          the Police were clearly rij»ht in thinking that it was
          unacceptable.  I do not think I need read any more of
          that letter.

               Then there is a plan on 280 which shows - I am
          not quite sure what it shows.   I think it is the effect
          of the new fences on the existing crush barriers and
          what should be done to the existing crush barriers.

               282 there is Mr. Lock, memorandum, requiring the
          new gate in the separation wall to have an inspection hole
          and a bolt to the gates at the bottom of the West Stand.

               Then we have a letter about the roof of the North
          Stand.  The only reason that is there, I think, is to
          indicate that the club suddenly had upon it an un­
          expected major expenditure as a result of the need to
          carry out repairs to the roof of the North Stand.
          It does not have any direct other relevance to these
          matters.

               Copy of a letter on the 26th September at 289 to
          Corderoy & Company who are the advisers to the Football
          Grounds Improvement Trust setting out the works because
          of course they would and did give a substantial grant
          to the cost of these works.

               291, Working Party in November, 1985, largely
          concerned with provision of disabled facilities and
          the enlargement and roofing of the Kop which was then
                    85


                                               MR. COLLINS

being proposed but at 5 there is reference to crowd flow
at the Leppings Lane end.

    "The Police reported on the continuing problems
     caused by the merging of spectators from all
     parts of the stadium at the Leppings Lane end.
     It was difficult to see how this   could be
     overcome, as the physical restraints   to achieve
     this could conceivably be more of a danger than
     allowing the present position to continue."

Then it was agreed that the draft of a Booklet prepared
by the South Yorkshire Police outlining the duties of
safety stewards was acceptable and should be distributed.
That, I think, is South Yorkshire Police document 23.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not quite follow that.
The merging of spectators from all parts of the stadium
at the Leppings Lane end.  Does that mean outside?

     MR. COLLINS:   I am not sure, sir.  Yes, whether it
means at the end of the game everyone comes out there I
am not sure.  I think that may well be so.

     Sir, then we have a document from the Football
Association which is referred to in fact in paragraph
203 of the Green Guide in which the F.A. sets out some
of its requirements.  Revised memorandum on crowd
management.


    "This document sets out to amplify and clarify
     the responsibilities of clubs in relation to
     this most difficult problem.  Both our bodies
     are fully aware of the enormous amount of time,
     money and energy expended by our clubs in
     ensuring that the public can attend matches in
     safety.




                           / With the eyes
                                   Mr. COLLINS

     With the eyes of thfetworld on us, however, we
     cannot afford to relax for one moment.   We ask
     you to study the memorandum in great detail.
     Failure to act on any of the recommendations
     may be taken into account should a club
     subsequently be charged with misconduct under
     Football Association Rules 23 and 24".

That is signed by Mr. Croaker and Mr. Kelly.

     295, A, "Admission of Spectators":

     "1. Clubs must, in consultation with the Police
     and visiting Club, consider whether any mateft
     should be made 'all ticket'.

           b.  Under no circumstances should tickets
           be sold on the day of the match.  Maximum
           publicity should be given to this fact
           in the areas of both clubs.

           c. Clubs are entirely responsible for
           the distribution of tickets allocated to
           them and must take all possible steps to
           ensure that tickets are not sold to supporters
           of the opposing team."

Of course,  that was a matter which, in part, caused
the problems in the 1981 crushing.

     "B.   PRIOR PLANNING:

     1.   Clubs must, in addition to the above, undertake
     detailed liaison with the police^ opposing club,
     rail and coach operators and supporters' Travel
     Clubs at least 10 days before a match to determine
     the likely movements of spectators and any other
     relevant matters.  In the cases of Cup ties, due
     consideration must be given, at the time of the
     Draw, to possible replay arrangements.

     2.   The number of police and stewards to operate
     at each match must be agreed with the Police.

     3.    Clubs should consider, in the interests of
     control at particular matches, reducing capacity,
     even when agreed with the competent authority
     under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, either for
     the ground as a whole, or for a particular section.

     4.   Clubs should consider, if necessary, closing
     a particular section or sections of the ground.

    5.   Clubs should consider in full consultation
    with Police,  the Football Association and the
    Football League, varying the kick-off times or
    even requesting permission to change the day of
    the match".
                                        Mr. COLLINS

Then 296, "Segregation" ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When it says "varying the
kick-off times", what does that mean?

     Mr. COLLINS:   I understand that to mean when the
Football Association or whoever in any fixture says
that a mat&tasis going to be, say, at 3 o'clock, the
Club can in advance say "Well, we know that such and
such is happening around that time which makes 3 o'clock
an awkward time.   Can we put it back?"

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     So it is not talking about
postponement?

     Mr. COLLINS:  It is not talking about ad hoc
postponement, certainly not as I read it, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then we come to the section entitled
"Segregation" on page 296:

     "Clubs must make adequate arrangements for the
     segregation of rival supporters. To ensure
     segregation, it will be necessary to reserve a
     section or sections in the stadium for visiting
     supporters.   It is essential in this process
     that adequate information on the likely movements
     of visiting supporters is obtained by the Home
     Club in consultation with the visiting club and
     the bodies listed in Bl."

Then Section 5:

     "Contingency plans must be made to move supporters
     situated in the wrong section ..."

and so on.

     "6. Wherever possible, segregation should be
     effected by permanent structures such as wall,
     barriers or fences....

     D.   PROTECTION OF PLAYING AREA:

     An adequate number of police and stewards must
     be available to restrict access to the field of
     play.  Clubs must protect ethe playing field
     by means of a fence, moat, double-barrier, wall
     or other system capable of denying access to
     spectators.  Any form of protection must incorporate
     an adequate number of exits, manned at all times,
     to allow access to the field of play in emergencies.

     The Football Association may instruct a Club to
     instal such a fence, moat or barrier, subject to
     any designation order under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act whi&h may be in force at the Club."
'<3
                             88


                                                    MR. COLLINS

      Over the page:

              "OTHER MEASURES:

              A sufficient number of police and adequately trained
              stewards must be on duty before, during and after
              the game.  Steps must be taken to ensure spectators
              do not bring objects into the ground that may be
              used in acts of violence."

      There must be no missiles, there must be plastic cups,
      they must exclude drunks and troublemakers, they must
      staff gates properly;  there must be electronic or
      other surveillance systems to allow police to direct
      personnel to problem areas.

              "9. All efforts should be made to provide spectators
              with pre?-match or half-time e n t e r t a i n m e n t " ---

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Incidentally, do we have
      the programme for this match?

           Mr. COLLINS:  I have not seen one, no.  I am sure
      there must be one available somewhere.  Mr. Glasgow
      is very kindly ---

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I only mwention it because
      somebody said that there was pre-match entertainment
      advertised but not provided.

           Mr. COLLINS:  Yes, sir, I think that is right.
      Certainly we know that there is a document in the
      bundle in which the Football Association indicated
      that they were going to provide the youth competition
      which they then for some reason cancelled.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

           Mr. COLLINS:  Perhaps it is slightly ironic in
      those circumstances that they required all efforts to
      be made to provide entertainment and it would seem,
      from the evidence that we have had so far, then go on
      to cancel that entertainment.

              "F.   FURTHER PRECAUTIONS:

              Clubs should take active steps to prevent the
              operation of ticket touts.  Clubs should take
              active steps to prevent ticket forgeries" ---

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I do not know whether you have
      covered 12.  That might be of some importance.

              Mr. COLLINS:    I am sorry, sir.   I should have read
      that:

              "Clubs should take whatever steps are necessary to
              ensure the comfort of spectators before, during and
      &       after the game."
                                        Mr. COLLINS

And, at 11, there must be an effective public address
system.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COL1INS:   On page 298, over the page, half-way
down the page:

     "MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED BY THE AWAY CLUB:

     3.  Clubs should appoint stewards to help manage
     and inform spectators at matches and to accompany
     parties of supporterse travelling away."

Of course, that is of limited application in a semi-final.
One accepts that it is directed to ordinary League
matches.

     LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR: Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:    Then      we   come to the bottom of299,
Section I :

     "Failure to implement any of the precautions
     outlined in this Memorandum may be taken into
     account in the consideration of any charge brought
     against the Club or may, in itself, lead to such a
     charge."

Then there is a letter on page 301, against which I
have put a question mark and the note "Why is it in?"
Having made that note, I will go on to 305.  It is
about disabled facilities, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR: Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:     305 is a note which Ithink we have
seen before,sfrom the Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
Officer of January, 1986:

    "As a result of several incidents during the
    recent past, involving casualties within Sports
    areas, I have decided to delegate one of my
    Officers  the specific task of liaison with the
    Football Clubs within the South Yorkshire
    boundaries.  This officer will have the task
    to ensure that advice and, if necessary, training
    can be provided by this Service to members of
    your staff.  It is also to be his responsibility
    to ensure that the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
    Ambulance Service are totally aware of the geography
    of your ground and of any Incident Plans which you
    may have drawn up in order to ensure the safety
    of the general public..."

and asking for communication and co-operation.  There is
a reply to that, on the next page, from Mr. McCee, the
Chairman:
                                      Mr. COLLINS

    "Thank you for your recent letter, and of course
    we would like to co-operate with you in any way
    possible to improve your service at games played
    at our stadium".

A copy was sent to Mr. Chester.  There is then a Circular
fr©m the Home Office in relation to the effect of the
Local Government reorganisation.  The relevant bit is
308e, where you will sees

     "Rights of various interested bodies (police,
     building authorities or, in the Metropolitan
     county areas after 'abolition', fire authorities)
     to consultation, access to grounds and information
     adn to the appeals procedure".

Sir, that is the amendment that I was referring to
earlier.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  I do not think it is necessary to
look at the remainder of that.    I will go on to 312,
which is  a letter to the Chief Fire Officer   from the
City of Sheffield:

     "I enclose for your information a copy of my
     Report to the General Purposes Panel on 6th May
     1986, together with a copy of the Panel's
     Resolution in relation to that Report.  I would
     like to make the following comments:

     (a)   Although it has been decided     to carry on
     with the old administrative system     organised by
     the   County Council, I wish to make   it clear that
     the   system is under review and may   be adjusted
     in the future;

     (b)   I will shortly write to the other District
     Councils in South Yorkshire with a view to
     establishing a basis for consultation as
     described in the Resolution;

     (c)   the re-drafting of the Certificate conditions
     will shortly be completed and I will then be
     asking for your comments on them.

     If you have any questions to ask on this matter,
     please do not hesitate to contact Mr. Bownes on
     the number given below."

Then there is the report on 313.  This, of course, is
in the context of the takeover by the Sheffield City
Council of the responsibilities following the abolition
of the South Yorkshire Council.  Page 313, second
paragraph:
                                        Mr, COLLINS

     "The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
     was designated as requiring a Safety Certificate
     in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued
     by the County Council on 21st December, 1979.  The
     stadium is currently undergoing major works which,
     when complete, will form a roof over the Spion
     Kop and thus substantially improve the
     accommodation for spectators."

IJaienie 314, "Safety Certificate Standard Conditions":

     "At the moment the Safety Conditions attached to
     Safety Certificates are standardised throughout
     South Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire
     Service have indicated that they woud wish this
     situation to continue for reasons of administrative
     simplicity.  The Conditions do, however, give
     some cause for concern, as they appear to be
     inadequate or inappropriate in some areas. The
     drafting of these Conditions is of particular
     importance as it is a serious criminal offence
     to contavene any of them punishable by the
     Statutory maximum fine (currently £2,000) or 2
     years' imprisonment, or both."

Actually, there is no maximum fine on indictment.

     "It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate
     Conditions where appropriate and to submit them
     to the panel for approval. Sheffield Wednesday's
     Certificate would then be replaced in accordance
     with Section 4(1)(b) of the Act.  Sheffield
     United's Certificate could then be issued with
     the new conditions before the start of the 1986/7
     season.  The re-drafted Conditions would, of
     course, be submitted to the Fire Service, the
     Police and Building Surveyor for comment;   other
     authorities in South Yorkshire coull also be
     involved in this process®"

Sir, I note, as you obviously did, inadequate or
inappropriate reference to some of the conditions, and
I ask you to note the date of this, which is 5th June
1986.  We are now the 15th June 1989 and there is still
no new Safety Certificate.  Perhaps to be fair, one
can say that they are awaiting the outcome of this
Inquiry, so I will then say that as at the 15th April,
1989 there was no new Safety Certificate.

     On page 315 there is a reference to the Health
and Safety Executive.  There is an indication, as is
indeed the position, that the Health and Safety
Executive have made what I understand to be a policy
decision that they will not involve themselves with
football grounds, as the responsibility is on the local
authority under the 1975 Act.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.
                                       Mr. COLLINS

      Mr. COLLINS:  Then there is a record on 317 and
 318 of the Resolution of the Council to adopt the
 proposal set out in that report.  In particular, on
 318, sub-paragraph (c):

      "... the Head of AQininistration and Legal
      Department be requested to draft new safety
      certificate conditions in consultation with
      other appropriate authorities for approval
      by the Council."

 On page 319 we have a record of a meeting between the
 Police sand the Club on 18th June, 1986:

      "Matters Raised:

      Stewards:  The Club will update Stewards’
      Instructions to take in relevant details from
      the Popplewell Report..." -

and I think by now this would be the final Popplewell
Report -

     "Representatives from South Yorkshire Police would
     attend the instructional evening for stewards which
     will take place on the 19th August.   South
     Yorkshire Police will brief stewards prior to
     every home game.  This will be done by the
     Inspector in charge of each area ofthe ground".

We heard evidence about that being done.

     "South Yorkshire Police requested that all turn­
     stiles, but particularly those at Leppings Lane,
     to be opened earlier.  The Club agreed to do
     everything possible to ensure this."

Then we have, under "Access at Leppings Lane":

     "Mr. Chester agreed to discuss with Dr. Eastwood
     and the Board the possibility of a wider door in
     the wall inside the Leppingsr Lane area and more
     permanent barriers for use on limited areas" ---

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I was just wondering about
this:   "... all turnstiles, but particularly those at
Leppings Lane, to be opened earlier."   This does i not
appear to be in relation to anything in particular?
This is in general.

     Mr. COLLINS:   This appears to be general, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE!TAYLOR:  That may suggest an awareness
that the number of turnstiles there requires that they
should be in operation for longer to get the numbers
through;  I do not know.
                                        Mr. COLLINS

     Mr. COLLINS:  Indeed, sir, that had occurred to
me.  It may be that we will find out more about that
in due course.  I do not know.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   It continues:

     "West Stand:   South Yorkshire Police requested that
     a steward be made available to patrol the front of
     thfesWest Stand to prevent visiting fans throwing
     their tickets over.     Sheffield Wednesday Football
     Club to sell tickets from Row 7 upwards.   The
     possibility of removing certain crash barriers
     at the Leppings Lane standing area was discussed,
     as this would assist the flow of fans into the
     ground.   This matter would have to be taken up
     when the inspection of the ground relative to the
     issuing of the Safety Certificate takes place."

Then there is a reference to correct money at the turn­
stiles, keys and plans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Some barriers were removed,
were they, as a result of this?

     Mr. COLLINS:  As we will see, yes, sir.  There was
one important one removed at the mouth of Pen 3.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then we have a letter of 25th June,
1986, on 320, from the Chairman, Mr. McCee to the
Secretary, Mr. Chester, referring to a seminar for the
stewards, attendance of the police, and the confirmation
by the police to Mr. Chester of the 3rd July about the
proposal for the meeting, and giving "details of the
points we would wish to discuss", which were "1. Stewards
2. Access to ground - turnstiles, Leppings Lane end in
relation to away supporters", and so on.




                            /Then there is reference
                                     MR. COLLINS


      Then there is reference, 323 onwards, I think it is
an Ambulance Document relating to the ambulance requirements
in relation to Major Incidents at Sheffield Wednesday.

       If you look on 324 sir, you will see, I think it is
Ambulance, I will be corrected if I am wrong, it is provided
by 5 1

      "On arrival at ground, Station Officer Higgins,
      after consultation with Police, will establish
      patient treatment and loading point at Gymnasium
      which is located at rear of north stand off
      Penis tone Road North."

Then there is a map as you see on 325 of the ground and of
where the ambulances are supposed to go.  There is another map
on 326 showing the surrounding area.

      Then on 327 there is an indication of the means of
evacuation.

      Then a letter on 328 from Superintendent Marshall to
Mr. Wilkinson of the Ambulance Service enclosing Appendix 'L'
of the Force Standing Order which relates to evacuation,
contingency plans for evacuation and which we have already
seen within the Standing Order.  I am not going to take you
through it sir at this stage, save that I think I would note
at the bottom of 330:

      "Details of Deployment, Duties and Instructions
      to Stewards

      These details should be drawn up by the Club in
      consultation with the Police and Fire Brigade,
      with particular reference to stewards' responsi­
      bilities in assisting police in evacuation
      situations."

8 deals with communications and then on 334 at the top
paragraph 1:

      "The prime responsibility for the arrangement
      of affairs at sports grounds lies with the club.
      To that end they should ensure that stewards are
      suitably qualified."

On 336 7a.

      "Specific Duties of Stewards

      Specific duties to be undertaken by Stewards
      include:

      a) Preventing overcrowding, ensuring that
      crowd limits in various parts of the ground are
                                  MR. COLLINS


     complied with and that gangways and exits are
     kept clear."

So there is the Police, or there are the Police indicating that
insofar as their Standing Orders are concerned they are placing
the duty upon the Club Stewards to prevent overcrowding and
ensure that the limits are complied with and the gangways and
exits are kept clear.  That of course is what was in writing
in there.
      Then we have a letter at 338, 14th July 1986 from
Eastwood to Mr. Chester relating or referring to the update
of the Green Guide, the 1986 version, the one that is now
in force.
      "I have read through the part of the document
      which deals with Sports Grounds.  I do not see
      any grounds for objecting to any of the
      recommendations.  There will be little if any
      change in the procedure already established at
      Hillsborough.  The document envisages that far
      more grounds for various sports will be
      designated, but in appropriate circumstances
      the procedures will not be so onerous as those
      relating to Hillsborough."

I am wrong, it is not the new Green Guide, it is the forecast
I think of what eventually became the 1987 Act and the Home
Office views on Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Grounds.

     "There is a welcome statement on page 11 that
      due account should be taken of the need to
      keep the costs to clubs and local authorities
      to reasonable proportions.  There are also
      various references to Safety Certificates
      reflecting the circumstances of each particular
      ground and the number of spectators who are
      likely to attend.  These words may be useful
      to us in the future, although we can expect to
      have more stringent requirements compared with
      some of the smaller clubs.

      It is comforting to know that the new Green
      Guide will not become a statutory code and will
      continue to be subject to interpretation."

It may suggest slightly the wrong attitude to the Safety
Requirements in the Green Guide, but that may be unfair to
Dr. Eastwood and no doubt he will explain that in due time.

       340 is the Ambulance Service writing to Mr. Chester,
 referring to the visit of Mr. Wilkinson on the 16th of July.
 Second paragraph:
                                    MR. COLLINS


     "The meeting was held with Mr. Ward, Senior
     Groundsman.  After touring your complex and
     discussing evacuation plans with South Yorkshire
     Police, it was felt that the Ambulance Service
     would normally only become involved in any
     events after they had already occurred and
     therefore, slight delays could be experienced
     on occasions in responding to the incident.
     To avoid this I would ask if two passes could
     be supplied to the Ambulance Service which
     would enable us to ensure that an Ambulance
     Officer was in your ground at all home fixtures.

     There would be no cost to the Club for this
     facility, and it would improve ground safety.
     In the event of any untoward occurrence my
     Officers would be in a position to identify
     problems prior to them happening and would
     therefore be in a much better position to
     respond to any emergency."

Someone has written ....

      MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, that is my writing.

      Perhaps while I am on my feet I should say that the
documents at page 322-327, which is the SYMAS Plan for
Hillsborough* were prepared after the meeting of the 18th
of July to which this letter refers.

      MR. COLLINS: I am grateful.

      I think though Mr. Kallipetis' comment is an accurate
one, the two season tickets were indeed not made available.

      Then at 341 we have a manuscript reference,  I think
this is Mr. Strange's writing again, to the inspection
by the Working Party on the 7th August 1986.

      "Items of safety work requested to be carried o u t .

      1) Remove three barriers on Leppings Lane end
      terrace.  Add new barrier."

2 refers to the removal of another barrier.   Now I think
sir it is 2 that is the relevant one because that should
show and does show, I think, the exit from the tunnel
on to Pens 3 and 4 and if you look at the right-hand side
where it says "OUT" that goes altogether.   The left-hand
the part of the barrier which goes up to the fences is
removed.

      If you would be good enough sir to look at the plan
of the barriers that we have somewhere, you will see sir
that the one in question is the one, or what is left is
                                     MR. COLLINS


that one described as "Design 3. Height 3'11”, 1.2 metres"
nearest the tunnel entrance in Pen 4.

      That originally was barrier 144 and was originally
stretched across what is now the central fence, and effectively
there was a barrier across the mouth of the tunnel.

      LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   It went all the way, did it?

      MR. COLLINS:  All the way across the mouth of the tunnel.
What is removed effectively is the remnants of that barrier,
effectively that position of the barrier in Pen 3 which should
have corresponded to what is now left in Pen 4 is removed.
The proposal was to remove it altogether and indeed it was
removed and the bit that linked up with the fence in Pen 4
was also removed.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: If the drawing at 341 is correct
itlooks as though   the Pen 4 bit was continuous with what
remained up to where the fence is, dividing fence is, but
the other one was not joined on.    Is that right?

      MR. COLLINS:  That would appear to be the case.  I
suspect the reason for that may have been when they put in
that central fence, and I think we can see this actually
if we go back to the plan, they took a bit of it out when
they put in the central fence.  I forget the page number
of the plans but it perhaps does not matter for the moment.

      I don't think it is necessary for me to read any more
of that.

      At 342 onwards there is a submission by Mr. Eastwood
relating to the application for increased capacity on the Kop.

      Sir, we have put that in not because it is in itself
of direct relevance, but it perhaps worth noting on page 350
where there is a discussion of the fire requirements because
there were arguments about the evacuation times, there is
a note in the middle of 350 in the paragraph beginning:
"The present Chief Fire Officer, Mr. Harry Wright" it goes
on about four lines in:

      "He was prepared to count the exits onto the
        pitch as part of the evacuation system in an
      emergency (each gate is controlled by a policeman)."

That you will recall, sir, was the difference between the Kop
end and the Leppings Lane end.

      Mr. Eastwood takes that up on 351:

      "With this as background the Club has been
      quite shocked by the suggestion that the gates
      onto the pitch should be ignored in the
      calculations of evacuation times, and that
                                   MR. COLLINS


      eight minutes should be achieved by means of
      ordinary exits. They feel this change of view
      cannot be justified."

Sir, I think all the relevant documents were included for
the sake of completeness, but we can in fact go on to page 368
that still refers to the Kop and is referring to the HSE.

      369, the reason for the inclusion of that newspaper
extract is the point I made earlier:  you will recall the
regulations require advertisement in the newpp&pers.  You
will hear in due course from the City Council that they accept
that they did not advertise or did not requite an advertise­
ment as they should have done, but they say:  "Well anyway
everyone knew about it because it was given a lot of publicity
and there is the publicity being given.

      I am not sure that is a very good excuse for failing
to comply with statutory requirements but still.

      Page 370, a letter of the 27th August 1986, or a copy
of a letter from Mr. Bownes to Mr. Chester:

      "I refer to the meeting of the General Purposes
      Panel of the City Council which took place on
      Thursday 21 August 1986 which you and other
      representatives of the Club attended.

      I am writing to confirm that the Panel agreed to
      increase the capacity of the Kop to 21,000
      spectators subject to the following conditionss-

      (a) that the infilling of crush barriers takes
      place prior to the match on 25th August;

      (b) the other work referred to before the Panel
      be completed within 2 weeks (i.e. by 4th
      September 1986);

      (c) extra stewarding be provided during the
      next 2 matches to the satisfaction of the Fire
      Service and the Police.

      Obviously, all work is to be carried out to the
      satisfaction of the Certificating Authority and
      the Panel authorised me to take any necessary
      action to secure compliance with the above
      conditions."

Well they got that permission but no one ever thought to
change the Safety Certificate.

      1st October 1986 is the next letter, 372. Eastwood,
or somebody in Eastwood's firm on behalf of Eastwood to
Mr. Chester:
                                  MR. COLLINS


     "During the summer inspection Inspector Calvert
     asked for some of the barriers at the Leppings
     Lane end of the ground to be removed so as to
     allow easier access into the various pens.
     Rather than ask ... sub-contractor to do the
     work, who were at that time working overtime, we
     instructed a firm to have the work completed
     before the Everton game. This they did and today
     we have forwarded a certificate ....    Payment
     should be received by them no later than 16
     October 1986."

There was a reference you will recall when that was mooted to
it having been put before the Working Party and notification
given.  There was no record that we have been able to find
that it ever was put up in that way.




                       /On the face of it
                                       MR. C O L L I N S

On the face of it there is a breach, therefore, of
the terms of the Safety certificate and no-one at any
time seems to have considered the effect of removing
that barrier upon the capacity of Pen 3 or upon the
likely effect of people coming into Pen 3 and their
means of access because, of course, the removal of that
barrier as becomes clear from looking at the plan
of the configuration of the bafiiers means that there
is a channel from the mouth of the tunnel down effectively
to the barrier that collapsed.    I do not say that
the two are necessarily connected, one perhaps does not
know, but it is at least significant that there was the
capability of a surge down in that way.    There is evidence
that we have of people going diagonally or being    carried
diagonally down that pen and it is a fact that the collapse
of the barrier was in such a position that was consistent
with pressure being applied through that diagonal and, of
course, that is the effect, or one possible effect, of the
removal of that barrier and it was, therefore, we would
say of the most vital importance that this removal should
not be carried out without considering what effect, if
any, it would have upon the safe capacity or the safe use
of that pen.

     373 is the internal Police memorandum in which the
relevant Superintendent writes to his Chief Superintendent,
who I think at that time would have been Mr. Mole, saying:

     "I have gone through the whole of this extremely
     comprehensive document" - that is the revised
     edition of the Green Guide - "and whilst a co nsider­
     able amount of the contents is applicable to man ag e­
     ment of the Club, engineering problems and fire
     officers, certain paragraphs are worthy of mention
     in relation to Sheffield Wednesday's Football
     Ground at Hillsborough.

     Paragraph 16 relating to crowd pressures.    As you
     are aware the Kop has had a tendency at recent
     matches to produce this wave effect and it is
     necessary that when a large match is anticipated
     in the future we should ensure that the numbers
     allowed onto the Kop strictly adhere to the capacity
     allowed.   it is imperative therefore that the
     automatic counting system is always in working order
     for 'A' and *B ' category matches, such as the visits
     of Manchester United, where almost capacity crowds
     can be expected."

Interesting to note that capacity on the Kop is there
emphasised but there is no similar emphasis in relation
to the Leppings Lane end.

     "Paragraph 23 onwards lays down the management
     responsibility very clearly and is to be welcomed,
     since there have in the past been grey areas as to
     who is responsible for crowd control etc."
                       101


                                         MR. C O L L I N S

I fear that not only in the past, in the light of what
we have been hearing in the course of this Inquiry.

       "Paragraph 28 recommends the appointment of a
       safety officer and identifies his duties.   I can
«-   ,anly presume that the safety officer is in fact
       Mr. Lock"

actually, no - as we shall see in the later documentation
the Safety Officer is Mr. Mackrell

      "although I have never heard him designated as
      such, and this should be clarified with the club.
      Furthermore, in the discussion of a central
      control point being designated (other than then
      police Q.ontKO'l.) one would assume that the central
      control point designated in respect of the Sheffield
      Wednesday ground would be the video viewing room
      in the south stand.

      Paragraph 43 relates to records of tests kept and
      examination of the ground.   I am not aware that
      these are kept by the club.

      Paragraph 199 relates to exercises of stewards
      regarding emergency procedures and I am not aware
      that the cliab have ever carried out exercises in
      this respect.

      In conclusion, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
      have complied with the guide to a very large extent,
      more so I would suspect, than the majority of clubs
      in the country, and it is only on minor points as
      identified above where improvements could be made
      so far as police procedures are concerned."

Then we have, on 18th February, 1987, the Fire input in
relation to the proposed new Certificate.    Sir, the
letter of 3rd November, 1986, is merely a letter requesting
that the Fire Service do the necessary checks and make
the necessary recommendations. ' For the record, it is
Exhibit 67 in the Fire Service bundle.    It is not included
in this bundle.   It says:

      "An inspection of the ground was carried out on
      17th November, 1986.   ComsBents appended below
      do not take into account the numbers of persons
      using individual areas, lateral and radial gangways
      or units of exit widths, as it is assumed that
      from various correspondence and documentation
      that the various working parties and committees
      have adequately dealt with these items."

Then it deals with escaping   fire, and then "B" on the
Spion Kop:

      "It is understood that the gates in the pitch perimeter
      fencing form part of the emergency exits.   The gates
                         102


                                                MR. C O L L I N S

     for reasons of security, fasten with barrel bolts
     secured to the gate both top and bottom and open
     in a sideways direction.   It is doubtful that if
     it were necessary to evacuate the stand onto the
     pitch in an emergency that the gates would opea; if
     pressure were generated by a crowd.   No record can
     be found in respect of discussion on gate fastenings.
     It is recommended that a satisfactory security
     device easily openable from the pitch side should
     be found and fitted to all perimeter gates."

And then,   a little lower down,     "West Stand" under "B":

     "Exit gates to the pitch perimeter as item B under
     Spion Kop above."

It may be said that that implies an acceptance as at that
date that the perimeter gates at the Leppings Lane end
were to perform the same function as the perimeter gates
at the spion Kop end and that, of course, may as a
matter of fact be so but I again repeat that quite clearly
from the earlier correspondence those were not treated
as evacuation gates for the purpose of deciding on the
timings in relation to the safety at the Leppings Lane
end, althoucji undoubtedly they could and would be used
if circumstances made it necessary.

     Sir, I do not think it is necessary to go through
any of the other items.  They are all very^detailed matters
but do not, I think, relate to matters which are vital to
this Inquiry.

     379 is a note of a message       from Sharon to Mr. Strange
and to Mr. Eastwood:

     "Subject:  Ground Capacity for possible Semi-final.
     Dated 26th February, 1987.
     Sharon has been sent a form from the Football
     Association to fill in for Hillsborough to be
     considered for this year's semi-finals."

After 1981 and the problems of 1981 Hillsborough was not
considered by the F.A. and it was not until 1987 that
it was put back into favour.

     MR. G I B S O N - W A T T : Sir, that is not quite right.
It was considered for a replay in 1986.

     MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry,       I had forgotten that.
It took place there, did it?

     MR. GIBSON-WATT:       No,   the replay was not needed.

     MR. COLLINS:
     "1._ She wanted to know present capacity o f .
     Spion Kop - 21,000.
                       103


                                           MR. C O L L I N S

     "2. What is the live reading under the floodlights"

Wife do not need to bother with that.

     "3.  Has any account been taken for alterations
     done atfLeppings Lane over last few seasons?   Is
     the 10,200        figure still correct?   I said
     that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better
     to do it now than later.    It could also affect
     ticket sales for Coventry game.    She will speak
     to Graham."

Graham, I think, Is Mr. Mackrell.   That is Eastwoods
Mr. Strange effectively indicating that the figure at
leppings Lane is too high because although adjusted could
mean either way in the context of what we have been seeing
before he is quite clearly thinking in terms of an
adjustment down rather than up, and that is February, 1987.

     2nd March, 1987, telephone message on page 380
from Mr. Strange to Sharon:

     "3» Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
     Leppings Lane end as it is, providing police
     have gates under West stand open so that people
     can distribute throughout the terrace evenly."

Now, there we have I won't say the genesis but a
reflection of the policy which appears to be universal
from the evidence we have had that all you need do is to
let the fans settle themselves on the terraces.    Very
strange philosophy in the light of what we saw in relation
to the 1981 match and comments thereafter and, of course,
on the face of it nothing to do with the point which is
being made which is, is the capacity to be changed,
because it does not matter whether they can distribute
themselves evenly or not;  if the capacity is too high,
then however they distribute themselves there are going
to be too many of them and if there are too many of them
there are going to be safety problems.   But, anyway, that
matter was raised, as you see, sir, in February, 1987, but
was effectively, on the face of it, sat upon by Dr. Eastwood
on 2nd March.

     Then we have a Fire Service note from file at page
381 of a meeting held comprising a member of the Fire
Service, Mr. Bownes, and other Oficers of the City Council,
Mr. Moor from Environmental Health, and two gentlemen
from the Building Surveyors Department.

     "Contents of letter dated 18.2.87" - that is page
     374 - "were discussed and agreed that these matters
     be taken up with the Club."  ' That 4,3 the fire
     matters.

     Thirdparagraph*

     "Stewarding and securing of all gates was discussed
                                      MR. C O L L I N S

    and the Fire Service indicated that existing
    arrangements were only acceptable subject to
    exits being stewarded and unlocked during 100SJ
    of the time that the ground was in use for a
    designated purpose.   Any relaxation of this would
    mean an insistence that panic fastenings only be
    pr o v i d e d ."

     Now, it is not made entirely clear there but I think
that that relates to or on the face of it it relates to
the external gates rather than any of the internal gates
in the terracing.

     "Discussion then took place on areas of responsibility
     and ground  inspections.

     On areas of responsibility Bownes did not want to be
     tied down to individual references and even indicated
     that his Department could not act independently but
     must refer all matters to the Council Committee
     responsible for the Act.   Whilst all others present
     would prefer definitive areas of responsibility
     (allowing that there must be some overlap), David
     Bownes preferred to refer back to a future meeting
     following further consideration of the matter.

     On ground inspections, Bownes referred to the recent
     Lords decision that grounds should be inspected
     annually"

I think that refers probably to an amendment of the Lords
to the 1987 Bill as it then was which became s . 10 (b) (3)
I think.

     "...he anticipated that this would mean a much more
     thorough examination than the present system of bi ­
     annual inspections, and that this would be backed up
     by inspections during games.

     This was agreed by all present but reservations
     about the suggestion that during game inspections be
     carried out by the whole working party were expressed
     by the Fire Service.   It was agreed however that one
     such 'during game' inspection would be set up and the
     outcome monitored.

     It was also pointed out by the Fire Service that
     the new guide now included a section which defines
     in detail, management responsibility.  It is
     recommended by ;the Fire Authority that the Club
     Certificate specifies as a condition of the licence
     that this section be complied with."

And, of course, that would be to remove the greyness of
the division of reepon&ibility or tofrelp to do that ami
was, no doubt, a very sensible suggestion.   Sitdly it was
not put into effect in time.
                                              MR. C O L L I N S

       "Note:  David Bownes is reluctant to produce minutes
       of meetings, therefore to safeguard the Authority
       we must make our own notes on meeting and forward
       letters to confirm any points as appropriate."

A letter then from the City of Sheffield on 22nd April,
1987:

       "In November, 1986 I asked both the Police and Fire
       Service to comment on the condition of your stadium
       having regard to the provisions of the 1975 Act.

       the Police have indicated that as at 6th January, 1987
       they are quite satisfied with the stadium and have
       indicated that the degree of co-operation which they
       receive is very satisfactory.

       the Fire Service have,   however,    made a number of
       comments"

and   then they are set out, because the letter is enclosed
and   again "the gates" is the outside gates, as I have
indicated.    I do not think I need read the rest in detail.

     385,   a telephone   message from Mr. Mackrell to Mr.
Strange:

       "1. He can't find any amendments to original Safety
       Certificate dated 1979.  Do I know if any exist?
       Not that I have seen.   One was to be drawn out after
       meeting about Spion Kop but knowing City of Sheffield
       they have ret done it.

       2. Would I send two prints of the latest ground lay-out.
       OK.

       3. He would prefer us to meet Officer Working Party
       to discuss their various comments, rather than write
       letters.

       During yesterday's meeting with Graham he asked if
       we would raise the question of increasing the agreed
       capacity on Spion Kop with Officer Working Party."

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     When did Mr. Mackrell come?

       MR. COLLINS:    I cannot off-hand remember,           sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       He took over from Mr. Chester,
did he?

       MR. GLASGOW:     November, 1986,    I think,   sir,    if    you
will    let me check it.    I am sorry.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Anyway he cottoned on to the
fact that nothing had happened to the safety Certificate
if nobody else had.
                                          MR. C O L L I N S

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   then we have a
memorandum from the Building Surveyor to Mr. Biownes:

     "I note your request for a report on the condition
     of the above stadium.   You will appreciate that
     to carry out a complete survey of all parts of
     this complex is a long and time-consuming job  which
     should not be approached in anything other than a thorough
     manner.   I have therefore yet to find available diary
     time for my Officers to spend on this site."

That is June, 1987.    In July we have the first draft
Certificate Conditions which are sent to the Fire Officer
or Fire Service.   "A first draft only and in basic form,
(i.e. they have not as yet been tailored to the needs of
individual stadia).    I enclose a first draft of the
interpretation section" and that is at 388 and then the
draft conditions at 389.    1. to appoint a Safety Officer,
3. The maximum number of spectators, schedule blank - there
was not any schedule.    4, 5 and 6 require arrangements
with the Chief Constable for the provision of a sufficient
number of Police Officers, providing for police use control
rooms and saying no spectator shall be admitted unless the
methods of admission and the methods to be used for
segregation have been approved by the Chief Constable.
9. The Holder shall ensure that the Safety Stewards
are fit and capable to carryout their duties, properly
trained and instructed, and so on.

     390. "10. the written instructions given to
     stewards must include the following tasks and duties.
     Stewards must:

     (a) prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd
     limits in various parts of the ground are complied
     with"

and there is a note to the left, written I think by someone
in the Fire service which is pretty illegibile on my copy
but the effect of it is, "How on earth can they do this.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can stewards control this - it
seems to say, does it not?

     MR. COLLINS:   Query.    Effectively it is how can
they do this.

     "(c) ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear."

and then various other details.    Over the page 391:

    "The Holder shall provide such signs or notices
    of such type, size and design as the Council may
    from time to time require for reasons of public safety.
    The H o lder shall ensure that -the signs or e-feices s&
    required are clearly legible so that they can easily
    be read at all times.
                                         MR. C O L L I N S

    ”26. Without prejudice to the provision of Section 8
    of the   Act the Holder shall not cause or permit the stadium
    or any   of its installations to be altered (which term
    shall exclude minor remedial works which do not in any
    way affect the safety of the stadium) in any manner
    whatsoever without the prior written consent of the
    Council.    The Holder shall supply the Council with
    copies of such plans and specifications" etc.

     28. The Holder shall provide and maintain at the
     stadium to the satisfaction of the Council a suitably
     equipped first aid room and shall arrange for
     attendance of such numbers of qualified first aid
     attendants as the Council may require"

and then it   goes on to require a doctor.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before we go on,leaving
aside the question of the amendment of the Safety Certificate,
26, the Holder did get the consent of the Council in writing
to the amendment of the radial fences, etc.   What about
the removal of the barrier?

     MR. COLLINS:    There does not appear to have been a prior
consent in writing to that as far as I can find in the
documentation.    Certainly there does not appear either to
have been an application for consent so it is not, perhaps,
surprising in those circumstances that there was no written
consent.   And then there are what I think are relatively
standard requirements for testing and so on, testing
records and inspections.




                          /LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         I am sorry.
                     108


                                                 MR. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry.  Just to clarify.
This is sent by the Council to the Chief Fire Officer

     MR. COLLINS:   Yes.

     10RD JUST1ESSTAYLOR:   Does it go to - presumably
passes between the.club .... What I am trying to get
at is what activated this, at any rate, beginning to
revise the safety certificate? Was it to do with ....

     MR. COLLINS:   No, it was activated, it would
appear, by the memorandum on the takeover by the City
Couneil in 1986, the memorandum in which you will
recall Mr. Bownes said there were inadequacies in
the existing safety certificate so it takes them
from 1986 until July? 1987,1 to get round to preparing
the first draft notwithstanding the inadequacies in
the existing certificate and the first .draft is not
sent to the club, it is sent to the, I think ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   313, is not it, if I am
not mistaken?

     MR. COLLINS:    313 is the internal report to
Council, that is correct, sir, and the relevant point
is on page 314.   The conditions do however give some
cause for concern as they appear to be inadequate or
inappropriate in some areas.   You will recall, sir,
in the resolution of the Council at page 318 at C,
the Head of Administration and Legal Department be
requested to draft new safety certificate conditions
in consultation.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.   This is when we pick
it up again, is it, next?

     MR. COLLINS:   A year later or so we have the
first draft.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have got it now.

      MR. COLLINS:   Then 394, there is the response
of the Fire Authority, 7th of July.   It is a slsightly
wider response because the couneil was also dealing
with a slightly wider matter and if we look at page
399,- sir, we will see the letter referred to of the
14th May, 1987, in the first sentence of 394.   This
was a letter sent by the City to the Chief Officer,
Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

    "Following a meeting on Tuesday, 10th   March
     I have given some further thought to   the above
     subject.  Many points were raised at   the meeting
     but I think that the general feeling   was that
     the roles of each Authority involved   in the
                      109


                                                  MR. COLLINS

     iystem should be defined perhaps along the
     lines adopted by the South Yorkshire.         I
     have no objection in principle to roles
     being defined in this way but I should
     make it clear that if it is agreed that
     particular Authorities adopt particular
     roles then they will be under a duty to
     consult with other interested parties where
     there is sreioverlap of interest.       As I see
     it the Authority which carries out a
     particular role will have the responsibility
     of advising the Council as Certificating
     Authority on all matters falling within
     that Lead M t h o r i t y role.  I have drawn up
     a draft Schedule which attempts to define
     Lead Authority roles.        I should point out
     that the draft is intended to be open for
     discussion and I would therefore welcome
     your comments on it. Would you please also
     let me know if there are any other matters
     which should be included ini the Schedule.

     Moving on to the question of inspections,
     this point was also discussed.  My view is
     that the existing system of bi annual
     limited inspections is no longer appropriate;
     I feel that one major inspection per year
     should be carried out oneach stadium which
     should include all the areas and installations
     within the sscope of the legislation.   To
     back up this inspection there should be a
     number of 'during performance' inspections
     by Officers.  I think that there is general
     agreement in relation to 'during performance'
     inspections as they would highlight the
     performance of the safety system at each
     stadium whilst it is in operation."

Then next paragraph, middle paragraph on 2:

    "Moving on to the 'working party' structure I
     think it is clear from the meeting of 10th
     March that some clarification of its status
     is required.  It is reasonably clear from
     the County Council's records that the working
     party as such was actually a decision making
     body presumably acting under delegated powers.
     However, the normal City Council practice iss
     that the principal powers remainwith a
     Committee or Sub-Committee (inthis case the
     General Purposes Panel) with routine matters
     being delegated to a Chief Officer (in this
     case myself).  I would therefore propose to
                                               MR. COLLINS

     ask the Panel to accept the working party as a
     forum for discussion.

     I take a view that the Lead Authority will be
     able to use the Working Party as a useful forum
     for discussion prior to drawing up that Authority's
     formal view to be submitted to the Certificating
     Authority,, I propose that when an Authority feels
     that a meeting would be appropriate contact should
     be made withny Chief Licensing Officer, Mr. Bownes,
     who will then make arrangements for the meeting
     to take place.  An agenda will be prepared and
     circulated" and so on.

Then in reply to that there is a letter at 394.   First
of all the schedule detailing proposed division felt
it should remain along the lines of the document issued
previously, so the new schedule is 398, new proposals.
Building surveyor should have responsibility of all
matters relating to structure of stadia including
crush barriers, walls, etc.   Fire service, fire
precautions, fire alarms,   means of escape, emergency
lighting, stadium capacity.   Police, stadium policing,
ground security, evacuation procedures, assess of
emergency vehicles and emergency planning and the
Director of Environmental Health and Consumer Services,
miscellaneous safety hazards such as nosings, trip
hazards, floor surfaces, defective seating, electrical
safety, food safety and hygiene, toilet accommodation,"
etc.  Then we see also- is the old one, sir, which we
looked at at page 27 and 28 in the bundle.   It is the
South Yorkshire one.   There is not actually an enormous
difference really when one analyses it between the two
but the fire response is they would prefer the South
Yorkshire as it has stood the test of time with few
problems.

    "Whatever the outcome," they go on, one area
     where there may be a meed for emphasis is a
     reference to the fact that all authorities
     should be more aware of other authorities
     responsibilities and that when considering
     any proposals all aspects of the green
     guide ...."

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Where are you reading now?

     MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry.  I have gone back to
394, the second paragraph in No. 1.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Right.

    MR. COLLINS:     "Whatever the outcome one area
    where there may be a need for emphasis is a
    reference to the fact that all authorities
                     111


                                               MR. COLLINS

     should be more aware of other kathorities
     responsibilities and that when considering
     any proposals all aspects of the green
     guide should be taken into account in
     order that full consultation can take place
     with other interested authorities?" which
     clearly is a very proper and sensible
     approach.

    "2.  The proposal for one annual inspection
     by the working group in conjunction with
     individual inspections by authorities as
     and when considered necessary is agreed
     with although it is envisaged that because
     of manpower resource limitations the degree
     of central co-ordination referred; to may
     cause problems.

     The Fire Authority would wish to carry out
     such inspections subject to the limitations
     referred to above and under varying conditions
     at the ground.   Obviously any adverse comments
     on crowd safety would be forwarded to your
     department.  As to the annual inspection, a
     good time would be at the end or towards the
     end of a season in order that any necessary
     work can be followed up before the commencement
     of a new season.

     Whilst the situation regarding the status of the
     working group is fully appreciated, this
     authority feels that the recognition of
     the group as a decision making body by the
     CityGCouncil is imperative if it is to remain
     effective.  As under the County Council
     however, the terms of reference of the group
     would be within the conditions of certification
     laid down by the City Council, anything beyond
     these terms being referred back via your
     Department for a Committee decision.

     The procedure outlined for calling additional
     meetings of the working group is agreed with
     although it is considered essential that full
     minutes of all meetings are produced and
     circulated and in particular should make
     direct reference to outstanding matters from
     previous meetings in order that these are not
     'lost' in the minutea "

     MR. GLASGOW:   I am so sorry.   I think there is a
little confusion crept inswilth the speed at which it
has been done.  Could I just ask my friend to clarify
that he read us the draft new certificate.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   39.
                                                      MR. COLLINS

     MR. GLASGOW:   Y e s ? sir.  Then 394 of course is not
a reply to that and it is very confusing because this is
the one point in the bundle at which the chronological
order gets out of place.     394 in fact is a reply to 399.
I think very importantly one has to go on to 409 in
order to get the Fire Service's reply to the certificate
point where they deal with it seriatim and it is very
important in view of what they say about stewarding.

     MR. COLLINS:   Mr. Glasgow is absolutely right and
I apologise for not making it clear.  It is indeed right
the bundle, 394 to 399, should be read together in
isolation from the letter, the Fire Service letter or,
rather, the letter to the Fire Service, Enclosing the
certificate at 387, enclosing the draft certificate at
387.  As a matter of chronology, what has happened is
there were two letters of the 7th of July which are
relevant.  There is the letter at 387 and there is
the letter at 394.  In fact, ideally, the letter at
387 should have been placed after pages! 394 to 399
so that ideally it should run 386, 394 to 399, then
back to 387.

       MR. GLASGOW:    No, no, 399 has got to go before
394.

       MR. COLLINS:   Yes, I am     including 399 ....

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Then back to 387.

     MR. COLLINS:      Then back to 387.     I am sorry
about that, sir..

       LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:     Then 409 follows on.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is the fire answer.  409 is
the fire answer or, rather, the fire comments on the
draft safety certificate.  May I go back to 401? You
will see, sir, that this refers to the Police receipt
of the City Council letter referring to - and the
letter is on 402 - referring to the arrangement of
a meeting.  Hope it will produce a consensus view
on future administrative procedures.  That of course
is the same or are the same matters, I think, that
were referred to in the letter of the 14thof May
at 399.

     There is a letter from the Chief Constable
which is undaded but someone has written at the
top 16/17th July.   Says, "Thank you for your letter
of the 14th ofnMay.   Overlap of interest,  as you
rightly point out.    Helpful to have a meeting."
Then there is another copy at 404 of the letter of
the 14th of May.   This is the Police copy. 407 is
<L\                         113


                                                     MR. COLLINS
      the draft Police response to that, I think.    I do not
      think we need go into it.   408 is a note of the meeting.
      Discussions were divided into four areas.    "Definition
      of Rolls"-of the wrong sort - "Inspections, Status of Group,
      Admin Machinery of the Group.   1.   It was agreed that
      roles should be broadly defined and responsibilities taken
      on by the appropriate of the three 'lead authorities'
      i.e. Police, Fire and Building Surveyors subject to
      agreement where overlap occurs.    All contact with the
      ground should be through the licensimgg authority.
      Environmental Heilth would take a 'general safety role'
      and not be a 'lead' authority.   2. The annual inspection
      is to be a joint full inspection to be carried out near
      the end of each season.   Match inspections to be done on
      an individual basis.  3. The meeting was informed that
      legally the group is essentially an advisory authority -
      only the council can be the ultimate decision making
      authority."

           Then we have 409, the Fire Service comments on the
      draft certificate and you will see, sir, Section 10(a)
      which is the one relating to the requirements the
      stewards should deal with the control of the crowds.

           LOR© JUSTICE LTAYLOR:   That follows the marginal
      comment we read before.

           MR. COLLINS:   It does indeed.  And over the page
      on 410 they say two additional items for consideration:

          "(i) That a competent electrician employed or
           retained by thee Holder shall be present during
           a specified activity.

           (ii) The Holdeex shall provide and maintain
           within the stadium to the satisfaction of the
           Council the access routes for emergency vehicles
           shown on the plans."

      And then we have the inputs August, 1987, from the
      Health and Consumer Services in the Coaacil.  Health
      and Safety - General at the bottom.

          "2.  The main first aid room requires to be
           supplied with adequate first aid equipment
           for the treatment of spectators should they
           become ill or injured.

          3.  In order to ensure that the football club
          fully discharge their duty to supply an
          adequate number of first aiders, I would
          require that a minimum of 12 be employed to
          render first a i d to spectators during an
          activity.  If the club continue to use the
          voluntary services of St. John's, then it
                                                 MR. COLLINS

     would be necessary to formalise their
     relationship with them in order to ensure
     adequate deployment.

     4. I am to understand that the club is now
     prepared to appoint, in writing, a safety
     officer of adequate status and authority.
     I would propose that he has the functions
     described in the draft safety certificate
     conditions.

     During the inspection of the football club's
     stadium it became obvious that the stands and
     associated areas are subject to excellent
     standards of maintenance and upkeep.   Bearing
     in mind the size of the premises the above-
     mentioned points are of only minor significance
     and I was suitably, impressed with the level of
     ground management being maintained^,

     I would advise that tte identity and role of
     the Ground Safety Officer be formalised in
     accordance with the green guide and without
     undue delay."

Then a note from Mr. Strange of Eastwoods to the
City  CoHncilj "Further to the recent discussionss
with  representatives from the Police, Fire Service
and Building Surveyors Department .... we have
pleasure in enclosing four copies of sketches ...."
This is the device for the gates and that is shown
at 415 and 416.  Then we have the report, September,
1987 ___

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I do not want to take up
time.   Do we gather from this as to whether these gates
are only intended to be openeddfrom outside or whether
they are supposed to be capable of being opened under
some pressure?

     MR. COLLINS:   My understanding is they are designed
only to be openable from outside.  As you know, sir, there
 has been evidence in the Inquiry of those who &ay that
they were opened by pressure from within.  We were
hoping to be able to carry out some tests to see
whether it was possible to open them by pressure from
within.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And by what pressure.

     MR. COLLINS:  And by what pressure.  As far as I
am aware either it has not been possible to organise
those tests or we have not got the results if they have
been organised.
                                                 MR. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am told Dr. Eastwood has
tested them and they cannot be ....

     MR. COLLINS:   Thank you, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We shall hear him.

     MR. COLLINS:   I did not know that.

     MR. GLASGOW:   May I just help you on thatbecause
we have asked the questions as well and we have not had
an answer and when we do we will help you.  Possibly
particularly for Professor Maunder's guidance.if you
look at the plan on 415 the matter which concerns us
is the dishing area at the bottom of the catch because,
 to be candid, we do not understand how that can be
consistent with a locking from pressure within.   It
appears to be designed to slip up under some pressure.
One would ....

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Clearly we had better have
this looked at when the expert ....

     MR. GLASGOW:   We have asked but we cannot help
further.

     MR. COLLINS:   I think we are in much the same
position at the moment.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.  There is then the
report of the Head of Administration.  The Panel will
recall the City Council inherited the role of
certificating authority, etc.  The Current Situation.
I do not think really I need it.  It is all history.
Except for the penultimate paragraph.

    "The drafting of new safety certificate conditions
     in consultation with the Council's advisers has
     been progressing steadily and new draft conditions
     are currently under consideration by those advisers.
     It is hoped that the new conditions will  be
     submitted to the Panel at its meeting in October
     for final approval."

I suppose that depends on what you mean by steadily.

418. "Future administration of the Council's
certificating function.  Following a thorough review of
the legislation it has become clear that a detailed
administrative system needs to be established  in
connection with the Council's certificating function.
Discussions have been underway.  Accepting that the
Council as the certificating authority will act on
                                               MR. COLLINS

     the basis of advice from experts (such as the
     Fire Seryice) the question arises as to how
     that advice may be best formulated.  In the
     past the County Council organised an Officer
     Working Party which was apparently used as a
     forum for discussion between Officers prior to
     the final formulation of advice to the Council.

     As it is essential that meetings take place
     due to the potential overlap of requirements in
     many areas, all the Authorities and Officers have
     now agreed that it would be appropriate to
     establish a revised form of the working party
     to perform a similar function for the City Council.
     It is recommended that the 'Safety of Sports Grounds
     Advisory Group' (which would consist of rep­
     resentatives from the Police, the Fire Service,
     the Building Surveyor's Division and the Department
     of Health and Consumer Services), would function as
     a forum for discussion between Officers," and so on.

Then at the bottom:

    “Under the old County Council administrative
     structure the different Authorities represented
     in their working party had fairly clearly defined
     roles within which to operate.    Although it can
     be seen that there is some merit in this idea the
     areas of potential overlap of responsibility are
     quite extensive.   However it apppars that the
     various Authorities and Officers wish for some
     definition of roles and the following have been
     agreed." Building Surveyor, structure, etc.
     Well, they are the obvious ones.    "It is antic­
     ipated that the Health and Consumer Services
     Department would have an input on (a) aspects of
     general safety;   ^b) the general safety management;
     (c) various special? items such as first aid
     requirements.   It will be appreciated that these
     areas are not exhaustive."      Inspections, large-
     scale annually.   "Delegations.   There is also a
     further question to be dealt with at this stage
     and that relates to the day to day decision making
     required for the running of the Certification
     System" and so on.   Recommendations to note,
     approve and delegate as appropriate.

Gate release device is approved at page 420.   421,
Council to Mr. Mackrell.  "I refer to the revised Guide" -
that is the 1986 edition - "which was recently published
by H.M. Government following the Popplewell Report."  I
suppose that again depends on what you mean by recently.
"I would like to draw your attention to the new Guide
and in particular Chapter 2 entitled 'Management
Responsibility.' This chapter sets out in detail the
t\o                          117


                                                       MR. COLLINS

      sort of matters which ground management should be
      responsible for and I regard it as essential that
      the management of designated stadia should be entirely
      familiar with it and follow its guidance.  Would you
      therefore?confirm in writing that you have obtained
      and intend to retain a copy and that your Company and
      its Officers are familiar with it.  You should also take
      immediate steps to appoint a Safety Officer."




                                   / 422.   Mr. Mackrell   ..
                                      Mr. COLLINS

At 422 Mr. Mackrell writes back saying that he does have
a copy and has had one for many months and that with
regard to the appointment of safety officer, his duties
encompass those of safety officer, and he would be
grateful if they Could amend the records accordingly.

     We then have the Home Office© NOtes to which I
referred earlier on, to take us through to 430.

     Then we come to the 4th December 1987, a letter
from the Council to Mr. Mackrell enclosing comments
made by officers arising from the inspection.  The
last paragraph:

     "The Fire Service has recently reminded me that
     no reply has yet been received to my letter of
     22nd April enclosing their letter of 18th’ February."

They are respectively 383 and 374 in the bundle.

     "You will recall that you were asked in that letter
     to comment on the points raised by the Fire
     Service and I would appreciate those comments
     as soon as possible.  I take the view that it is
     appropriate for a Certificate Holder to have the
     opportunity to comment on the views of Officers
     before final decisions are taken on works that
     are required".

Then the comments occur at 432 and 433.   Page 433,
under "Miscellaneous Points":

     "4.2 The main first aid room requires to be
     supplied with adequate first aid equipment for
     the treatment of spectators should they become
     ill or injured within the sports ground".

I think the other matters are relatively minor or not
relevant f & r our purposes. Then there is an interesting
memorandum at page 434, internal to the City, dated 2nd
February 1988, from the Building Surveyor; 'He says:

     "I am advised by a member of my staff who has
     attended recent games that there has been a lack
     of effective stewarding on the Kop, resulting in
     the crowd occupying the radial gangways as
     additional standing areas throughout the games.

     Although it is appreciated that these games were
     important Cup-Ties and therefore attracted increased
     crowd capacities, stewarding must be of a quality
     and of such numbers as to maintain these gangways
     free from congestion during performances.

     It is also understood that the turnstile capacity
     on the Penistone Road frontage fwas insufficient,
     and that many of the spectators were still entering
     the ground up to 15 minutes after the kick-off.
                                       Mr. COLLINS

     The combination of late arrival and ineffective
     stewarding could lead to dangerous occurrences.

     It is considered that the Club should be made aware
     of these matters and be required to confirm that
     stewarding will be made available to keep these
     areas clear.

     This is possibly a matter that should be raised
     at the next meeting of the Working Party so that
     police and fire authority comments may also be
     sought."

There are three things arising from that memorandum;
First of all, although it refers to the Kop, it identifies
a problem which, of course, is essentially the problem
which has given rise to this tragedy, although of course
at the other end, the combination of late arrival and
ineffective stewarding,    the combination of late
arrival causing the turnstiles to be unable to cope.
When I say "ineffective stewarding", I must not be taken
tomean that I am saying it is the Club's fault;     all
I am saying is stewarding in the sense of generally
ensuring that spectators go evenly on the terracing,
whoever may have been responsible for it.    I am using
the word "stewarding" in that sense, in that context.

     Secondly, it does not appear that the Council took
any action from that, they did not get in touch with
the Club and they did not raise it, or so it would
seem - certainly there is no record of their having
raised it ~ for police or fire authority comments.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you mean nothing flowed
from this memorandum?

     Mr. COLLINS:  It would seem that it was put on
file and that is as far as it went.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Bownes is the ...?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Mr. Bownes is the officer of the
Council who is responsible for the implementation of
the certification responsibilities under the 1975 Act.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   So it did not go to the
Working Party?

     Mr. COLLINS:  There is no record in writing that it
did do, although I think it is fair to say that the
City Council in their evidence may say that there was
reference to its contents rather than to it itself, at
the next meeting of the Working Party.  Sadly, we do
not appear to have, and certainly I have not seen in
the. documents, a record of that Working Party.

    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.
                                         M r . COLLINS

    Mr. COLLINS:    Maybe because no-one took any Minutes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  On page 435 is a letter from Eastwoods
dealing with their responses to the various matters. C^n
I go on to 441?    These are all the matters set out in
letter, you will recall, sir, most of which I said were
relatively minor.     I simply referred to 441, the last
paragraph, where it said :\

     "The Club have expressed to us their increasing
     concern that with the introduction of each new
     member of the Fire Service to the Officer Working
     Party new or different recommendations are put
     forward by that officer, which in some cases openly
     contradict the recommendations offered by his
     predecessors.   Whereas we agree that many of the
     observations arWJ lecommendations;are of a subjective
     nature, the Club cannot be expected to continue
     spending money on matters which are purely a matter
     of personal opinion ..."

and so on.  The Fire Authority's response to that is not
in the bundle.  For the record, it is document 81 in the
Fire Service bundle and the effect of it is to indicate
that those strictures were, in their view, a little
exaggerated, to use their words.

     442 deals with the gate   safety device, and sodoes
443   - a demonstration to the police.  444   is   another
letter, but a round robin, I think -

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry, do    we   get a
reply to the document at 431, or have we not got there
yet?

     Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, sir, we do, and we have not
got there yet.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   All right.

     Mr. COLLINS:   444 is a round robin letter.   I call
it a round robin letter, but   it would appear to be a
common form letter addressed no doubt to a number of
bodies, including Sheffield Wednesday, in April 1988,
and I think I suspect Mr. Kallipetis again in the no
response;  he confirms that.   The middle paragraph says:

     "We acknowledge the very valuable contribution
     which the St. John Ambulance and British Red
     Cross make.  There are,  however, areas where the
     level of care which we can provide, of necessity,
     exceed those which can be provided by the
     voluntary societies ... Can we be of assistance
     to you?"
                                     Mr. COLLINS

     Then there is the response of the Fire Service of
the 25th May 1988, the note of matters following
inspection.  I do not think there are any matters that
I need specifically refer to there.

     Tten there is a memorandum of the form of inspection
from the Director of Health and Consumer Services, and
again there is nothing there that I need specifically
refer to.    Sir, if you will give me a moment, I said
that there was a response from the Club, and I am sure
there was and I think I must have gone over it to the
next one.  431, sir, is dated 4th December, 1987, and,
of course, refers back to a reply to the letter of the
22nd April enclosing the letter of the 18th February.
If one goes to 435, one sees that that is a reply to the
letter of the 22nd April, 1987;   so that is the reply
referred to.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I see.

      Mr. COLLINS:    I am sorry, I should have spotted
that.   I apologise.  Can I now come on back again to
449? That is an internal communication to the Club,
written in the Club, with a copy sent to Inspector
Sewell of the Police.   We have seen that. That is the
instruction to the match day staff.   You will recall,
sir, that it does not on the face of it have any scope
for stewarding in the terraces.

     455 is Sheffield Wednesday's instructions to stewards.
Again there is nothing in that that refers specifically
to any duties in the terraces;  it refers to nothing
specific to the terraces as opposed to the stands. That
again is a document that we have already seen.

     457 is August, 1988 and refers to the testing of
barriers in the third line:

       "The barriers tested were numbers 121 to 124, 124A" -

and that is the barrier that went.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Were do we find these
labelled?

     Mr. COLLINS:   Sir, there is a plan which should
be at the front of your ---

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes,     I have got   it, thank
you.

       Mr. COLLINS:     459 and 460 is the same plan.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes,     I have got   it.

     Mr. COLLINS:   And 124A can in fact be         seen on 459
at the front of pen 3.
                                        Mr. COLLINS

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you very much.

     Mr. COLLINS:   In the third paragraph of this letter
he says:

     "In all but one case the barriers tested successfully
     withstood the applied load.   A clip over the rail
     of barrier 124 broke before reaching the full test
     load".

A visual inspection revealed some of the ends being
corrode&d   And there are the plans, as you have pointed
out.

     There is a copy of the report at page 461 and 462,
and on page 466 we have the Certificate relating to
124 and 124A ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    466?

     Mr. COLLINS:  Page 466, sir.  You will see at the
bottom, if you turn it sideways, 124A and the test of
the two spans.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Sir, the method of testing is that
set out in Annex C to the Green Guide.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   You will see that there are three
tests there set out on the Certificate which are
required by Annex C.   I am reading from paragraph 1
of the Green Guide:

     "The test is to consist of the application of an
     evenly distributed force of either 6.0 KN/metre
     width (400 lbs f/foot width) or 4.3 KN/mefcre
     width (290 lbs f/foot width) of barrier as mentioned
     in paragraph 13.

     4. The force to be applied for three consecutive
     periods, the full force being maintained for 5
     minutes each period.  The interval between
     applications to be as short as possible, i.e.
     to enable complete unloading and reloading only.
     A record should be kept of any deformation during
     the loading periods, during the periods of
     maintained loading, or during the recovery period.

     5.  If on the removal of the force for the third
     time the recovery of deformation is at least 75%
     the barrier or handrail may be “deemed to have
     satisfied the loading requirements.   If this
     requirement is not met but the recovery is more
     than 50%, then the test should be repeated and if
     on retest the recovery is at least 75%, the barrier
                                    Mr. COLLINS

     may be deemed to have satisfied the loading
     requirements.  If the recovery is less than
     50% on the first test or less than 75% on the
     retest, the barrier shall be deemed to have
     failed.

     6.   If during any test, even though the barrier
     or handrail satisfies the above loading require­
     ment, doubt should arise for any reason (including
     such matters as cracking of the terracing or
     distortion of connections) as to the safety of
     the barrier^ or handrail, a detailed investigation
     should be carried out ... and a record should
     be k e p t ."

What is required   is that you have three consecutive
tests and provided it does better than 75% on the third
then all is well.   If on the third it does 50% to 75%,
then you have got to go through the whole thing again;
and if on the retest it performs better than 75% on the
third, thfen all is well.  Now, if we look at the actual
figures of the barrier in question and if we turn back
forgive me - to page 459 for a moment, you will see
that it runs from the right-hand side     1, and the
left ■ivaad side is 3, so that it was 1 and 2 that went.
It was spans 1 and 2 of the barrier which collapsed.
So we are concerned largely with the upper of the two
tests recorded on that certificate for 124A, that is,
1 to 2. You will see that the application of the force
is 6; applied load tonnes 1.44.    I am looking at page
466, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:    "Test 1: Rest 0;   load 29; unload
12;    59% recovery." That is on the first ofhthe three.
So that barrier moved, under load, a distance of 29
millimetres, as I understand it. When the test ended,
it recovered to 12 millimetres from its original
position, and thus its recovery was only 59%.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   On the second of the three tests,
it moved 19 millimetres;   it recovered to 5, and thus
achieved 74%.  On the final one, it moved under load
19 millimetres but recovered to its original resting
position, i.e. 100.   If you flick through the records
on the other barriers, you will find that 29 millimetre
movement under load is high but not the highest of all
the movements - indeed by no means the highest of all
the movements - but it is certainly on the high side.

     Now, there is an apparent ambiguity in the wording
of this to a layman, if not to an engineer. The
ambiguity is perhaps the obvious one. You have got
thireeetests. If you start the first test and that
(demonstrating) is your zero, as it were, your upright,
                                         Mr. COLLINS

when you put it under load, it will move, let us say,
that much.     If it recovers 50%, it will recover to
t ha t , which is still, of course, at a slight movement.
Now, if you start your second test with that as your
base-line, then you are going to get recovery of, say,
75% to thajr’and not to tha t . Similarly, if you start
your third test at your second test base-line, then
your recovery to that is going to be 100 per cent but
it is actually going to be from your original base-line
of the first test, a recovery of much less than 100 per
cent.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The question is whether you
go back to first place each time or ---

     Mr. COLLINS:  It is question of whether you go
back to first place each time.    We would say, as a
matter of common sense, you must.   Otherwise, to use
an exaggerated example, you could have a barrier that
went that much on the first test and on the second test
went a little more and on the third test came back to
that, and would still pass the test because on the third
test it came back to tha t ; and that, frankly, would
seem on the face of it to be absurd.    So we would
suggest that any sensible interpretation must mean that
you go back to first base.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Well, if it was not Parliament
that drafted the Green Guide, we can now ask the people
who drafted it what they meant, can we not?

     Mr. COLLINS:   We can, sir, if we can find out.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:   I may say, sir, we are trying.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, thank you.

     Mr. COLLINS:  These certificates, of course, do not
indicate how Dr. Eastwood did it.   I do not think we
have had any indication yet from Dr. Eastwood of how
he did it.  No doubt we will find out from Dr. Eastwood
how he did it.

     Sir, those go on, and the calibration follows them,
to 475, which was Dr. Eastwood's certification that the
various structures were in a satisfactory condition.
That is page 475.

     476 is a reply to the letter at 462, which I did
not read in detail but which was effectively Eastwoods
indicating what the damage was and asking did the Club
want the repairs to be done, and the Club said s< e

    "I am writing to confirm our instructions that
    all work necessary on the crash barriers be
    completed prior to the commencement of the season".
                                            Mr. COLLINS

     Then we have Inspector Sewell's note on the
eme®gfncy evacuation procedure and I have already
read that.   That was in the Police bundle.

     479 are the figures for the Manchester United
football matehv which again we have already seen.

     480 is an extract from the Football Association's
instruction about the "soccer star scheme", which has
been referred to before.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was what was going to be
staged, was it?

    Mr. COLLINS:   That is what was cancelled, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Mr. COLLINS:  Then 481 is a letter dated 30th March
1989 from the City to the Chief Fire Officer:

     "I refer to your letter of 13th August 1987 in
     connection with Safety Certificate Conditions.

     I now enclose for your attention a copy of the final
     revised Safety Certificate Conditions which, as far
     as possible, incorporate the comments made in your
     letter.  You will appreciate that the wording of
     certain of your comments has had to be amended
     slightly but I hope that the objective has none the
     less been achieved.

     These are four points which require some further
     consideration:

     (a) You say in your letter that an age range should
     be specified in connection with stewards.  I think,
     however, that the wording of Condition 11 should be
     satisfactory without stipulating an age range ...

     (b) police knowledge of the whereabouts of a
     doctor - I believe this is adequately covered in
     Condition 7;

     (c)  identifiability of press T.V. and radio
     personnel - I am not sure of the justification
     for such a Condition and wonder if you have any
     further comments on it;

     (d)  the attendance of competent electrician - again
     I wonder what the justification for this would be.

     Would you please let us have your comments in due
     course."



                        /One does feel bound to point out.
                                     MR. COLLINS


      One does feel   bound to   point out that there appear to
have been 18 months   to draft or to act upon the Fire Service
comments.

      483 is the draft conditions.

      "The Holder shall provide such signs or notices
      of such type, size and   design as the Council
      may from time to time require for reasons of
      public safety."

12 amends the written instructions of the Stewards.      It says:

      "They must include the following tasks       and
      duties.  Stewards must:

      (a) Under the direction of the Safety Officer or
      the Chief Steward or an Authorised Officer prevent
      overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in
      various parts of the ground are complied with."

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  But those didn't in the 1979
certificate send the particulars as to pens.

      MR. COLLINS:    No, they didn't.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  And there was no proposal at
this time was there in April 1989 that the revised certi­
ficate should either?

      MR. COLLINS:  That is quite right, sir.  If you look
at page 506 you will see the Draft Schedule 3 referring to
Condition 27 and Condition 27 is the one that deals with
capacity.  You will see that it still does not break down
the West Terrace at all.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I am probably asking the
obvious, but there is nothing then in this certificate which
takes account at all of the radial fences having been
introduced?

      MR. COLLINS:  No, and it does not seek in any way
to amend the amounts, the capacities and they don't seem to
have thought, no one seems to have thought to reconsider
the capacities.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    They could not have had any
impact on this occasion.

      MR. COLLINS:  No, no, of course as far as the capacities
are concerned by then they had losfe what is now Pen 5.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The slim bit of Pen 5.
                                         MR. COLLINS


      MR. COLLINS:  Going back to 12 I think other than the
first one they are much the same as the one we looked at
before.

       Over the page, 485:

       7*13. Training exercises organised by the Safety
       Officer relating to the duties of stewards shall
       be held at least on©e every three months. A
       written record of the exercises shall be kept."

       .... The other duties detailed in schedule 2
       shall be carried out by stewards."

If we look at page 489 we see what the duties of the     Safety
Stewards are:

       "The number of Safety Stewards on duty at each
       specified activity shall not be less than 66.

       The Safety Stewards carry out the duties set out
       below:-

       26    2 for    each main exit

       12    1 per vomitory in the South         Stand

        8    1   "        *      h     » west Stand

       18    1   "        "     "      " North   Stand

        2    Beneath South Stand"

No duties in relation to Stewards on the terraces, of course.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am sorry to take time, but
the new bit that you referred to which related to overcrowding
which is at 484, can we just look back to the certificate
as before, it was 107 wasn't it onwards.

       MR. COLLINS:     The existing certificate sir?

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Yes.

       MR. COLLINS:     Yes, the existing certificate is at 107.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Where do we find the relevant
bit?
      MR. COLLINS:  There is nothing so specific, but insofar
as there is it is paragraph 9, page 111, which is much more
general.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     So this Is a total recast really?
                                    MR. COLLINS


     MR. COLLINS:   Oh yes.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORi And when you pointed out that
passage it is not that that has been inserted, it is a
complete recast in which that now appears?

      MR. COLLINS:   Yes, if you recall, sir, the original
draft which was commented on by the Fire Service was specific,
that the Stewards should effectively sort out the levelling
on the terraces.   I am paraphrasing.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, I thought the Fire Service
queried how on earth they were going to be able to do it?

      MR. COLLINS:  Exactly and then 12(a) is a redraft
intended, I imagine, to take account of the Fire Service
objection and the redraft says:

      "Under the direction of the Safety Officer or
      the Chief Steward or other authorised Officer,
      prevent overcrowding by ensuring crowd limits
      in various parts of the ground are complied with."

But with respect one would have thought if there was a diffi­
culty in doing it, identified before, that does not cure that
difficulty if it is a difficulty.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Again we went rather quickly over,
it was a letter from Eastwoods wasn't it, that was the reply
to the Club being invited to comment?   Did the Club comment
on the suggestion?

      MR. COLLINS:  No, the Club weren't asked to comment
on the draft Safety Certificate.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Shouldn't they have been?

      MR. COLLINS:  Well I would have thought so and one
imagines they will.  The intention is that they would have
been but I don't think taht stage has yet been reached, as
I understand it.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Can you help on that, Mr. Maxwell?

      MR. MAXWELL:  I seek to assist on another point, sir.
Condition 12(a) contains reference to "an authorised Officer"
and the definition there includes a Police Constable and
therefore the Stewards are to be deployed at the direction
of a Police Constable as a possible way of dealing with
the terraces.

      MR. COLLINS:  Yes, certainly that is right.  An
authorised Officer is defined on 482 to include a Policeman,
but so far as putting to the Club is concerned, I think I
am right in saying that stage has not yet been reached.
                                   MR. COLLINS



     MR. MAXWELL:   It hasn't.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Thank you very much.   That is
what I was seeking.  Thank you.

      MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I don't think it is necessary to
refer to more of that save to refer you to paragraph 33 at
the end on 487.    It says:
      "The Council may from time to time issue written
        guidance to holders on safety matters.  The    ^
      holder must pay due regard to any such guidance.

The guidance is at page 492, the draft guidance.

      "This note has been prepared by the Sheffield
      City Council in order to inform Certificate
      Holders as to the general background of the
      Safety Certificate Conditions....

      GUIDANCE

      Where advice is given to the holder by any of
      the four Officers mentioned it should be
      acted upon in accordance with the time constraints
      given in the advice.  The holder is reminded
      that failure to take steps to ensure the
      reasonable safety of spectators could give rise
      to a prosecution.

      The Chief Constable and his Officers have a
      particularly important role in relation to
      'public order' situations the correct handling
      of which should reduce any risk to spectator
      safety.
       The Chief Constable must therefore be provided
       with appropriate facilities at the stadium
       for control, crowd surveillance, detention
       and administrative purposes.  These facilities
       are essential if public order is to be
       maintained and the risk to spectators minimised.

       The Chief Constable must also be informed at
       the earliest possible moment of the proposed
       date and content of all specified activities
       so that appropriate planning can take place.

       In addition there must be consultation and
       agreement between the holder and the Chief
       Constable well in advance of specified
       activities about the proposed methods of
       admission and the segregation of spectators.
       Consultation must also take place if advance
       information is such that public order difficulties
       may arise.  As a result of this consultation
                            130

                                    MR. COLLINS


      it is possible that the Chief Constable may require,
      for reasons of preserving public order, that the
      specified activity is "all ticket" or the specified
      activity should not be played at all at the Stadium
      or the day and the time of the specified activity
      should be changed.

      The Chief Constable should also be able to use
      whatever means are appropriate to exercise control
      over spectators for reasons of safety ...."

Then there is a Police note 493, reaction to that:

      "Enclosed for information is a copy of the
      Certificate issued by the then South Yorkshire
      County Council .... Also attached is a copy of
      the first Draft prepared by the City Council
      in August 1987.

      Referring to the latter could I draw your
      attention to paragraphs 4, 5 & 6 which have been
      totally deleted from the new draft."

Sir, the original 1987 draft you may recall included - page 389
I think - included specific reference to the holder making
arrangements with the Chief Constable providing a room for
Police use and not admitting spectators unless methods have
been approved.  Those have been removed, as is pointed out
in this document.

     "Similarly could I draw your attention to    paragraph 10
      which outlined the duties of stewards.      To some
      degree the first draft made the stewards    answerable
      to police officers.   In the latest draft   the reference
      to Jsolice has been totally removed."

I am not sure that is entirely fair, because as Mr. Maxwell
pointed out, it is covered by the definition of "authorised
Officer", although of course that is a Police Officer rather
than the Chief Constable, although I suppose the Chief
Constable is a Police Officer.

      "Generally speaking the new draft certificate,
      apart from matters relating to the police, is
      reasonably consistent with the first draft.
      However you may consider it appropriate at some
      stage to seek the views of Chief Superintendents
      Broomhead and Duckenfield."

Then t h e £ is a letter from the Chief Constable to the Joint
Secretariat.     It says:

      "I enclose a copy of correspondence received
      from the Administration and Legal Department
      of Sheffield City Council and relating to the
                                     MR. COLLINS


     Council's proposed general conditions to attach
     to certificates under the above Act.  I also
     enclose a copy of my immediate reply from which
     you will see that I am concerned that the
     proposals do not take full account of the
     legislative provisions regarding the attendance
     of police at sporting events."

That letter is at 495, the Chief Constable says:

      "Meanwhile, I am concerned to note that the
      conditions do not appear to require the attendance
      of police officers at football matches, as
      provided by Section 2 of the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act 1975 (as amended by Section 21 of the
      Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
      1987).  I am forwarding a copy of your corres­
      pondence to the Police Authority Legal Department
      for advice on the matter and will contact you
      when that advice is available."

496, the response of the City:

      "I refer to your letter ....

      I have carefully considered this matter and
      have come to the conclusion that Conditions
      which purport to delegate the Council's
      functions to outside bodies are unenforceable
      as they are beyond the powers of the Council.
      Therefore several Conditions which were included
      in the first draft (relating to for example
      discussions between Certificate holders and
      the Police) have been deleted or modified.

      I am, of course, conscious of the very important
      Police role in connection with the safety of
      spectators at sports grounds and I have therefore
      taken two steps to ensure that this role is
      properly recognised in the certification system.
      Firstly the definition of "authorised officers"
      in the Conditions include Police Officers.
      Secondly there is also a new Condition which
      relates to guidance given by the Council on
      safety matters."  That is 33.  "A draft of
      the proposed guidance is enclosed with the new
      Conditions and you will see that it refers
      largely to Police/Certificate holder relations.

Then there is a copy of the certificate that we have already
seen that follows.

      Sir, this stage of the Inquiry is I think perhaps not
the time or place to go into whether the second paragraph
is right or not.  I don't think it is right speaking for
myself, but as I say this perhaps is not the time or place.
                       132
                                   MR. COLLINS


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   No.

       MR. COLLINS:  Sir, we then have the Ambulance log
which I don't think we need to refer to in detail at this
stage.   That can be dealt with when the Ambulance give
their evidence because it is not really material to safety
of the ground because it r&lates to the events of the day.
That is at pages 510 to 517.

      May I say I am not seeking to decry its importance
or minimise its importance, it is just that it is more
relevant to the events of the day than to the issues in this
bundle.

      I don't think 518 matters.

      Sir, that is the bundle. I am sorry it has taken
rather longer than I had hoped to go through it but I hope
that it has been valuable and I know that it will mean
that we don't have to go through a lot of evidence of
reference to the history which really is there in the
documents.

      I hope too that I have indicated in the course of
going through it the areas where there might be criticism
of certain of the bodies which are directly concerned and
it is not necessary for me to spell those out insofar as
they are not already covered by standard letters.  As I say
I hope they have already been spelt out in the course of
going through, but insofar as they haven't, may I just
indicate in relation to the City Council that it would seem
that the major matters are first of all the inordinate
delay that took place in doing anything about the perceived
inadequate and inappropriate safety, matters in the Safety
Certificate; that the delay was inordinate I think cannot
be doubted, whether or not it was excusable will remain
to be seen.

      Secondly, there seems to have been a failure on anyone's
part, and this may be more in fairness a matter that one
should take against the Club rather than the City Council,
failure to consider the effect of the removal of that barrier
144 on capacity and generally, but certainly so far as the
Certificating Authority is concerned and I am not at this
stage limiting it to the City because clearly their
responsibility is that the City inherit from South Yorkshire
in these matters, there seems to have been a failure to take
any steps as the pens were divided and subsequently redivided
in 1981 and 1985, to take any steps to consider what effect
that should have on the capacity and to reflect that in the
Safety Certificate.

      There appears to have been little if anycconsideration
- and again this is a matter which affects the Club as well
as the Certificating Authority - in 1985 or thereafter of
the number of turnstiles needed at the Leppings Lane end
                         133
                                    MR. COLLINS


to cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected of
spectators into the ground.

      There are a number of breaches of the Green Guide both
in respect of the capacity of the pens, the crush barriers,
the width of the gates, the perimeter and the tunnel.  Those
are matters which are really are already covered.

      The first aid room situation ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, you put that in criticism
of the City or just the Club?

      MR. COLLINS:  Both.  The first aid room never seems to
have got its proper equipment and again that is a matter
really for both and I think this is also a matter for both,
no one really seems to have applied their minds properly to
the problems of even distribution and ensuring even distribution
of the fans on the terraces, coupled with and ensuring that
the capacity of the pens were not exceeded.

      Now in that regard, sir, it is perhaps worthwhile
pointing out that there will be in due course evidence, and
this is a purely factual matter, that as the pens stand it
is a matter of measurement their capacities even at 1,000
and 1,200 are exceeded.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  You mean 1,000 and 1,200 is
more than the Green Guide says it should be?




              /MR. COLLINS:    That is right.
                         134

                                          MR. C O L L I N S

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right, yes.    Sir, if one
looks at Paragraph 222 of the Green Guide one sees that
it is there stated that the extreme allowances for packing
density are as follows:  54 persons per   10 sq.m. when
the terrace or viewing (inaudible ) is in good condition
and 27 persons/10 sq.m. when it materially deviates from
the recommended guidelines so as to constitute a possible
hazard.   There are then various elaborate ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It seems rather extraordinary
that you immediately halve the capacity without any kind
of sliding scale but there we are.

        MR. COLLINS: There is a sliding scale because
223 says that it may be necessary to interpolate between
these figures where conditions fall between the two
ex t r e m e s .

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I am sorry, I misjudged      them.

     MR. COLLINS:   Although it is done in rather general
terms and then there are various elaborate provisions for
working out the capacity at less than maximum where the
crush barriers do not conform in one way or another,
either because they are the wrong strength or because they
are wrongly positioned.

     If one takes 54 as the maximum, which is the maximum
allowable assuming everything is right, and I may say everything
was not right so far as the crush barrier configuration is
concerned but taking it at 54 which is the maximum possible
the area of Pen 3 is 14.35 metres x 13.1 metres and at
Pen 4 it is 14.645 metres.    14.350 x 13.1.  Pen 4 is 14.645
x 13.1.   The areas are therefore - and I am reliably
informed - respectively 188 sq.m., that is Pen 3, and 191.8
square metres, that is Pen 4.    Assuming, therefore 54/10 sq.m.
the capacity of Pen 3 is 1,015 and the capacity of Pen 4 would
be 1,036, making a total of 2,051 as against the 2,200
for the two which is in the Safety Certificate and which has
been assumed.

     Those, I emphasise, are the figures assuming the
configuration of the crush barriers to perform exactly
with the Green Guide.  They do not and therefore those
are in themselves figures which are too high and the
true capacity in accordance with the Green Guide would
be less than those figures.

     Sir, you will recall that somewhere there is a plan
which gives the 1,000 and 1,200 and off-hand I am trying
to remember whether 1,200 is Pen 3 or Pen 4.   The 1,200
is Pen 3, I am obliged.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     it would help me if you reminded
me   which document it is we   have it on.

     MR. COLLINS:   I have it in a little aerial sort of
plan of the ground -- not aerial, a plan of the ground
                                                  MR. C O L L I N S

with the figures.     I think it may be that one, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Tha is right,   it is.

     MR. COLLINS:     And it is Pen 3, is it, sir, which is ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Pen 3 is 1,200,    according to this,
and Pen 4 is 1,000.

     MR. COLLINS:   That is right.   Actually Pen 3 is
smaller than Pen 4 and it just shows how arbitrary the
1,200 and 1,000 were because one must remember that P&n               4
has had taken out of it ---   No, I am wrong, Pen 5 was
taken out of Pen 6 next door.

     Sir, those are, as we see it, the major matters
which we would say should be considered, if there are to
be criticisms against the City Council and Club.    There
are other matters against each of them but they have had
Salmon letters which cover the other matters.  So far
as the City Council is concerned, I think probably I would
substitute what I have stated for matters which are in
the Salmon letter and which, as the thing has gone on,
as the Inquiry has gone on perhaps are not of such vital
relevance.   There are breaches of the Green Guide,
as I have indicated which are referred to.

     I hope that makes it clear enough but if Mr. Maxwell
wants it in writing I will, of course, give him it in
writing so that he can have a formal Salmon letter but
Ihope he has sufficient information to know what the
possible areas of criticism are.

     MR. MAXWELL;   No, sir, I do not require it in
writing.but I wonder if I could mention a point which
may well be a false point which I feel I ought to deal with
now so that others do not build upon it and it relates to
page 434 of the Inquiry core bundle which is a memorandum
sent from the Building Surveyor about the Spion Kop
and which it was said ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Can we just get it first.

     MR. MAXWELL;   434, sir, a memorandum relating to
the spion Kop concerning a problem which it was said was
remarkably similar to the one which concerns this Inquiry
and where it was suggested that Mr. Bownes who had received
this memorandum had not taken anycaction upon it.    Sir,
the position is this, that we did not put into our statement
all of the advisory group meeting documents but one such
which came into existence on 23rd Marcia three weeks after
this memorandum and which relates to the Spion Kop ---

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    23rd April?     I am sorry,
F e br u a r y .

     MR. MAXWELL;    Thenotes are of a meeting held on 23rd
March.
                      136

                                               MR. C O L L I N S



     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The date on this document
is 2nd February.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I am obliged, it is seven weeks or so
after the memorandum on page 434.   There is a discussion
of this memorandum where the Building Surveyor's represent­
ative outlined the memorandum and the circumstances which
gave rise to it and Superintendent Stuart for the Police
indicated that the gangway problem had been discussed
with Sheffield Wednesday who were going to take measures
with their stewards in an.attempt to resolve it.   Sir,
I mention this because action was taken and it is recorded.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.  It may be convenient
if you can give us the document to slot it in at that point.

     MR. COLLINS:   I am grateful to Mr. Maxwell.   As
I hope I made clear, I said that we have not seen any
document and I was not aware of any document.  Now he has
drawn that to myttention clearly that matter does not
or should not attract the emphasis that perhaps I placed
upon it and I fully recognise that, subject to seeing the
document Mr. Maxwell refers to.

     MR. MAXWELL:   The document is with ---

     MR. COLLINS:    I am sure it is.

     MR. MAXWELL;   At least with junior counsel.
     MR. COLLINS:   I am sure it is.  It is do doubt one
of the 2,000 that we have had to go through.   We can be
caught out as well as anyone.

     Sir, that is all I want to say in going through
this history.   I was now proposing to call the representative
of the Fire Service input which is Mr. Seaman, I think.

     MR. HYTNER:   Sir, before that is done, so that we
have a comprehensive view of the 2,000 other documents,
could I just ask Mr. Collins, at Document 422 there is a
reply to the previous document, 421.   It does not
actually answer the question put and what I was wondering
is whether that was followed up and whether there is some
more correspondence or whether the City just let it lie.

     MR. COLLINS:   All I can say is so far as I am aware
there was no follow up ---

     MR. HYTNER:   Could I just indicate what I am saying.
Would you please therefore confirm in writing (b) that
your company and its officers are familiar with the Guide
and intend to perform the management duties outlined in
Chapter 2.   There was no answer to that question.

     MR. COLLINS:    I take the point, there was no specific
answer to it.    I will check to see whether there are
                       137

                                            MR. C O L L I N S

any follow-up documents.   I do not believe thEfe there are
because if there had been they would almost certainly
have been considered to be relevant.

     MR. HYTNER:   I am grateful, and the other question
is this, that although we have got a fair idea of what
may be said from Dr. Eastwood's statement, is there
actually any correspondence or any minute of a Board
Meeting or anything of that sort to indicate when and why
kthe Club did not paroe^ed with the turnstile plans.

     MR. COLLINS:   Beyond the minutes that I have referred
to, no, but I think ---  They may exist, other documents;
I am not saying they do not but it would seem fairly clear
from the documentation we have that the reason it was not
proceeded with was expense.

     MR. HYTNER:   We gather that from dr. Eastwood ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Could I suggest if there are
any further matters of this kind they might perhaps be
discussed ---   There may be other people who have got matters
to raise as well.

     MR. COLLINS:     I will endeavour at 5 o'clock to answer
all queries.      I do not promise   I will be able to.

     Sir, as   I say, what I was proposing to do was to
deal with Mr. Seaman.     Now, he has a dauntingly long
statement and bundle but the bulk of his statement is
simply a narrative of the Fire involvement which is shown
in the documentation and therefore it is not going to
be necessary to go through it.     For the purposes of this
part of the   Inquiry where there    are such statements -and
this applies   to Mr. Seaman;   it   will apply to Dr. Eastwood
and it will apply to Mr. Bownes on b e h a l f of the City
Council;  it may apply to some extent to Mr. Mackrell
but I do not think perhaps to such an extent - what I
propose to do is to put the statement in as representing
the evidence of that witness for the purposes of the
Inquiry, because we have all had the opportunity of
reading the relevant statements and then I propose to
ask questions on such parts of the statement as I consider
to be worth asking questions about, if I may put it that
way, (a) to elicit matters which are not included in the
general bundle, in so far as relevant and (b) to probe,
if I think it right, any areas where that witness has
referred to matters in his evidence.

     That, I hope, is a convenient way of dealing with
it.   Certainly it will have achieved the object of going
through this rather tedious exercise today of going
through this bundle if it serves to shorten enormously
the taskof the witnesses who will be called to deal
with the various bundles.  Therefore I hope, notwithstanding
the size of this, I can get through Mr. seaman relatively
quickly.   Certainly we can perhaps start him now and
                                       A. K.   SEAMAN


certainly if I do not finish him in chief tonight,
finish him in chief tomorrow and then see how we go
from t h e r e .           -

                ALAN KEltlf SEAMAN, called

                 Examined by MR. COLLINS

You are Alan Keith Seaman, is that right?      A.   That's
right, sir, yes.

You have read through, no doubt, and been involved in
the drafting of the statement which is dated 8th June,
1989 which is at the beginning of the bundle which you
have in front of you.   A.   Yes, sir.

And do you formally confirm the truth of the contents of
that statement?   A.   Yes, I do.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, may I say, for the purposes of
the press if there are any listening that that means
that that statement is the evidence that is before the
Inquiry.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Quite so, that is being put
in as the evidence.

     MR. COLLINS:   As the evidence of this witness so
the press are free to report any part of it, if they
wish to do so.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

       MR. COLLINS: Mr. Seaman, you are - because,of
course, some of the public have not read this - you are
Assistant Chief Fire Officer, is that right?   A.  That
is c o r r e c t .

And is your major concern that of Fire Prevention and
Safety including, of course, Safety at Sportsgrounds?
A.   Yes, sir.

You have been, I think, a fireman for 23 years, involved
with Fire safety matters since 1973.  A.  That is right.

Have you held your present post since early 1987?
A.  Yes.

And you are a member of the institution of Fire engineers.
A.  Yes, sir.

Now, your involvement - Fire Service involvement - involved
input right from the outset, did it not, of the passing
of the Safety at Sportsgrounds Act?   A.   Yes.

I do not think it is necessary to take you through the
historical part of your statement.   May I go on or start
                                139

                                                        A. K . S E A M A N

         at page 10 of that statement.

              HR. COLLINS:   Sir, I will give you and perhaps I
         can do that as I go through before I get to 10 because
         there are references to exhibits and you would like the
         cross-reference.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    To the bundle you have
         just been through, yes.

              HR. COLLINS:   Sir, page 1, Exhibit 1 is not copied,
         it is simply in the file.   Exhibit 2, page 4.   Exhibit
         the Green Guide, 1976 edition, we do not have copied.

              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes.




                                             /MR.   COLLINS:     Exhibit 4   page .




-r:.'^
                               A.K. SEAMAN


Exhibit 4, page 27. On to page 4 of the statement.
Exhibit 5, page 307.  Exhibit 6 is not copied.  Can we
just look at it perhaps, Exhibit 6 in your bundle refers
to the abolition on reconstruction of Local Government
and the need to establish and maintain liaison and so
on.  It is a general note requiring the Fire Service to
have their usual input in advising and liaising with
the relevant Authorities. - A. Yes.

Exhibit 7 is also not copied and is a letter from the
City of Sheffield to the Fire Service anticipating the
transfer of responsibilities under the Local Government
reorganisation and suggesting a meeting of the 13th of
March.  We have got the record of that meeting.

      Exhibit 8 is again not copied and is a memorandum
from the County from the County Solicitor of South
Yorkshire to the Chief Fire Officer of the 5t& of March 1986
referring to the arrangments for a meeting and general
discussion because of the impending changeover.

      Exhibit 9, page 312,  Exhibit 10, page 381.
Letter of the 14th May 1987, Exhibit 11 is page 399.
Exhibit 12, 394.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs  I am just wondering, Mr. Collins,
I am not being offensive but instead of playing bingo if
we got a list we could ....

      MR. COLLINS:  I can give you a list.  I will give
you a list which you will have by tomorrow morning.

May I go to page 10. Mr. Seaman, you refer at    the bottom
of page 10 to a meeting of the Officer Working   Party on
the 12th of February to discuss Mr. Eastwood's   report
and to consider the views which will be put to   the Club.

      Now that meeting or minutes of that meeting,
Exhibit 17, are referred to at page 57 of our bundle.

      Then over the page you say:

      "With regard to the West Terrace you consider
      due to the lack of depth of the terrace the offer to
      reduce to 7, 200 and so on all would be well ...."

Now you specifically refer to "total movement laterally
throughout the terrace and the three entrance/exits in
the terrace being well situated and the West Stand
providing a minimum of fire risk.  You go on:

      "The existing gates in the perimeter fence were
      discounted for means of escape purposes."
                                A.K. SEAMAN

A. That is correct sir, yes.

Was this you at the time, Mr. Seaman, or someone else
actually at the meeting.  I think it was someone else,
wasn'tt it. You weren't there yourself.  But the three
exits that are referred to, those presumably are the
three tunnels, two at the ends of the Stands and one in
the middle.  Is that right? - A. That is right sir, yes,
the three tunnels.

And those were looked upon, were they, as the natural
means of escape if there were a fire? - A. Yes.

It being assumed that there was very unlikely to be a
fire in the Stand itself? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Of course I suppose it was possible that the tunnels
might be blocked off or one or more of them might be
blocked off because of fire or possibly a bomb scare or
something like that? - A. We thought it was very unlikely
that we would lose one but anything is possible.

Yes, but doing the best you could you considered, did
you, that having regard to the lack of any constraints
on the terraces themselves, all should be well in the
sense that it met the reasonable requirements? - A. Yes
sir.

Did you know of the width of the perimeter    gates? - A.
I can't say specifically.     Iam not aware that anybody
took particular regard of the width of the gates at that
time.

Was that because it really was not contemplated that the
perimeter fence would form any sort of means of egress
in case of fire? - A. Yes.   We only saw a minor need for
the use of the gates.

Only a minor need for the use of the gates? - A. Yes.

And it was on that basis that you were prepared to approve
the capacity of 7,200? - A. Yes sir.

Can I go on please to page 14. You refer there to the
Safety Certificate and then in the middle you refer in
1980 to a memorandum from the Council stating:

       "Despite the fact that the Certificate had
       been issued as recent as the 21st of December,
       it was felt that the Sheffield District
       Officer ... to review the situation due
   r   to the pending F.A. Cup semi-final ...."

Now so these are not in fact or this aspect is not covered
in our bundle? - A. No.

I am not sure that it is of vital relevance and I can
                                 A.K. SEAMAN


leave it if I may to Mr. Muller to bring out such matters
as he considers relevant.  I would though like to go
on to 2.7 on page 16 and refer if I may Exhibit 35.

      There is there a reference to a letter from South
Yorkshire County Council outlining the concern of police
policy of locking away supporters inside grounds antil home
supporters have cleared the area because this obviously
had a safety implication? — A. Yes sir, it did.

And then there was this:

      "Concern was also expressed at modifications
      being made at Sheffield Wednesday at the
      request of the Police without the knowledge
      of the Officer Working Party".

Now that related, I think, one looks at the second page
of the letter, part of Exhibit 35, second paragraph:

      "Extensions to the barriers at the foot of
      the Kop.  Designated ground be added at the
      request of the Police; the wire mesh at the
      top be extended beyond the edge of the frame.
      No record of the Working Party had been
      consulted."

Now was that incident in 1980 where there appears to have
been worked out without proper consultation, so far as
the Fire Service is concerned are you aware of any other
incidents ....
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, it is my fault.     I
have not connected with this yet.

      MR. COLLINS:  It is 35, second page at the end
of the exhibit, second paragraph or the first full
paragraph, and then the third paragraph.

       The point you were making of course was that these
 sort of things could have safety implications of which
 the Police might not be fully aware.  Is that the point?
 - A. If I can just make it clear to you. Mr. Vaughn
 of the South Yorkshire County Council actually wrote
 this letter.  It was not the Fire Service, but yes.




           /Q. I am sorry, your concern
                          143


                                             A. K. SEAMAN

Q.   I am sorry, your concern, the general concern which
     you share, is that if modifications of any sort are
     made, they could have an implication or an effect on
     safety and therefore it is vital that everybody be
     informed and asked to give their opinion? A. Yes, it
     is necessary that everybody knew.

Q.   It would seem thattthe role of the police, or the
     input of the police, one would expect to be largely
     concerned with crowd safety - crowd management - that
     is to say, public order?   A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And I imagine you would say, would you, that you would
     not necessarily expect the police to be alive to all
     the implications in respect of safety of a particular
     matter that they wanted done?   A. It would depend who
     the policeman was.

Q.   Of course.  A.   If the policeman was a policeman that
     was regfilaylptattending meetings of the Officesr
     Working Party,T and, as the Fire Service did, we had
     a headquarters officer that attended meetings in every
     district - Sheffield, Rotherham, Barnsley and Doncaster -
     so that we had an overall view of standardisation,
     then I would have anticipated that that officer would
     be aware of the general safety implications ---

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Would be aware of...?

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:  Keep your voice up, Mr. Seaman.
     A.  Sorry, sir, of the general safety implications.
     On occasions, sometimes at local level things were
     asked for without the knowledge of the Working Party
     in the early days.   I can remember that that happened
     on a number of occasions and was taken up and dealt
     with.

Q.   But this improved after that letter, did it? A. Yes.
     I don't think it was ever a serious problem, bttfc
     from time to time things do happen.

Q.   That presumably was the purpose or the main purpose
     of including this part of your statement, was it?
     A. Yes.

Q.   To highlight that?     A. Yes, exactly that.

Q.   Can we go on, please, to page 18? Perhaps I had better
     start at the bottom of 17, Exhibit 41, which is our
     page 153.  We are here concerning ourselves, as you say,
     with the proposed erection of the radial barriers.   Now,
     I think that the representatives of the Fire Service
     this time were Messrs. Ellis, Horner and Ray, as appears
     from the indication?   A. Yes.

Q.   What position did they hold?   A. Mr. Ellis at that
     time was the Divisional Officer in charge of the
     area of the Hillsborough Ground, in charge of fire
                                      A. K. SEAMAN

prevention matters.  Mr. Horner was one of his
station officers that worked in his section.   Mr.
Ray was the Headquarters-based Divisional Officers

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The Headquarters what?
A. He was the Divisional Officer based at Headquarters.
So he had two representatives from the Division and
one from Headquarters.

Now, you pick up the reference at the bottom of our
page 153, the first page of the Minutes, to the new
gates at the rear of the terrace being under police
control? A. Yes, sir.

This, of course, was a provision for dividing the
terrace, effectively, into three pens?   A. Yes, sir.

You had approved, as I understand it, the original
capacity on the basis that there were three readily
available exits and there was no barrier to movement
of fans to any one of those three exits?  Is that
correct? A. Yes, sir.

We have now, of course, a barrier being built over the
radial fence?    A. Yes.

With a 1.15 metre gate at the back of each of those
barriers?   A. Right.

Now, in your statement, at the bottom of page 18, you
say:

     "It was clearly understood by the representatives
     of the Fire Service that these gates would be
     constantly manned and they would not have approved
     the proposal if the situaiton was to be otherwise.
     At this time the permimeter fence gates were
     never contemplated for mass evacuation on to the
     pitch."

Now, you considered, did you - obviously you have looked
at your records - the Fire Service considered that
those 1.15 metre gates would be adequate for evacuation
should the need arise?    A. Yes, sir. We considered
that they were essential to allow movement in that
direction, should it be necessary.    We felt that the
lack  of fire risk inthat stand made it unlikely that
we wouldn't have the tunnel escape route, but we needed
to maintain an ability to go that way if necessary.

I entirely follow   ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: We are having difficulty
hearing.  I wonder if you could get yourself a little
closer to the microphone?   Thank you.

     Mr. COLLINS:   Mr. Seaman, I entirely follow that in
your thinkfng< it was singularly improbable that there
would be any need to effectively block off the tunnels,
                                      A. K. SEAMAN

but let us just consider for a moment, if we may, the
position in the central pen.  In that pen, the only
obvious means of egress in an emergency is through
the central tunnel, is it not, when you build those
radial fences?  I appreciate that you have the gaps
at the back but essentially it is the central tunnel?
A. Yes.

Now, if for some reason the central tunnel is impassable,
whether because of a fire in the stand or because of
something happening behind which means that you cannot
use it to go out, then the position is that those in
that central pen are limited, are they not, to those
two rather small exits in the back?   A. Yes, sir.

And if you do not consider that the perimeter fence
can provide a sensible means of escape, as indeed it
obviously cannot, because there is only one rather
small gate - that is right, is it not?   A. Yes, sir.

- then it would seem to the layman that there was
certainly a potential danger if you only had those
small gates at the back, particularly as the back may
be the difficult place to get to? Do you see what I
mean?    If something is wrong in the We<st Stand, then
you cannot get to the tunnel and it may be that you
cannot get to those gaps at the back either?     A. If
 I could explain on that one, we would feel that it would
be better, in that situation, to have the exits at the
rear because if there is pressure, it's the people at
the back who are able to move, not the people at the
front, and so they are able to go and as they flow
away, that would reduce the pressure, yes.    The actual
terrace itself was regarded as a relatively safe place;
it's in the open air;   there is no fire risk.   If you
have to move people, for whatever reason, it is
difficult to imagine, on a properly packed terrace,
a problem arising of serious proportions, and therefore
if for any reason you had have lost the tunnel escape,
it would have been possible, using the public address
system and a manned gate (so that where necessary
action could be taken to open the gate and draw attention
to the fact that we wanted people to go through it)
to evacuate in that way;   arid we felt that it would
have been relatively safe to do that, bearing in mind
that it was a balanced compromise that was needed on
the : Terrace.

So far as your role is concerned, do you see your role,
in regard to provision of suitable egress, to be limited
to egress caused by fire or similar hazard, such as
something like a bomb scare, something of Fire Brigade
concern, and not to extend, for example, to a need
foae egress, caused by someone creating trouble on the
terraces?     A.  I think it has to encompass everything
that might happen.

So you, tthe Fire Service, are concerned with egress
generally?   A. Yes.
                         146

                                             A. K. SEAMAN


Q.   And you say positively in your statement that it was
     understood that they would be constantly manned and
     that they would not have approved the proposal otherwise.
     That is not quite so strongly recorded as that, is it,
     in the Minutes?   AiL No, I understand it is not, but
     the point I would like to make is that we feel that
     it would be absolutely essential to have a gate that
     you needed potentially to use for means of escape
     purposes to be permanently;manned.

Q.   I entirely follow that, Mr. Seaman, but what you are
     saying in your statement is that at the time,that was
     made crystal clear.  Are you saying that because you
     assumed that that would have been done or because you
     have been told by whoever was involved that that was
     the position?   A.  I have had the opportunity of
     speaking to the people that attended that meeting and
     that is their reflection.




                               /Q.   That is your information.
y   •
                                      147

                                                 A.K. SEAMAN


        Q. That is your information from them? - A. Yes.

           o0 there is a reference on page 19, and perhaps we ought
        Q. j u s t t o l o o k a t t h i s to Exhibits 44 and 45 which are not
              in the bundle.
                    44 is a memorandum from the Chief Executive of South
              Yorkshire to the Chief Fire Officer which a s k s for comments
              on the proposals, that is the Eastwood proposals in
              r
              telab
               he to
                   io
                    tn toof
                     tom  the
                            thp
                              ero
                                sp
                                 to
                                  as
                                   ie
                                    rd ee
                                     casrs
                                         ecti°"
                                           at tho
                                                efr
                                                  Jea   f thT
                                                    ^roof     ves
                                                          the W tlt
                                                                 tb St
                                                                     ra
                                                                      an
                                                                       nd,
                    The reason it is not in the bundle is it is not
              directly relevant to the terraces, it is the West Stand
              and the means o£ access from the back of the West Stand
              that is there referred to.
                    May I now go on please to page 23. Again perhaps
              I ought to put it in context by looking at page 22.
              This refers to a meeting to discuss the proposals
              segregation at the Leppings Lane end.

                    Page 211 of our bundle is Exhibit 51 and this is
              the proposal to construct the new turnstiles at the
              Leppings Lane end.  I think the proposal was for the 29
              new which was the one under discussion.
                     You set out what those proposals are in your page 22
               You say and refer to Exhibit 50 and perhaps we ought to
               l i lt that because it is not again in o u r bundie, to
               Mr. Grimshaw who was the Officer then ®^endj"9^
               Mr. Grimshaw's notes on the relevant plan.        If we
               look at that.
                     Now the proposed radial barrier from the existing
               harrier it the north end of the terrace could be
               dispensed with etc. What has been referred to in your
               statement, is that the bit where we see “ wards the
               bottom where "neutral area or visiting supporters
               terrace" there are dotted lines down the middle “ Om
               the tunnel? - A. Yes sir, that is the actual annotation
               that Neil Grimshaw made during the meeting.

          Q. And crossing out "the new secondary radial fence" which
             is referred to on the side there? - A. Yes sir.

          o    And also dotting in in the middle of the home supporters'
               terrace       Now I presume what appears on your page 23,
               Mr S e l m a n ls as related to you by Mr. Grimshaw. Is
               that right? - A. Yes.
          Q. Just tell us what Mr. Grimshaw's position was at that
             time please? - A. Well he felt...*

          n. NO sorry, what his position in the F i r e S e r v i c e w a s ?
             - A. He is a Divisional Officer employed at headquarters
                                  A.K. SEAMAN


in the Fire Prevention Section and he had the reference
at that time for Safety of Sports Grounds and soc he
would attend sports grounds'working party meetings.

Effectively was he your predecessor or not? - A. No, he
is a colleague.

You record his concerns or his main concerns which he
expressed in the meeting as having been:

      "Whether the external gates and exit routes
      created at the rear of the Stand would be
      adequate for the numbers of spectators in
      each section of the West Stand and terrace."

What was that specifically referring to, as you understood
it? - A. I Understood him to mean the numbers of people
that would be in each of the newly created pens. The
external gates were also the fact that the new partitions
and turnstile arrangements were each going to feed into
different sections of the ground and each of them would
need an exit gate so that they could cater for the number
of people that would require a means of escape and he
needed to check what those widths of gates needed to be.

I see.  So for example if we look at the drawing and can
I draw your attention again just by way of example to
the area described as "Visitors' West Stand" do you see
just to the back of the visiting seating supporters' side
of the West Stand? - A. Yes.

There appears to be a relatively small area the as with a
gate opening for exit purposes into the visiting supporters'
centre terrace exit? - A. Yes sir.

And  it is the size, is it, the adequacy of the size of
that area which was concerning Mr. Grimshaw together with
the size of the gates? - A. Yes.  He wanted to ensure
that the gates were wide enough to take the flow of people
exiting from the Stand, from that part of the Stand.

Of course there were two gates, one on each side in the
example that I have actually g i v ® you.

Then (b) going back to page 23:

      "Whether the numbers of spectators being allowed
      into each section of the terrace could be
      controlled to prevent overcrowding."

Now what sort of control, as you understand it, was
Mr. Grimshaw concerned with? - A. He was concerned that
because of the way in which the terrace was proposed to
be split up, that it would be necessary to have careful
control over numbers going into the pens.  It needed to
be properly controlled.
                                           A.K. SEAMAN


Q. On the face of it they ought to have been able to be
   controlled by the number of turnstiles and thus the
   ability to count in the turnstiles those entering through
   them? - A. I think on the arrangement shown on this
   drawing that would have been true, yes, it would have been
   a natural separation.
Q. Quite apart from any rearrangement of the turnstiles w ^at
   Mr. Grimshaw was largely concerned with, if on®.
   interprets (b) was this was it, that when you divided the
   terrace into the pens you had to be catfeful that you got
   the right capacities for each pen? - A. Yes, and also that
   we got the gates in the new fences manned for emergency
   purposes should they need to evacuate.

Q. Did it occur as far as you can tell to Mr. Grimshaw, or
   indeed to anyone, that the new radial f e n c e s ^might affect
   the capacity of the terraces? - A. If I could say that
   so far as capacity was concerned, what the Fire Service
   dealt with was the aspect of capacity by means of escape,
   that is calculated n o t necessarily on the area of the
   terrace which will be what the crush barriers in the
   standing area gave you a figure for, but on the width of
   the means of escape and how many people that could carry.

Q. So you were concerned with what I think is the standard
   of eight minutes.  Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And that is I think in the Green Guide, the effect of
   it being you have got to be able to get everyone out
   within eight minutes? - A. That is the general guidance
   given in the Guide.  It can vary.  If there is a risk,
   if the Stand had been combustible, we would have reduced
   that evacuation time to a much lower figure.

 Q. Now this one in fact on the original was 6.6 minutes, I
    think, as we have seen, something of that order, and of
    course we have a Stand which you consider to bear a very
    minimal risk of fire? - A. Yes sir.

 Q. So you did not consider it and you don't consider it
    part of your function to concern yourselves with the
    effect on the capacity in relation to the c r u s h barriers,
    that is for the other persons concerned with safety?
    - A. If I could explain.                 The original division of
    r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s under the South Yorkshire County Council,
    the figures were required f r o m all three members of the
    Working Party.                 The Fire Service worked its figures out
    based on the capacity of the exit routes and that would
    give a figure.                 That could be affected by how long an
    evacuation time we were allowing, it could be eight
    minutes, it could be two-and-a-half for a combustible
    Stand or it could be a period in between.

           So far as the capacity of the standing capacity
     of the terrace is concerned, that was based on the standing
                       150
                                   A.K. SEAMAN


area for spectators and the condition of crush barriers.
K ? was not a calculation that the Fire
out, but that would produce a figure and the f i ^ r e that
would normally apply to a particular area of the terrace
would be the lower of those two figures.




   \




                      /Q. Then C
                                     A. K. S E A M A N

Yes, and then (c) - what arrangements could be made to
ensure that the gates in the radial fences would be readily
available for use should lateral movement to alternative
exits become necessary - that is your point about keeping
them open and manning them, is it?    A.   We wanted them
manning whether they were open or closed.    The intention,
as we understood it, was to have flexibility of the use
of that area and there could be home and away supporters
in adjacent pens.   That might mean that gates were closed
under normal circumstances.    Whether they were open or
closed we would have wanted a steward or a Policeman there
appropriate: to the needs, really I suppose as agreed
by thir Club ---

It did not matter who but someone had to man those gates?
A.   Someone had to be there.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Why would you?   Take this
match, for example.  There was nobody, either stewards
or Police on the gates in the radial fences back against
the stand but the gates were locked open.   A.   Right, sir.

What would it have added to have had them manned?
A.   Normally speaking, sir, we would wish people to
evacuate down the tunnel, down the normal route.     If
we needed to get them dJ t via the gates in an emergency
situation then we would need to get people to go through
that gate and that would necessitate a decision to use
the public address system to direct people to go through
that gate.  That was part of the emergency evacuation
procedure.   In those circumstances, we wanted someone
on that gate to direct people in the vicinity andmake
sure that they saw where the gate was.    A Policeman,
as a member of authority, or a steward that has got an
identification jacket on, to actually perform that function
to assist people through the gate.    That was the idea
that was embodied.

     Mi. COLLINS:    I can understand that you might want
to have someone to feneure that the gangways, that is the
access points to the gates were kept free.    Is that a
consideration?    A.   The access gates ---   The tarace itself
at that point had no gangways.

I follow that but that in itself wocild surely render the
gates less obviously available as a ra^^is of dgress in case
of need, would it not?   Normally, if you have got an egress
point you would expect to have a clearly marked gangway
showing that it was an egress point, would you not?
A.   The problem was, sir, that we did not want them to
go via those gates under normal circumstances.     We wanted
them to go out via the tunnel in normal circumstances, which
is generally what happened.    So if we had marked that,
it could have caused confusion.

The difficulty surely is that unless you have some sort of
gangway or unless you identify those gates as possible
                                       A. K. S E A M A N

egress points, people, particularly those further down
the terrace, may not even know of their existence.
A.   That is why the public address system was seen as
the means of activating the use of those gates, so that
a message could be given to the crowd to get them to
move in that direction.    The packing on the terraces
itself with the crush barriers was considered to actually
control the flow towards the gate at the terrace.    It
would want to be in a controlled way, not in a rush, and
that would naturally tend to do it.

It may be suggested, I suppose, that although your requirements
were, on the face of them, sensible and one can see why you
wanted them, in fact they would have had no practical
effect because, as Lord Justice Taylor has pointed out, the
existence of a man at the gates probably would not have made
a great deal of difference, assuming you have got no gangway
and no identification of the gate as a means of egress.
A.     Well, I do not think I can agree with that.    I think
I have got to say that the plan has been and still is in
other grounds that if you have got a gate that is separating
an area there is a steward there and it is for that purpose.
If it is considered that that is not an adequate means,
I d o n rt know, I am not aware actually that it was tried
on the day.      The gate was open.   I am not aware that the ---

You are quite right, it was not used but that was because
the tunnel was available too, one way, but that was because
people on the whole did not know that the gates were there
because they had been pushed forward in the crush on the
terraces and were not able to see that they existed, you
see.   A.   Well, I would make the point, sir, that they
knew that the tunnel was there and they did not use that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Is that a convenient moment?

     MR.   COLLINS:   Yes,   sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can you give me some idea
how long you think you will be?

     MR. COLLINS:   You can see, sir, we have got quite
a way through this statement.   I have already indicated
I am not going to go through the matters that are essentially
historical.   I do not think I shall be more than at worst
an hour and probably less.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am not tying anybody.            Is
there likely to be a great deal of cross-examination?

     MR.   HYTNER:    Five minutes from me, sir.

     MR. MULLER:  There may be some things I wish to
elaborate but not more than quarter of an hour.

     MR. MAXWELL:      Yes, sir,      there may be some from me.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:           Does it look as though we
                        153




should finish this witness's evidence within the morning?

     MR. COLLINS:     I would certainly hope so, sir.  Well
within the morning,   I would hope, but it is not in my hands.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well.   I just wanted some
idea.    What then I propose to do after that will be to
break off until it has been proposed, I think, Monday
afternoon.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, that is certainly what we had
been working to and I understand that that is acceptable.
What we would endeavour to do in that ease, having
finished Mr. Seaman, would be to call Messrs. Calvert and
Sewell who are the Police Liaison Officers for Monday
afternoon in anticipation that there is no real reason why
they should not be disposed of in the course of the
afternoon because, of course, the planning for the day
in question has been exhaustively  dealt with already
in relation to other officers and we are concerned, and
concerned only at this stage with the Police input
into the history of the matter and the state of the ground.

     MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, the suggestion that the chronology
is acceptable, sir, is not something that can be accepted.
It was contemplated   that there would be some opportunity
for mature consideration in dealing with documents.    As
we have heard today, even the Inquiry team has not dealt
with 2,000 yet and, sir, it is in relation to that matter
that I rise.   We had expected to have the opportunity of
being able to deal with matters and also to survive the
weekend.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It is hard to deal with both
Brahms and the list at the same time!

     MR. WOODWARD:  It is indeed, sir.   On the question
of the timing it is in relation to the suggestion that
the matter is acceptable, sir, we cannot, I am afraid
accord with that.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    There is no point in wrapping
it up, Mr. Woodward;   what are you saying?   What would
you like?   I aro prepared, if you think it is necessary,
to give longer time on Monday.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Would it be possible,    sir,   to sit on
Tuesday and not on Monday?

     LORD   JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think certain arrangements
have been   made for Tuesday,  I believe, to enable the
Ambulance   Service, is it ----?

     MR. COLLINS: Sir, yes,   the position is, as you
are aware, that because Professor Miunder is unable to
be here on the Tuesday and on the Wednesday, we have
arranged already that there should be -- we will not deal
with this part of the matter, we will insert the Ambulance
Service personnel on the day;    we will have evidence from
one or two doctors who attended on the day and who have
already said things in public;    we will have evidence
from one or two other individuals who add to the story
and from the F.A. and that we would hope to deal with on
the Tuesday and the Wednesday.    Of course, those are
matters which, although they may have matters relevant,
Professor Maunder will not be directly concerned with,
or at least not so directly concerned with as, of course,
this side of the Inquiry.     So we could, I suppose, simply
defer the Police evidence which I hope to call on Monday
afternoon if we have to but that is, of course, sir,
a matter for you.     What we could not do is to go into
Tuesday and I would not be in a position to recall Mr.
Seaman if there are any matters to be put to him after
Monday uratil Thursday, and then we run into difficulties
because I have got to fit Dr. Eastwood in on Thursday,
so what I am saying effectively is that if Mr. Woodward
is unable or finds matters which he needs to put to Mr.
Seaman which he is not able to put tomorrow, then he
will either have to have Mr. Seaman back on Monday,
some time or not until Thursday at the earliest.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sympathetic to the
problems with this amount of documentation, obviously, but
you appreciate, Mr. Woodward, and I am sure everybody does,
that I am not trying to press on with this because I want
to do so just, you know, for the sake of it.    It is very
important that we should get this Inquiry completed by a
certain time and it is a question of how we can best do
that.    I am prepared, if you tell me it is necessary,
to say that we will not sit Monday at all but it does
mean that things are having to be put out of phase, as
Mr. Collins has indicated, and we will get on with ---
I do not think that matters particularly.

     MR. WOODWARD:    Sir, I rise to endeavour to help
because the opportunity to reflect reduces the necessity
for the investigation of matters which may be demonstrated
to be perhaps easily resolved by looking at other documents,
so whilst I am on my feet might I mention Dr. Eastwood.
We know that investigations are under way with the Health &
Safety Executive and we have been given, as it were, a
skeleton whisper in writing of certain indications but,
sir, it is not something which one can usefully work to.
We would like, if that was at all possible, to enable ---

     MR. COLLINS:    You will get that either this evening
or tomorrow morning.    You will get it this evening.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, that is a further burden for the
weekend to be put into the time and to be able to deal with
that, sir, would be a great advantage.

     MR. COLLINS:   As I have al rea dy iin dic at ed, I am not
going to call Dr. Eastwood until Thursday so Mr. Woodward
                          155




will have at least some time to consider the evidence in
relation to Dr. Eastwood.      There it is, sir.   Hay I
perhaps suggest that this is a matter we could perhaps
discuss between ourselves and you need not make a final
decision about Monday m t i l tomorrow morning and it may
depend upon what time we finish tomorrow, perhaps, as to
whether we sit on Monday at all, as to how much is
available on Friday.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not want to be dogmatic about
itj   If it is actually going to be helpful and we have got
to get the right answer so there is no point ia just hastening
along for the sake of it.

     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I hope I am fully aware of that.
All I am suggesting is that we have heard your willingness
to give all Monday and we all know that you are willing
to give all Monday but perhaps before we make a final
decision on whether we ask you to accept that, we can
discuss among ourselves because I do not know whether
everyone will support Mr. Woodward.   It may be everyone
will and there will be no problem but it   may be that
others will not entirely support him.    I just do not
know.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am content to consider it
t o mo rr ow .

               (The Inquiry was adjourned until
              10.00 a.m. the following morning^
