                                          HILL
                                       DICKINSON
EQUITY & LAW HOUSE                                       &CO                        TELEX: 627327 HILDIC G
                                                                                    CABLES: HILLDICK LIVERPOOL
47 CASTLE STREET
LIVERPOOL L2 9UB                                                                    DX 14153 LIVERPOOL
                                             SO LIC IT O R S   •   NOTARIES         FAX: 051-227 1352
TELEPHONE: 051-227 3151




                                                                                    YOUR REF
The Treasury Solicitor
The Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                                               REF PWJ.KEL.
                                                                                   OUR REF
                                                                                            1860-002
                                                                                   OATE
                                                                                        16th  June 1989




Dear Sirs
                          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - PART II


     We enclose herewith six bundles containing our clients'
recommendations for Part II of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.                                                       You
will see that each bundle contains an Index and Schedule of
Appendices.

         We should be grateful if you would pass these to the Clerk to
the Inquiry upon our behalf.

                                             Yours faithfully




                                            HILL DICKINSON & CO




                           R O Y G . HILL
J.D . GREGSON              PETER JACKSON                       DAVID WAREING   LO NDON A DDRESS       THIS FIR M IS REGULATED
A NTHO NY HARDING-HUBER    RICHARD MARTIN DALE                 JOHN WOLFE      IRONGATE HOUSE        B Y THE L A W SOCIETY
M ARTIN G. HILL            JOHN M AXW ELL                      ASSOCIATE:      OUKE’S PLACE          IN THE C O N DU C T OF
JOHN HULMES                OAVID SWAFFIELD                     ANNE DOBIE      LONDON EC3A 7LP       IN V E S TM E N T B U S IN f
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' ASSOCIATION

            TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR *S INQUIRY

             INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
1

                                 LIST OF APPENDICES


    1   .   Original handout information sheet

    2.      The Wembley dossier.

    3.      Liverpool City Council Ticket Allocation Report.

    4.      Intermediate Treatment Fund Proposal

    5.      The Ombudsfan Initiative.

    6   .   Football Family Face Report.

    7.      Football Fans against Hooliganism.

    8.      Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Government

            Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Football League
            Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Football Association
            Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Professional Football
                                                       Association

    10.     FSA Response to I.D. Card Working Party.

    1 1 . Minutes of Meeting at Lancaster Gate 5/10/88
            with Appendices;

            (a)   Application Form
            (b)   Publicity Outlets
            (c)   Rules and Constitution
            (d)   Europe Statement
            (e)   FSA Cup Final Ticket Allocation suggestion.

    12 . Minutes of Meeting at Lancaster Gate 23/2/89.

    13 .    FSA Research Paper for "First World Congress of Science
            and Football", April 1987.
    14.     Sample Minutes of London Branch FSA/Police Liaison Committee.

    15.     Report on 50% Membership Schemes.
    16.     Miscellaneous Documents.
                                  INDEX


Contents
Introduction

History of the Association


                                 Part I

(i)     Existing Stadia

(ii)    Fencing
(iii)   New Stadia/New Funding

(iv)    Late Arivals
        Delayed kick-offs

(v)     Crowd Control

        (a)   Policing
        (b)   Stewards

        (c)   Supporters
introduction


The loss of ninety five lives at Hillsborough on the 15th of April,

1989, throws into high relief the past failure of those charged

with the task of administering football to deal effectively with

the many problems which beset the game.     However, some of those

problems              far beyond the boundaries of the world of
football. In particular, the chronic hooliganism attached to our

national sport (often closely associated with racist undercurrents,

territorialism and a general xenophobia) is in part clearly the

product of complex social and historical circumstances outside
football's purview.    The position has now been reached where those

faced with the task of policing grounds have to remember and

reflect the problems of ground safety and public order.

Regrettably, but quite clearly, and probably for reasons which we

concede are understandable, the tragedy at Hillsborough was in part

caused, and in part exacerbated, by the attitude of police to this

problem (see the evidence of P.C. Birchard Day 19 am Page 61 (c)).

We feel that far too much emphasis was placed on public order with

almost a total disregard for public safety.



However, football and its supporters can do much more than

they have to help find solutions.    The sport has a huge purchase on

the hearts and minds of those very groups within the football crowd

who are potentially troublesome - but the game's administration has

so far utterly failed to co-opt the vast majority of ordinary, well

disciplined fans into a campaign to alleviate its problems.       By

seeking proper representation for football supporters, the FSA
1




                                    - 2 -


    hopes to begin that process.    The granting to this Association of

    full representation on the Hillsborough Inquiry is the most

    significant step in that direction in one hundred years of
    professional football.   The FSA wishes to record its debt to Lord

    Justice Taylor for providing the opportunity for fans to make a

    significant contribution to this Inquiry and, therefore, to the

    future direction the game will take.


    History of the Association


    The Association was born in August 1985 following the Heysel

    Stadium Disaster in May of that year.    The Association was set up

    as a result of a desire amongst supporters to gain a voice in the

    corridors of football power.



    Five founder members approached the media with the germ of an idea

    and the Organisation was launched nationwide.    It was decided to

    adopt a federal structure with regional branches to reflect the

    views of local supporter communities.    The Association now has 17

    branches around the country, from Glasgow in the north to

    Southampton on the South Coast.    It has flourished in predictable

    areas, London, Merseyside and Manchester and has attracted over

    8,000 individual members.    The recent innovation of affiliated

    membership has brought in substantial additional members.



    The present structure of the Association is such that it is run

    nationally by a National Executive Committee (NEC) consisting of 5

    officers,   (elected at Conference) including a Chairman, Treasurer
and Secretary, together with one representative from each of the
branches.   The NEC meets every other month whereas each regional

branch will meet once every month during the extended football

season of August to May.     Each branch is run by a Committee elected

by the local members.



The Organisation exists entirely on voluntary contributions and
membership fees, the current annual fee being £2.00.     With the

exception of its(temporarily) full time Campaign Co-ordinator Rogan
Taylor, all of its officers both nationally and locally are

voluntary part-time workers.


Since 1985 there has been much for the Association to do.     Each of

the branches has dealt with regional matters, liaising and taking

up issues within the branch's particular locality.     The Appendices

hereto are an attempt to reflect as many of the nationwide

activities of the Association as possible.    The documents show the

Association's attempt to put forward its own views on the game's

inherent problem - the Football Fans against Hooliganism document -

App. 7; They catalogue the Association's concern for safety and

fairness arising from the F.A. Cup final at Wembley in May 1986 -

App. 2; Two years later the Association's lead was followed by the

Liverpool City Council's Trading Standard's Department - App. 3;

The Association has corresponded and met with those having power

and authority in the world of football - Appendices 8,9,11 and 12.



The FSA's submission to Lord Justice Taylor is in two parts,

mirroring the Inquiry.     In Part I, the Association will make
                                - 4 -


recommendations concerning topics which arise directly out of the

tragedy at Hillsborough. These include:


(i)    Existing Stadia

(ii)   Fencing

(iii) New Stadia/New Funding
(iv)   Late arrival at Matches/Delayed Kick-offs

(v)    Crowd control at football.



Part II will include:


(i)    Membership Schemes/Supporter Responsibility - including

       attitudes to crowd misbehaviour.
(ii)   Football's Administrative Structure

(iii) Representation for Football Supporters




                                PART I



(i)    Existing Stadia



       Many of the football grounds in England are highly

       unattractive and poorly served venues.   Substantial numbers

       of them are located in run-down, urban centres and they

       reflect the general decay and underinvestment of many
       decades.   There is very little point or incentive to spend

       time in such stadia except between 3 p.m. and 4.40 p.m. when
       a football match is in play.
                           - 5 -



The question whether existing stadia should be     required only
to provide all seating accommodation receives, from a clear

majority of football supporters, a resounding "No” in reply.

The FSA is not aware of any evidence to suggest a link

between reduced hooliganism and all-seater stadia; in fact,
some of the worst examples of crowd misbehaviour in recent

years have originated precisely from the seated areas (Luton

v Millwall 1985 - Crystal Palace v Birmingham City 1989).


There does not appear any reason either to think that

standing on terraces is intrinsically unsafe.     The most
significant factors affecting safety on terraces appear to

be:


(a)   The total numbers allowed in terrace sections coupled

with their distribution.
(b)   The presence of frequently sited and appropriately

strong crush-barriers.



(c)   The provision of safe and quick exists forward onto the

pitch, sideways and at the rear in case of emergency.



(d)   The behaviour of the fans on the terraces



(e)   Satisfactory policing and stewarding.



(f)   Appropriate segregation.
                           - 6 -


In certain circumstances, terracing is safer than seating.

For example, terracing is more quickly evacuated in an

emergency.



As well as providing many fans with the close companionship

and "atmosphere” that they enjoy, standing on the terraces is

also of course comparatively cheap - often half the price of

a seat.   Any forced process to move football "up-market" via
a requirement for   all-seater provision might cut off a
substantial number of the young and/or less well off

supporters from the game.    This latter group represents a

significant proportion of the game's traditional support over

the last century - the permanent 'sponsors" of football.

Further, it should be recognised that, for a large number of

the young, male fans (especially those drawn from inner-city

areas), football sometimes represents the sole, abiding

source of feeling of belonging to a group associated with

success and achievement.    To cut off such people from the

game, by out-pricing it beyond their reach, would be
short-sighted and unjust.



Many football supporters think that crowd attendance figures

for individual matches are manipulated either upwards or

downwards, depending on the circumstances of the home club.

(On occasions, the communication of attendance figures for a

game are greeted with roars of laughter amongst the crowd

attending.) However, for safety reasons alone much tighter
controls on counting fans entering a ground may be required.
When terracing is split (as at Leppings Lane) by radial

barriers into "pens" a_ system which monitors individual

pen totals is necessary to avoid the kind of harsh crushing

which fans unfortunately have accepted as normal for a long

time. Although it is perhaps worth mentioning that such

matters are already provided for in the Green Guide.


Most pen-terracing is at the "visitors" end of a ground for

purposes of crowd control.   Facilities at the "visitors" end

are consistently the poorest in the stadium; the view of the
game from it, persistently the worst.    Yet, such areas are
often run as unashamed "profit   milking" exercises by clubs,

some of whom operate a two-tier pricing structure which makes
it more expensive to stand as a "visitor" than as a

home-supporter. (We understand that the Football League have

prohibited this practice following their 1989 A.G.M., as a

direct result of FSA representations).



Entry into grounds for "visitors" is generally less efficient

and comfortable than for home supporters. Crushing both

inside and outside football grounds is an experience so

common to away-supporters that it has become an expected part

of the day out.   One of the most frequent comments from fans

after the disaster was to the effect that "it could have

happened to any of us - we've all been in situations where we
thought serious injury might occur".
                                 - 8 -


       Often there seems to be too few turnstiles to effectively

       accommodate in-coming supporters.   Obviously, the exact

       number of travelling fans is not entirely predictable,

       however, with improved liaison with supporters (see Part II),

       and an    enforcable requirement for a minimum number of

       turnstiles per thousand fans, conditions could be much

       improved.


       Finally, the use of signs and other methods of conveying
       information to football supporters (both home and away)

       outside grounds is usually poor or badly organised.    Along
       with the segregation of away fans, the increasing designation

       of "family enclosures" and "Members Only" areas have

       recently served to confuse supporters even further.



(ii)   Fencing



       As far as we know, no pitch invasion in England has ever

       resulted in loss of life.   We consider that   the kind of

       fencing which existed at Leppings Lane is totally

       unacceptable.



       However, with some reservations, this Association     recognises

       the current need for some kind of   barrier which prevents

       supporter-encroachment onto the pitch, whilst ensuring that

       in the event of emergency fans can find quick access forward.
                         - 9 -



Though supporter representatives were not invited recently to
France to look at the "swing open fences" installed at Nimes,

we feel that such fences installed in English grounds would

probably not solve the problem.   We understand that these

fences release under a certain pressure and we suspect that

French supporters stand well back from them in ordinary

circumstances.   In contrast, at English games, often the fans
are normally pressing on the front fences and would trigger

their release (by accident or design) too regularly.     In
addition, it is not clear that, in circumstances like those

at Hillsborough, "swing fences" would have opened in time to
save lives.



Any barrier preventing easy encroachment onto the pitch needs
to work in combination with effective stewarding.     One can

imagine a barrier that would prove difficult to surmount if a

steward were blocking access, but easy to surmount with the

active assistance of stewards and/or police.   Regular and

frequent breaks in the barrier are also required to ease the
problem of emergency evacuation, but which could be

effectively blocked by stewards under normal circumstances.

There should be no spikes or other anti-personnel devices on

fences.   Their presence at many grounds is an unmistakable

sign of the loss of balance between safety and security.



At Watford F.C. there is a small barrier at the end of the

terrace, beyond which a "no mans land" strip lies leading to
                         - 10 -


a bigger and more difficult barrier preventing unwanted

access to the pitch.   Such a system whereby there is a line

beyond which fans cannot go except in emergency, followed by

a more difficult to surmount obstacle, seems an attractive

solution.   However, we are unsure how practicable this might

be at the wide variety of stadia in England.


Whatever kind of barrier the Inquiry might recommend, we

would suggest that it should not (as so many existing fences
do) make viewing the game difficult, and that such a barrier

need not apply:


(a)   In front of a "family" or "Members Only" enclosures.


(b)   In front of designated disabled supporters areas.



(c)   Possibly other areas.   (Many football clubs with
reputedly less than perfectly behaved groups of fans - e.g.

West Ham United - have had no fences at all and no pitch

invasions).   Every opportunity to put supporters "on trust"

and to make them responsible for self-discipline should be

taken.   The imaginative use of tannoy systems (perhaps manned

by supporter representatives) at potentially troublesome

games might help considerably.
(iii) Nev Stadia/New Funding



     The capacities of football stadia have shrunk drastically-

     following the Ibrox disaster in 1971 and the subsequent

     imposition of safety regulations limiting attendances.

     However, overall attendances at football matches in the

     Football League have increased (for the first time since
     1945) for the last three seasons running.   In addition, the

     potential audience for "big" games (cup and derby matches,

     promotion play-offs, top of the tables games etc) has

     increased even further.


     Clearly, there is a need for new stadia with large

     capacities (in excess of 75,000).   In the immediate term,

     therefore, we propose the building of three new regional

     stadia sited in the Midlands, the North West and the North

     East.


     These new venues could be used to host cup Semi-Finals,

     European games ,(if and when English Clubs return to European

     competition) and big local derby matches where the clubs

     concerned can recognise that demand for the game will far

     outweigh the supply.   In that sense, these stadia might be

     styled "overflow grounds" and would initiate supporters into

     the experience of watching their clubs play in "greenfield"

     localities with much improved facilities and access.     We

     appreciate that a combination of "stick and carrot" may be

     required because of the possible loss of home advantage to
     clubs.
                          - 12 -


It would be acceptable to supporters that such new stadia be
"all-seater" but only with the proviso that admission costs

to certain areas were kept at a guaranteed (low) maximum to

avoid moving costs beyond the reach of many less well-off

fans. (Such a system operates, for example, in Milan where

the local authority owns the San Siro Stadium and insist

that a certain percentage of the capacity be retained at a

reasonable price.)


The new stadia would also represent a major regional

resource for other sporting activities and leisure pursuits.

We would not like to see such stadia used for "forced"

re-location of football clubs but rather as    beginning the
process of weaning supporters away from the old urban venues

to which so much affection is attached despite their poor

facilities.   It is only by persuading fans to relinquish old

attachments that ground-moving or sharing will succeed.

Recently, Charlton Athletic's attempt to "re-locate" seven

miles away at Crystal Palace's Selhurst Park (a move made

without any consultation with supporters prior to the

decision) failed completely after a sustained,

supporter-led (and FSA supported) campaign to return to the

"Valley" ground.     If re-location were successfully negotiated
with a club's supporters, it would be important to show that

any profits made from selling the old stadium/re-developing

etc, remained in the club to its long term benefit.
                         - 13 -


The potential funding for new stadia and other improved

facilities for football involves issues so complex that it is

very difficult for a voluntary organisation with few

resources to address them properly.     These issues lie outside

the immediate experience of most football fans.     It does,

however, seem fair to expect the punitive "Betting Levy Tax"

to be either reduced, so that very substantial sums of money
become available (perhaps through the Football Grounds

Improvement Trust) to invest in the game, or the Government

be committed to return a percentage of the tax annually.

Perhaps financial incentives could be made available for

improvements affecting safety and comfort inside and outside
stadia.



A combination of local authority/public/private funding might
be possible, though initially new facilities might have to be

run at a loss (in return for their "service to the

community").   European Community funds for improvements might

be available also.   Whatever the sources of money, the

rationale for spending it is plain: for a considerable number

of people in this country, football is an enormously

important and rewarding game.     It originated here and it

plays a vital role in communal life throughout Britain, but

especially in those "run down, urban centres" suffering

chronic environmental and social decline.     Contributing

directly to the redevelopment of those areas in particular is
an urgent and worthy task.
                                 - 14 -


(iv)   Late Arrival at Matches/Delaved Kick-offs



       It is a general trend that supporters are arriving later and

       later at football grounds.   There appear to be a number of

       contributory factors:



       (a)   Consistent delays on motorways and other major roads due
       to weekend repair work.


       (b)   The experience of travelling on "football specials"

       (trains) or coaches is highly unattractive.    Supporters feel

       to be "in custody" for the whole day.    Consequently, every
       one who possibly can uses private transport.



       (c)   There is no alcohol on sale inside most grounds.

       Often, public houses in the vicinity are also closed.     Some

       fans, therefore, are constrained to drink in pubs at a

       considerable distance from the ground (and under pressure of

       time).   Possibly , the new licensing hours also tempt

       supporters to remain longer than previously.



       (d)   Police tactics have consistently operated to delay the

       arrival of (particularly) away fans.    This could be a

       deliberate policy on one interpretation of the Standing
       Orders of the South Yorkshire police.
                             - 15 -


(e)   Tickets for big games do not assist in so far as they

advise ticket holders to arrive at what may be considered by
some to be a late time.



(f)   Football grounds have become increasingly unattractive

places to spend any lengthy period of time inside before a
match.



Clearly, it is important to encourage supporters to reverse
this trend towards late arrival.       In particular, it is

especially necessary to target away fans to arrive earlier.

So far, ideas about "pre-match entertainment" (invariably

generated without any input from supporters) have tended to

fall flat.     Much more direct incentives to come early for
games are required.       Possibly along the lines of:



(1)   A free programme for early arrival.



(2)   Financial incentives, perhaps the issuing of vouchers
giving discounts for subsequent matches.



(3)   The general improvement of what is available inside
grounds, including:



      (a)    Convenient sites for buying a ticket to the
             next game.

      (b)    Magazine stands selling "Fanzines" (supporter
                          - 16 -


            produced magazines).

      (c)   A Betting Shop facility?
      (d)   Availability of a variety of food and drink,

            including alcoholic drinks.

      (e)   Creche facilities.


(4)   Playing women's and/or youngster's football matches

prior to the featured match.


Delayed Kick-offs



There are good reasons why persistant delays to kick-off

times are undesirable.    Supporters may begin to rely on
delays; kick-off times may be manipulated for a club's

advantage in promotion or relegation situations.



The FSA is, however, concerned that recent policy

(pre-Hillsborough) appeared almost to rule out entirely the

option of delaying a kick-off.     The evidence given to the

Inquiry by the Police would appear to be of the effect that

before a kick-off can be delayed there must be "an

identifiable incident" such as a motorway accident,

regardless of the safety of those in and around a ground.

Possibly, pressure from television companies may influence

decisions - a danger likely to increase in the future.

Though unsure of the practical implications, we suggest,
(a) That there is a Senior Police Office specifically

designated to give permission to the Referee to delay a game.



Crowd Control at Football Matches



Policing



The task of policing crowds from 1,000 to 100,000 attending
football matches in Britain is no easy one. Though the vast
majority of football fans are easily controlled and usually

good-humoured there remains a significant minority of fans

either actively seeking or over-ready to respond to
provocation.   This Association recognises the scale of the

task facing the police throughout the football season.



The supporters7 experience of policing at football is very

patchy.    Some police forces seem much better than others.

There is undoubtedly a feeling that, as a football fan, one

receives a distinctly lower level of ordinary politeness and

civility than otherwise.     It seems that supporters are often

considered "guilty until proved innocent" and it sometime

proves a considerable shock to people who start to attend

football matches to find themselves automatically treated as
potentially violent thugs.



The evidence of Mr Hicks at this Inquiry illustrates

perfectly a situation many fans experience.     If Mr Hicks
                          - 18 -


cannot draw a civil word from a senior police officer, one

may imagine what it is like if you happen to be young, male

and dressed in jeans and training shoes. The FSA has sought
in a small way to initiate better liaison between police and

supporters (see Part II), but the requirement for a serious,

ongoing, dialogue between fans and police needs underlining.

In our view:


     (a)   There should be regular meetings of police -
     supporter liaison committees, operating at a regional

     level and involving both      senior and junior police
     officers.



     (b)   Prior to particular, "big" games, supporter

     representatives and police should liaise in good time to

     deal with any foreseeable problems, or new intelligence.



Where police and supporters expect large crowds to turn out

for a game, a conscious effort needs to be made to      work

together in the forming of proper queues outside turnstiles.

Supporter-representatives equipped with loud-hailers could

play a useful role - given the pressure on police to ensure

public order.    It is vital to begin the process of

queue-formation at an early stage.     Once established, queues
generate their own discipline because it is in the direct

interest of everyone in the queue to keep order, prevent
"queue-jumping" etc.
Once queues are formed, it becomes possible for police to

filter out non-ticket holders (if it is an all-ticket game)

at a point well back from the turnstiles.   It is also easier

to identify the small groups of non-ticket holders who will

remain apart from the queues hoping to pick up spare tickets.



Alternatively, and where the geography of grounds allows for

it, a police cordon set up some distance from the ground and
through which only ticket holders can pass will avoid the

possibility of non-ticket holders congregating close to
turnstiles.



Once inside the stadia, supporters (and not only supporters,
it seems) are often confused about the specific areas of

responsibility allocated to either police or stewards.     We

suggest that the division of responsibility should be made

much more clear. The vital role of controlling the "packing"

of terraces (and of sealing them off when full) would be best

performed by the police because they naturally carry a

greater authority than stewards.   It appears to many

supporters that crushing itself has been relied upon as the

main force to make crowds "find their own level" on terraces.



Such a policy is palpably dangerous and utterly
unacceptable.
»   1   I   *




                                               - 20 -


                (b)   Stewardinq



                      The role of the stewards is poorly defined and badly paid.

                      They occupy an awkward space somewhere in the "no mans land"

                      created by the triangle of police/club/and supporters.      A

                      considerable effort needs to be made to re-define the
                      stewards' role and to communicate that role to supporters, so
                      that it is clearly understood.



                      We suspect that the relationship between many clubs and their

                      stewards is unsatisfactory.     Channels of communication

                      between clubs and stewards are probably often confused or

                      unused.   It seems surprising that, as yet, football stewards

                      have no organisation of their own to represent their views

                      and improve their pay. Stewards are largely, at heart,

                      football supporters. The FSA is now looking at the

                      possibility of developing close contacts with stewards, with

                      a view to establishing an FSA (Stewards) Branch, so that they

                      may be more properly represented and more closely allied to

                      the fans they must deal with.     Better organised stewards will

                      contribute towards better organised football matches.


                (c)   Supporters



                      The role that football supporters themselves might play to

                      assist in crowd control is, as yet, undiscovered territory.

                      In England, around 6 million different citizens attend at

                      least one football match a season; One and a half million of

                      them may be styled "regular supporters". These people
*   5   •   »


                                         - 21 -


                represent an enormous - and currently untapped - resource to

                assist football in solving some of its more intractable

                problems.


                Over the past fifteen years, many supporters have become

                almost Minstitutionalised" by the rigorous monitoring and

                policing of their every move.     They are given no

                responsibility for their actions and, unfortunately, some
                fans appear to feel no responsibility for their actions.      The
                FSA recognises that supporters must take a much greater

                responsibility upon themselves for their own behaviour and

                for the behaviour of others around them.     As supporters, we

                have come to tolerate the kind of behaviour amongst fellow

                supporters that we would not tolerate in any other situation.

                This message must be broadcast bv supporters to supporters

                and it must be acted upon.



                We suspect that the average age of fans at football matches

                has been dropping consistently over the last twenty five

                years due to the increased number of youngsters and children

                attending.   This situation places a considerable number of

                older, more mature fans almost "in loco parentis" - but

                supporters have signally failed to exercise this potential

                role. Recently, however, there are signs that the general

                body of adult supporters is beginning to take more

                responsibility upon itself.     The FSA, for example, has

                occasionally organised vocal action to drown out racist and

                abusive chanting.   The emergence of this Association itself

                and the flourishing of over one hundred and twenty

                supporter-produced "fanzines" (selling between them a million
H   «   »   *


                                        - 22 -


                copies a season) are also clear indications that the will to

                get involved and to take responsibility is growing fast.

                Just how to tap that desire and utilise it to good effect is

                dealt with in detail in Part II of this submission.
