     • *




           21-8.JS                                        &uJ^


                                   tC            hcc:
                                                                    3314
                                                        Mr Boys Smith (o/r)
                                                        Mr Clayton
                                                        Miss Goose■
                                                        Ms Jago
                                                        4.19
                                                             17 August 1990

           C J Anderton Esq CBE CSt.J QPM CBIM
           Chief Constable
           Greater Manchester Police
           PO Box 22 (S.West PDO)
           Chester House
           Boyer Street
           MANCHESTER M16 ORE




           FOOTBALL:   EXCLUSION ORDERS


           On 25 July I wrote to you about a proposed Home Office
           Circular to remind the courts of the exclusion order
           provisions of the Public Order Act 1986.  I was grateful for
           Malcolm George's comments and an amended draft has now been
           approved by the Home Secretary for issue as soon as possible,


           In considering^" exclusion orders the Home Secretary was
           concerned, as I know ACPO have been, at the lack of an
           effective enforcement mechanism. He asked us to look again at
           the possibility of introducing reporting requirements on the
           lines of those attached to restriction orders made under the
           Football Spectators Act 1989.


           As the police service have recognised, the exclusion order
           scheme's impact on hooliganism has been reduced by the lack of
           effective enforcement.  It is all too easy for the excluded
           hooligan to defy the order and cause trouble again. There are
           obvious operational advantages for the police as well as the
           football-going public in ensuring that exclusion orders have
           bite. But the difficulty, in our preliminary view, is in
           devising a system of enforcement which would not be unduly
           onerous for the police.  In other words, we are looking for a
           system where the benefit of enforcement is not achieved at
           disproportionate cost in terms of other police activity
           necessarily foregone.


           In terms of numbers involved the burden caused to local police
           by requiring those subject to exclusion orders to report to a



17 AUG 1990
2 /-S’
  police station might not be great: we believe that there are
  now about 2 , 0 0 0 people subject to exclusion orders.  It is
  difficult to say whether this figure will increase
  significantly although the purpose of our new circular is to
  encourage the use of exclusion orders both more widely and for
  periods of somewhat longer duration. However, the frequency
  of reporting would presumably be different from that envisaged
  under the restriction order scheme.       There we think that
  there may be a few dozen reporting occasions a year when key
  foreign matches are played. But if reporting were to take
  place on every occasion a league football match is played in
  England and Wales there would be more like 80-100 reporting
  occasions.


  We also need to consider the duration of the attendance at the
  police station when reporting would take place:  simply
  signing in, as required by the restriction order scheme, may
  be sufficient to deter most offenders from attending a match.
  But this is certainly arguable and we should be particularly
  grateful for your views. To require the reportee to remain at
  a police station would probably be unacceptably disruptive to
  other police work.


   So far I have addressed the reporting arrangements as they
k. would impact on local police stations.  I recognise, of
^ course, that these are very much matters for ACPO and I should
   be most grateful for ACPO's views on them.


  Turning to the central administration of any reporting scheme
  for those subject to exclusion orders, it may be that we
  should need to set up, on the model of the arrangements for
  restriction orders: a system of "calling-up" for matches -
  although I suppose it is not unthinkable that a blanket
  obligation to report on every football Saturday and Wednesday
  might be an acceptable alternative; a system of "exemptions"
  from the reporting system;  and a system of appeals to back up
  the exemption system. All this might require perhaps double
  the number of staff currently employed in the Restriction
  Orders Authority.


  Of course, a reporting scheme for those subject to exclusion
  orders could only be introduced following new primary
  legislation. The details of the scheme would, therefore, be
  subject to close consideration and approval by Parliament.   I
  think I should say that it seems unlikely that there will be
  any early opportunity for such legislation even if Ministers
  eventually decided in principle to propose it.


  May I ask you to let me have, on behalf of ACPO, further
  advice which I can relay to the Home Secretary on ways of
  enforcing more effectively the exclusion order scheme? In
  particular, I should be grateful for views on the possibility
  discussed in this letter of a scheme for reporting to local
police stations. However, there are no doubt other ways of
proceeding and we are already, through the NFIU, working on
building up a photographic library of those subject to
exclusion orders and disseminating this information to local
forces. Any other workable ideas for strengthening the
enforcement of exclusion orders would be most welcome.




                         J, L GODDARD


                         J L GODDARD
                         F8 Division
