The Hillsborough Scrutiny
The honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 528
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H9AT
PNITED KINGDOM




            14 August 1997


Re:         Your letter o f 16 July 1997 adressed to Mrs L. Thompson,
                                      Jnited Kingdom


Dear Sir,

With some delay I received your letter from 16 July 1997 informing me o f the fact that a new
inquiry will take place regarding The Hillsborough Tragedy in which - as you know - my former
husband (Mr Peter Reuben Thompson) died.

First o f all I can inform you that I emigrated to The Netherlands in 1991. Furthermore I remarried
so mv name changed from Mrs A.M.O.E. Thompson^                           to


My new address is:



               THE NETHERLANDS


Having read your letter I would like you to explaine to me in more detail why a new inquiry will
take place, because I have not heard anything about this over here.
Furthermore I would appreciate if you could keep me informed o f any developments of such
inquiry.


Trusting to have informed you sufficiently.

\
)
Kind regards,



        /


Mrs
                   \jr             -JJ                      _     11111111           J4J
                                            HE L    M0      N D   NEDERLAND


                                                  15.8.97         0 0 1 00
                                            Po s t bu s 468       ~—
                                                  5700 AL         FR         56560




\ h& MitLS                        •Sc!^uTiXJU

\r t £    Uor\C)«ft efcL£   Lc«s?0 S u S T itfE      S T U A R T -S » liT H

R o c m


SS Ciueau P tuvE 'S                (>fiTE

Lovoo/i?           SO i H . Q (j~v
L lo r r e s )


                     O
•-j
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 528
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171273 4347 Fax 2703



Mrs                                                           Your reference:

                                                              Our reference:
THE NETHERLANDS
                                                              Date:       {^    August 1997




                          rj




Thank you for your letter of 14 August to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

The Home Secretary, Mr Straw, announced Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of possible
fresh evidence about the Hillsborough disaster in the House of Commons on June 30. As
you know, there have been several inquiries and investigations into this tragic event already.
The most thorough and wide-ranging was the public inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor.

Inquests were held on all the victims, including of course your late husband. There was an
investigation conducted by the West Midlands Police, supervised by the Police Complaints
Authority, to establish whether there were grounds for criminal prosecution, and to consider
whether any police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.

However there remains concern among the families of some of those who died that the full
facts have not yet emerged. A television programme in December last year dramatised the
disaster and raised a number of issues which the programme makers believe represent new
evidence.

The Government has decided to establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there
now exists any new evidence relating to the disaster which was not previously available. It
has appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to carry out this scrutiny. You may be interested to
se his exact terms of reference, which I attach.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has two tasks. First, he will advise the Home Secretary whether
any evidence which was not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further
full public inquiry. Second, he will identify any new evidence that might be relevant to
criminal prosecution or to police disciplinary proceedings which has not previously

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WASSENAA.059
considered. He hopes to report his findings towards the end of the year.

I hope this is helpful. Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report to the Home Secretary will be made
public and I will ensure that you are sent a copy of it.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WASSENAA.059
