From: C F Bone                                               cc Mr Pugh
      Hillsborough Scrutiny
      Room 1106, QAG
      9 273 2512

        15 October 1997                                 _____




Mr Edmufuison




HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY - LETTERS FROM CAROLYN WAITE & ED
WALKER




The attached two letters have come to me in an (untraceable!) transit envelope.

2.      Ms Waite suggests to the Home Secretary that he should remove Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith from the scrutiny. Dr Walker - whom the Judge is, as he says, seeing
next week - does not go as far as that. But he complains about him.

3.     I think that both letters are bettered answered by the Department than by the
Scrutiny Secretariat. I would suggest something like

        “I am sorry that you were upset by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s reported
        comment to Mr Phil Hammond o f the Family Support Group.

         “As you may know, the Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets
        this remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or
       for it to be taken seriously. He has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord
        Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause o f the disaster was the failure o f
        the police operation and not the behaviour o f the fans.

         “The Judge has recently spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families o f
        those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found
        these meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write
        his report.

         “The Home Secretary believes that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a
        thorough report in which the families and the public can have confidence.
        [For WALKER - He has asked me to say that he was pleased to hear that you
        are to meet the Judge soon and that he is grateful for the efforts you have
        made on this very important issue]”.



G: | H ILLSB O R | M A IN | EDMUNDSO. H O
     I
i.




     4.      I have mined most of this from the press notices we released last week, which
     I enclose. Please ring if there are problems.




         C F BONE




         G: | H ILLSB O R | M A IN | EDMUNDSO. H O
