Neville  Trotter encloses           correspondence from
         about the recent           programme Hillsborough. ____
      H feels the inquiry           into the disaster should be
reopened as a result of the         programme.

The Home Secretary informed the House of the current
position in the adjournment debate on 17 December; the
decision as to whether further action should be taken will
be made following the receipt of a detailed report of all
the issues raised which is to be submitted by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire at the end of the month.

           /T'T o P/S of M of S as within




                                                       MWard
                                                       9 January 1996


                                                                   V\:v
                                                                        '©/i k b




                m in is te r o f st a t c
                                            wr°te as witwo     04 ^ tB 1997
                                                         Home Office
                         The Rt Hon David Maclean MP   q u e e n a n n es gate

                                                        LONDON SWIH9AT

                                                           C4 FEB 1997,

Our Ref:   PW/96 5/2180/6
           PO 24732/96




Thank you for your letter of 16 December, enclosing one from

                                 about the tragic events at
Hillsborough.

As you will be aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider
carefully the points which were made in the programme
'Hillsborough', and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN
Neville Trotter Esq MP
                                                         Home Office
                         The Rt Hon David Maclean MP   q u e e n a n n es gate

                                                        LONDON SWIH 9AT

                                                            ; ? FEB T997j

Our Ref:   PW/96 5/2180/6
           PO 24732/96




Thank you for your letter of 16 December, enclosing one from

                                 about the tragic events at
Hillsborough.

As you will be aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider
carefully the points which were made in the programme
'Hillsborough', and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN
Neville Trotter Esq MP
                            04-
Thank you for your letter dafeed 16 December, enclosing one from


                                            about the tragic events at
H i11sborough.


As you will      be aware,     the Home    Secretary has undertaken to
consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that
he would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but
would   need   to    be   convinced that   it would be   in the public
interest to do so and that it would stand a chance of providing
a better understanding than there is at present of what happened
on that terrible day.


In coming to        his   decision   the Home   Secretary will   consider
whether there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether
that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome
of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been
different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide
the Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points
raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he
will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon
as he has been able to consider all the issues.
                         Dlvtslonol File Reference fiA) I            1Ko j

HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

A d d r e s se e l
 Name                (u ^Ttq-h^   JP fof
 Address                          Reference
 Tick on* bojt
       E r House of Commons
        □        House of Lords
        □        Other - Insert full postal address




Letter drafted for Signature by)

                                                   (Kama of Signatory

Enclosures




Copies to be sent to




                                          ( fu ll addresses. If nccessory]
                                                                  HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                                                   LONDON SW1A OAA

                lister
                         2 0 U&L 1iliiS              #•
                                                     *
                ppnaip ^ F r g r r ^ y




                                                             16th December, 1996



            I shall be grateful if you will give the enclosed
                                                        as above
communication fr o m .....................................................................

your attention and send me a reply which I can forward to

my constituent.

            Please acknowledge.




                                                               For NEVILLE TROTTER MP




The Rt Hon David Maclean MP
Minister of State
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT


                                                                                             H.C.9IB
Neville Trotter M.P.
Houses o f Parliament
Westminster
London

6th December 1996


Dear Mr Trotter,

I write with reference to the recent documentary on the Hillsborough disaster and to express my
concern at what appears to be the withholding o f evidence, and collusion by senior officers serving
with South Yorkshire Police at the time.

I have attended football matches for some thirty years both home and away and have been to
Hillsborough several times to see my team, Newcastle United, play Sheffield Wednesday.
On one particular occasion , many years prior to the disaster, we were subjected to exactly the same
scenario as the Liverpool fans were on that fateful day, but were fortunate in that we managed to force
open the side gates at the top o f each pen and spill over into empty terracing reserved on either side
for segregation purposes. Our screams for help were met with abuse from the police. Our fingers were
hit with truncheons whilst trying to scale the fences to escape the crush. We were pushed back into the
overcrowded pen just as we were about to escape it. In short, our lives were put at serious risk because
of the, “They’re all animals”, attitude o f South Yorkshire police.

Several people o f all ages and backgrounds were injured and complained bitterly, but were silenced by
the threat o f arrest for some invented, “Breach of the Public Order Act”.

I am sure that, upon the realization that their detractors could be silenced, South Yorkshire Police
became complacent and their standards continued to slip. Measures that were previously taken, such
as putting up barriers and checking tickets on the way to the stadium, were slowly discontinued.
These falling standards due to lack o f accountability were, I believe, the major factors that led to so
many wrong decisions being taken on that fateful day, and the fact that ,as yet, there has still been no-
one held accountable, leaves open the possibility o f a repeat disaster despite the recent improvements
to stadia.

How can any organization that pledges to take responsibility for the safety of the public, be allowed
to shirk that responsibility when the going gets tough?

Other incidents since Hillsborough, which I will gladly discuss, reinforce my view that there is still a
lack of training given to police officers on the issue o f crowd control. Training which I am sure would
be forthmming i f every Chief Superintendent knew that they were going to be held accountable
should they fail in their duties.

I consider it imperative that the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster be reopened, not as witch hunt
o f individuals, but to make accountable every organization which claims responsibility for public
safety, be it the police, fire brigade, channel tunnel or whatever.
I will gladly discuss these and many other      its which tune prevents me from adding at this time and
implore you to encourage the Home Seen             consider the new evidence highlighted in the
Hillsborough documentary.

Thank you for taking the time to read this letter, and please do not hesitate to contact me at the above
address.


Yours sincerely,




ccto:
Neville Trotter M.P.
David Mellor M.P. (BBC Radio 5 606)
Hillsborough Action Group
