From:   A H Turney (2798)                  cc   Ms   Rex
        Fire and Emergency                      Ms   Snow
        Planning Department                     Ms   Craig
                                                Ms   Harrison
        26 January 1990                         Mr   Yates
                                                Mr   Chilcot
                                                Mr   Hammond
                                                Mr   Moriarty
                                                Mr   Boys Smith
                                                Mr   Mower
                                                Mr   Bolton
                                                Mr   Goddard -
                                                Mr   Mould
                                                Mr   Smith, F8
                                                Mr   Gilbert
                                                Mr   Godfrey
Mr Walters


TAYLOR REPORT:   STATEMENT AND OPPOSITION DAY DEBATE
I attach the following:

A    The Schedule for the Library on the recommendations in
     Chapters 3, 4 and 5;

B    A similar Schedule on the three remaining groups of
     recommendations which can either be for background briefing
     or incorporated into A if the Home Secretary saw value in it
     (this would require a small amendment to the statement);
C    Notes for supplementaries for the statement;
D   Without comment, notes for supplementaries for the statement
    on the membership scheme which DOE have provided (which the
    Home Secretary may wish to discuss);
E   A first draft of the Home Secretary's speech for the debate
    (which is rather long but will enable the Home Secretary to
    decide what he wants to emphasise and to cut);
F    Background material for the debate.
2. So far Mr Moynihan has not sought speaking notes for the
debate; A to C above, &fter the Home Secretary has considered
them, can be offered.




                                           A H TURNEY
hs.1.26/s&tadia.dm




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY

Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final report of Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.

In his statement on 28 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
Government's response to the recommendation set out in Chapter
3, 4 and 5 of Lord Justice Taylor’s final report. The schedule
is annexed.




29 January 1990
hs.1.26/sstadia.dm


national     INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)
       (a)    The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
              review the discharge of functions by local authorities.
       (b)     The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
             ^ sports and other sports venues.
The Government supports the recommendation that safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
relation to grounds used by football league clubs and the
international football grounds. Consideration will be given to
introduction of legislation extending the role of the new
authority in relation to other sports grounds and sporting venues
after ^ consultation     with   the    representative    sporting
organisations, the local authority associations and other
interested bodies. Consideration will also be given to extending
the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a voluntary
basis.

MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)
7.    Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
      in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).
8.    Calculations of crowd density:        revised figures (interim
      recommendation 2, revised).
9.    Arrangements to prevent further access to pens         (interim
      recommendation 3).
10.   Turnstile flow rates.

The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates to reflect reductions in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities’
attention. The next edition of the ’Green Guide’ will reflect
the new figures.

FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)
11.   Statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.
12.   stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).
 The Government have already urged police and clubs have already
 been encouraged to enter non-contractural statements of intent
 with the aim of ensuring that no doubt exists as to the
 respective responsibilities of each? and to provide monitoring
 of terraces accordingly. The relaxation in recommendation 12(b)
 will be drawn to the attention of local authorities and clubs.
 GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)
 Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
 terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.
FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)
14.   Removal of spikes.
15.N Reduction in height.

16.   Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).
17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.
18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).
19.   Gates normally to be kept open during matches       (interim
      recommendation 8, revised).
20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates   (replaces   interim
      recommendation 9).
21.   Cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).
The Government supports the recommendation on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15 ,
17 and to note recommendation 19 which varies interim
recommendation 8. The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.
CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)
22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).
23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).
These are repeated from the Interim Report.     They have already
been commended to local authorities.
SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)
24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.
25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.
26.   Terms of safety certificates.

27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).
 28. Issue of certificates to grounds without them          (interim
      recommendation 14).
29. Annual   review   of  certificates;   annual        renewal    of
     certificates (interim recommendation 15 ).
30. Review of arrangements for issuing certificates (interim
    recommendation 16).
31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability of a properly constituted team approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.
Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.
DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)
32.   Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18) .
33.   Generation of turnstile       flow   and   capacity   (interim
      recommendation 19).
34.   Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).
35.   Closed circuit   television    (interim    recommendation   21,
      extended).
36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22 , extended).
37.   Information on tickets (interim recommendation 23).
38.   Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).
39.   Computer records of ticket sales.
40.   Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.
 41.   Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).
42.    Recruitment of stewards.
43.    Police control rooms.
These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.
POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)
44.    Nomination of a Chief      Officer   for   liaison    (interim
       recommendation 26 ).
45. Pre match briefing     (interim recommendation 27).
46. Operational orders     (interim recommendation 28).
47.    Police action on ticketless fans.
48.    Review of arrest procedures.
49.    Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).
50.    Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.
51.    Control room facilities.
52.    Training of senior officers.
53.    Charges for police services.
These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior officer training and the objective to             improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches. The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.
COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)
54.    Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).
55.    Provision of a command channel.
56.    Land lines (interim recommendation 32).
57.    Public address (interim recommendation 33).
58.    Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:    advice
       on hand signals withdrawn).
 These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
 Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
 to implement. Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
 additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
 commanders.

 CO-ORDINATION OP EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)
 59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).
60.    Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).
61.    Communication with emergency services.
62.    Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).
63.    Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).
These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those concurred in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recommendation devised to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.
FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES
(Recommendation   64-69)
64.    Firs aiders (interim recommendation 39).
65.    First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).
66.    Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised).
67.    Ambulances (interim recommendation 42, revised).
68.    Ambulances, larger matches (interim recommendation 43 ).
69.    Major incident vehicles.

The Government will draw attention to variations from the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provisions of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.
GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)
74.    Revision of the Green Guide.
75.    Crush barrier tests.
76.    Inspections for corrosion.
The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
hs.1.26/sstadia.peb

Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in Chapters 2 and 6 of the Taylor report.

ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)
1.    General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
      designated under the Safety of sports Grounds Act 1975.
2.    To apply to all UEFA *'high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.
3.    To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
           Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
           Scottish football league, Premier Division
           National stadia.
4.    To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
      other matches played at designated grounds.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches,
Divisions 1 and 2 of the football league, the Scottish Premier
Division and the national stadia as recommended.
The Government will discuss with the football authorities the
application of the recommendation to other football league clubs
but sees no reason at present why the recommendation should not
be put into effect.

The application of the recommendation to other sports cannot be
achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989 but the
Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the sporting
authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under the 1975
Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league grounds which
are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not be practicable
to deal with in this way.
ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 2)
The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES (Recommendations 70-73)
70.   Selling tickets.
71.   other specific offences.
72.   Attendance centres.
73.   Electronic tagging.
The Government will look carefully and sympathetically at these
recommendations.
.1.25/QUESTION.DM
   NOTES FOR QUESTIONS FOLLOWING THE HOME SECRETARY'S
   STATEMENT

  ALL SEATER STADIA

  How will the change be achieved?

  S .11 of the Football Spectators Act provides the
  machinery as regards football grounds. Grounds will
  be licensed and seating will be prescribed as a
  condition of licence.

  Will HMQ discuss movement to all seated stadia with
  the football authorities?

  Yes, we have always made it clear we would do so.

  Will 3rd and 4th Division clubs/non-league clubs
  have tp SQvert their grounds to all seater?

 The first step will be to press ahead with the
 conversion of the major grounds and those grounds of
 clubs in Division 1 and 2. We shall also be
 discussing with the football authorities how best to
 move forward to convert grounds of clubs in the
 lower divisions and clubs outside the football
 league.

 Will designated rugby league, rugbv union, crirkot-
 qrounds be reguired to be all seater?

 The Football Spectators Act does not extend to these
 sports. We shall consider the action necessary,
 including any additional statutory powers, in order
 to increase the proportion of seated accommodation
 at these grounds.
Bhafc.Af clubs cannot meet the timetable?

This is hypothetical. Smaller clubs will have 10
years to become all seater. It is for the football
industry to decide how it can best make the long-
overdue changes. Remember that the smaller grounds
will not need to provide more seats than the numbers
of people who normally attend matches.



FINANCING/c o s t s

Haw much will conversion to all seated stadia cost?

The report says that the figure estimated by the
football authorities is £130 million. But it could
be less, as pointed out by Lord Justice Taylor in
paragraph 118 of the Report.

Who will pav?


The Report canvasses a number of suggestions but
recognises that the bulk of the finances for ground
improvement will have to be raised by the football
industry. HMG agrees.

What if clubs cannot afford to convert?

This is for the clubs but a requirement to admit
spectators to seated accommodation only does not
mean closure of the ground. It requires only a
reduction in the standing capacity.

Sill it_Bvean that the terraces of many grounds will
lie empty?


That depends on whether reductions are made in area
or density. It is up to the football industry to
decide how best it should proceed. Obviously the
capacity of grounds will be smaller but few grounds
are in practice regularly filled to capacity.

Will HMG reduce the Pool Betting Tax so that more
finding can be directed into football?

The argument for doing so is set out in the Report.
This would, in effect, mean meeting the costs, or a
significant part of them, from public funds. The
Government does believe this would be right.

Why not have a l e w such as that for horse racing?

The Report makes clear that the racing analogy does
not add weight to the case for a separate levy for
football. It is for the clubs themselves to meet
their responsibilities.

Will HMG grant capital tax allowance for ground
improvement work?

As I have said we shall consider this suggestion.
NATIONAL INSPECTORATE/REVIEW BODY

tew   Will a National Inspection   be   set   up   ?


The relevant sections of the Football Spectators Act
will be brought into force to set up the Football
Licensing Authority to exercise these powers in
respect of football league and international
football grounds in England and Wales.

Why, does such an Inspectorate not apply to other
sports grounds?

The Football Spectators Act applies only to
association football grounds. We shall consider the
introduction of legislation to extend the
Authority's role. In the meantime we shall discuss
with the local authority associations and relevant
representation sporting bodies extending the role of
the Authority by agreement.

Will the Inspectorate cover Scotland?

The Football Spectators Act does not apply to
Scotland. I shall discuss with my Hon Friend the
Secretary of State for Scotland the question of
extending the Authority's role to Scotland.

Willthe Authority take over safety certification
from local authorities?

No. The objective will be to bring consistency as
between one authority and another, by a process of
review.

Does yet another 'agency* concerned with safety mean
there will be confusion of responsibility?
No. Prime responsibility for the safety spectators
at grounds rests with the ground operator. The
local authority will remain responsible for issue of
safety certificates. The Football Licensing
Authority will have a review function.

KilL-the Authority issue guidance to local
authorities?

As indicated by Lord Justice Taylor, the Authority
may well find that it will be able to disseminate
advice to local authorities drawn on the experience
of problems and solutions at different grounds.
This is for discussion later.
GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)

Will HMG amend the Green Guide?

Yes. We have accepted recommendations of the Final
Report to do so urgently and will establish a
working group for that purpose.

Will the Guide now be made mandatory?

This is not recommended by the Inquiry.



Will the Government make parts of the Guide
mandatory?

An Order on mandatory contents of safety
certificates as recommended by Lord Justice Taylor
(recommendation 24) will be made as soon as
possible. We shall also consider whether additional
directions as to the contents of safety certificates
is necessary.

Does the revision of the Guide mean it is unsafe to
use it?


No. Although changes to the Guide will be made the     Appendix 3
advice generally remains good. The Technical
Working Party of the Inquiry recognised the Guide's
valuable contribution to safety.

Will HMG introduce measures to require clubs to havp   Appendix 8
automatic "Nimes" style gates in pitch fences?

No. This is a matter to be decided locally. The        200
Report is not encouraging on the use of such gates
in this country. Many grounds would be too small to
accommodate them.
POLICING AND NEW OFFENCES

When will the Government implement Part II of the
Football Spectators Act 1989?

We plan to implement Part II as soon as the
practical arrangements are complete. This is
expected to be in early May. Once Part II is in
force courts may impose restriction orders on those
convicted of hooliganism in this country which will
prevent them from travelling to key matches abroad.

Hill Part II of the 1989 Act have any effect on
hooliganism in Italy at the World C u p in June?

We are discussing with the Italian authorities the
arrangements which will enable our courts to impose
restriction orders on offenders convicted of
football-related offences in Italy. We aim to have
these arrangements in place before the World Cup.
We expect them to have a useful deterrent effect.

[IF RAISED]: What about offences in Scotland?

We hope to agree shortly with the Scottish
authorities arrangements for "corresponding
offences" there. This will enable courts to place
restriction orders on offenders convicted of
football-related offences in Scotland

Ifi-the National Football Intelligence Unit fully in
operation?

Like Lord Justice Taylor, I believe that the NFIU
will be of great value in dealing with hooliganism
at home and abroad. Since November the Unit has
been gathering intelligence and putting it to good
use. [IF PRESSED ON COMPUTER FACILITY: Computer
             facilities for the Unit are being procured and are
             expected to be fully operational by the end of
             March.]

NEW          Kften will the Government implement Lord Justice Taylor's
OFFENCES     recommendations foxnew offences and penalties for
AND          dealing with hooliganism?
PENALTIES
             As I said in my statement, I shall look
             sympathetically at these recommendations against the

•            background of the existing provisions of the
             criminal law. [It is too early to say when I shall
             reach firm decisions on implementation.]

CHARGING     Will you ensure that clubs pay the full costs of
             policing football grounds?

             The Report recommends that police authorities should
             ensure that charges made to clubs for policing
             inside grounds are realistic. I support that
             recommendation and will encourage consistency of
             practice, subject to the need, recognised in the
             report, for local discretion.

POLICE       Will you ensure that the police service act on
RESPONSE     Taylor's recommendations directed at them?

             The police service responded quickly and positively
             to the recommendations in the Interim report. I
             have no doubt that chief officers will respond in
             the same way to the final recommendations.

CCTV COSTS   Whowill bear the costs of improving CCTV at
             grounds?

             It is for football to bear these costs. The
             Football Trust have made generous grants towards
             these costs in the past. I hope they will continue
             to do so.
                             CONFIDENTIAL



NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

1.   Isn't this a major climb down by the Government?
No. The Government has always said that it would take account of
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. I have made it clear that
the Government does not intend to repeal Part I of the Football
Spectators Act. The effect of today's decision is not to proceed
immediately to establish the Football Membership Authority with
the remit to draw up a scheme. The Government will explore Lord
Justice Taylor's concerns about the operation of a membership
scheme in the light of advice from the specialist companies who
responded to the ITT on 19 January.

2.   If you accept Taylor, why not repeal? If you don’t accept
Taylor, why not press on?
Taylor has put forward an extensive package of measures which
could have the effect of reducing hooliganism: all-seater stadia;
better facilities; a better example set by players; restrictions
on ticket touts; three new criminal offences; an extension of
attendance orders; and tagging. They should be given a fair
trail. But experience shows that hooliganism is not easily
defeated. The national membership scheme is a further potentially
powerful weapon against the hooligans and it would be
irresponsible to abandon it before experience of the effect of
the Taylor proposals has shown that it is not needed.

3.   Didn't Taylor show that the scheme was inoperable?
All he had to go on was an invitation to tender issued by the
consultants employed by the football authorities. We shall need
to discuss his technical worries with specialist companies who
submitted tenders in response to the invitation, but - although
this is to some extent breaking new ground - our own computer
experts saw no reason to believe that a workable system could not
be devised.

4.   Didn't Taylor say that even if the technology worked, the
scheme would not deter hooligans?
The arguments in the report on this point were all put forward
-and answered - in the course of the Parliamentary debates. The
Government does not accept that a national membership scheme
would not deter hooligans. However, Taylor has put forward an
alternative approach, and it must be given a fair trial.
                            CONFIDENTIAL

5.   How do you propose to carry the scheme forward?
The Department of the Environment will initiate discussions with
the football authorities and the specialist companies as soon as
possible with a view to devising an effective and tested
membership scheme in the event that Lord Justice Taylor's package
of measures do not achieve his objectives of "minimising or
eliminating hooliganism" and it should then prove necessary to
introduce one.

6.   Doesn't   Lord   Justice   Taylor   may   that   testing   would   be
dangerous?
It is the view of the Government, the football authorities and
the specialist companies that such testing can be carried out
safely.

7.   Will the Government reimburse the football authorities for
the costs already incurred?
No. The football authorities and the Department of the
Environment agreed to fund the development work jointly. The
football authorities were fully aware that Lord Justice Taylor
was due to report.
[Department of the Environment paid £132,225 - half the costs up
to Royal Assent]

8.   Surely the measures proposed by Lord Justice Taylor are
either already in effect or previously ruled out as unworkable?
Some elements of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations are
already in force. The Government hopes to build on these in
carrying forward the full package. We share Lord Justice Taylor's
view that a move towards all-seater stadia and better discipline
among players would contribute substantially to a reduction in
football hooliganism.
 I would like to remind the House that although the immediate
matter which is the subject of this debate is the implications of
the final report of Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry into the
Hillsborough tragedy, the event which was '’the primary "cause of
our being here tonight was the tragedy itself. {I need scarcely
remind the House/the Rt Hon Member for SparJtbrook has already
reminded the House/] th&t it claimed the lives of 95 people and
caused more than 400 injuries.         I wish to place on record my
sorrow and my sympathy to the relatives and friends of those who
died, to those who were injured and, in some cases, to those who
continue to care for thfe injured.


I sincerely hope that that needless loss of life at Sheffield
last April will not simply be another entry in the list of major
tragedies which has inflicted football over the years.         Instead I
hope that it will be the beginning of a chain of improvements and
developments which will perhaps prevent such a tragedy happening
again.         If the conclusions of this report do have such an effect,
the loss of those lives will not .have been entirely in vain but
may I say that I can fully understand that because it comes too
late, eVen that would bfe little consolation to the people of
           t          ♦   .   .   L.

Merseyside and to the friends and relatives of the Hillsborough
victims.



I also wish to record again my appreciation and thanks to Lord
Justice Taylor for the very considerable amount of work which he
put into this valuable report over the past 9 months.      I would
also like to thank his assessors,     Mr Brian Johnson, the Chief
Constable of Lancashire and by Professor Leonard Maunder who is
Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of
Newcastle upon Tyne.     Lord Justice Taylor would acknowledge
himself that the special knowledge and experience which they
brought to the Inquiry can only add to the importance of this
report and to the credibility of its recommendations.


Over the past' 9 months Lord Justice Taylor has addressed himself
essentially to 3 different issues.     The first, I remind the
House, was his thorough investigation of the circumstances which
led to the tragedy at Hillsborough which was the subject of his
interim report.     The interim report contained 43 recommendations
to improve safety in football and other sports grounds, most of
which he regarded as urgent and which were brought into effect,
with few exceptions, before or shortly after the start of the
1989/90 football season.


The second task - the crowd control and safety - has led to Lord
Justice Taylor's analysis in his final report on the state of
British football.     In his own words it is a "bleak picture" which
he paints in that part of the report which he has called "Three
sombre lessons after Hillsborough".    His analysis that poor
conditions and facilities for spectators, and the poor example
set by those who are concerned with the management of
professional football have done little to improve standards of
behaviour by fans, has implications for public disorder and for
public safety that must be heeded,    with this part of the report
we must consider the specific recommendations which he has made
 for a movement towards all seated accommodation at football
grounds and other sports venues for improving safety, and on
offences.


Thirdly of course he has commented, and I would ask hon members
to remember that it was, as the report makes clear, Ministers who
invited him to comment, on the effect of the proposals for a
national football membership scheme.   His conclusions led me to
announce yesterday that the Government had decided not to place
before this House at present proposals for the setting up of the
football membership authority and the football membership scheme
itself.   As I said yesterday, the legislation which would enable
us to set up such a scheme will not be repealed.   There is much
that is useful in the Football Spectators Act 1989 and, indeed,
we intend to use Part I of the Football Spectators Act to
implement some of the other recommendations in the Taylor report
as I shall presently explain.   Part II of course is not in
contention.


Lord Justice Taylor's report will not make easy reading for the
football industry.   It points to previous reports on crowd safety
and the extent to which they have gone unheeded; and to how
complacency is still to be found at many grounds and in many
board rooms even after Hillsborough.   He illustrates this by
relating the complacent remarks of senior club officials.     More
worrying perhaps, he refers to the more recent incident at
Middlesbrough on 9 December where it is clear that some of the
specific lessons of Hillsborough had either not been learnt or
had not been applied, though mercifully the number of injuries on
that occasion was very small.


The report suggests a picture of a general malaise or blight over
the game due to a number of factors which he identifies
principally as old grounds, poor facilities, hooliganism,
excessive drinking and poor leadership.   He says that crowd
safety and crowd behaviour are closely related to the quality of
the accommodation and facilities offered and to the standards
which are encouraged and enforced.


He is critical too of some of the methods which have been
introduced to control hooliganism, in particularly segregation.
Though segregation was introduced to keep rival fans apart, Lord
Justice Taylor feels that it encourages worse behaviour.    As he
says "If people are confined as potential offenders, that concept
may in some cases be self-fulfilling".


The fans are not given a clean bill of health by this report.
Both in the interim report and the final report there is
reference to the effects of too much alcohol in a minority of
cases.



But his main criticism is addressed to those who run the
industry and who have permitted these squalid conditions to
develop, - conditions which encourage rather than dissuade the
hooligan.



For all the reasons which Lord Justice Taylor has identified we
are in agreement with his conclusions that on grounds of safety
we should move towards the phasing out of the standing
accommodation at major football matches and at certain other
major sports grounds.   I said yesterday that we accepted this
recommendation.   We propose to use Part I of the Football
Spectators Bill to achieve it by bringing into force those parts
which will permit the setting up of the Football Licensing
Authority and give it power to issue licences to football
grounds.


What we envisage is that the conditions of the licences will be
related to the timetable for the phasing out of standing
accommodation recommended in the report.   We shall clearly need
to discuss with the football authorities how this should be
achieved in practice.    Consultation of this kind will also be
important in the case of some other sports which have designated
sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act some of
which are not fully enclosed.


Some members may feel that the move towards all seated
accommodation will force clubs to turn away spectators.    I can
only ask them to read the report carefully.   Many clubs already
have more seated accommodation than the numbers of spectators who
on average attend their grounds.   10% reduction in standing
capacity will not affect them for some time, if at all.    Some say
it will change the atmosphere and image of the game.   That may
well be a change for the better.   Lord Justice Taylor points to
experience in Scotland and says that he is satisfied that in
England and Wales, as in Scotland and abroad, spectators will
become accustomed and educated to sitting.       The evidence he has
received shows that more recently where seating has been
installed the fans have come to accept it and like it.


Some clubs will no doubt be concerned at the cost of improving
their seated accommodation, the facilities for spectators and the
other measures for removing squalid conditions recommended in the
report.   Lord Justice Taylor presents a number of ways in which
money might be raised.       He says, and we agree, that the bulk of
the money must come from the industry itself.      There is a basic
rule in this country, originally in common law but now also in
statute law that it is the duty of occupiers to take reasonable
care towards those whom they invite into their premises.      So far
as the Government is concerned, its view is that if the
                         t
professional football industry wishes to invite members of the
public to watch the game, it must expect to pay for the
facilities which are necessary to ensure that those members of
the public are to be protected against unsafe conditions or
unsafe behaviour.


As I said yesterday there are some areas of fiscal policy which
we shall need to look at but the bulk of the finance for ground
improvement will have to be raised by the clubs or, or I might
add, by their national bodies and the report suggests a number
of ways in which this can be done.


I come now to the recommendations made in the report for specific
changes relating to safety conditions.      A number of detailed
recommendations were contained in the interim report,      it must
be acknowledged that some of the Interim recommendations caused
difficulty in a minority of cases.     That was perhaps not
surprising, given the very diverse nature of the sports grounds,
both for football and other sports, to which the recommendations
were intended to apply.   That is acknowledged in the final report
and a number of the interim recommendations have been modified.
We shall be drawing these changes to the attention of the local
authorities and clubs concerned shortly in a circular.     I do not
want to comment on the safety recommendations in detail.
I agreed yesterday that I would place in the Library of the House
a schedule setting out the Government's response to the
recommendations contained in chapters 3, 4 and 5 of the final
report and that has now been done.     There are however one or two
matters on which I would like to comment particularly.


The first is the setting up of an -organisation to review or
supervise the way in which local authorities carry out their
responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 in respect
of safety at sports grounds and other sports venues.     Part I of
the Football Spectators Act 1989, in particular section 13, gives
such a role to the Football Licensing Authority in respect of
designated football grounds:     designated that is for the purposes
of the 1989 Act.   I have already said that we propose to set up
the Licensing Authority to bring about all seated accommodation
and we shall also bring into force the powers to permit it to
review these safety functions.    I regret the need to set up such
an organisation but I do not think that we can doubt, in the
light of Hillsborough and the more recent Middlesbrough incident,
that such a move is necessary.     We shall proceed with this as
soon as possible but it will clearly not be practicable to set it
up and to recruit an effective inspectorate overnight.       I hope
however that we shall have made considerable progress by the
beginning of the next football season.


Lord Justice Taylor suggests that the powers of the organisation
should be extended to cover not only all sports grounds
designated for the purposes of the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds
Act but also where there are designated stands under Parts III of
the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 or indoor
places of sport licensed under Part IV of that Act.    We shall
need to consider this carefully.    The powers under the 1989 Act
extend only to football grounds and on past experience that is
where most of the problem lies.    There may be a case for
extending these safety responsibilities to cover other major
sports grounds, perhaps by agreement, and in the same way to
regulated stands (for example at racecourses).     But we have some
reservations at present about extending these supervisory
responsibilities of the Football Licensing Authority to indoor
places of sport.   These are dealt with by district authorities
under entertainments licensing legislation and there might be
some inconsistency in supervising the way in which a district
authority licenses its civic centre when it is used for a boxing
match but not supervising it when it is used for a Christmas
pantomime.   This is obviously something which we shall need to
consider further with the authorities concerned.


There are a number of specific recommendations for the amendment
of the Green Guide.     The Green Guide, as honourable members will
know, is a document published by the Home Office and the Scottish
Home and Health Department which owes its origins to the
technical working party set up by Lord Justice Wheatley in the
course of preparing his report on crowd safety at sports grounds
which was published in 1972.     The document has been revised on a
number of occasions in the light of experience gained in the
light of later incidents.    We shall of course be taking immediate
steps to revise the guide again but I think we can justifiably
point to the fact that it has stood the test of time remarkably
well.   Indeed it is difficult not to conclude that if the
guidance which it contains had been properly followed and applied
at Hillsborough and more recently at Middlesbrough, neither
accident would have happened.


I turn now to the role of the police in ensuring safety and
effective crowd control at sports events.    A key issue here is
the liaison between the club and the police.    There must be no
opportunity for each to stand aside thinking that the other is
dealing with the matter.    I am particulary grateful therefore
for the thoughtful discussion in the Report [206-214] of which
functions should be discharged by the police and which by the
club's stewards.   I agree with Lord Justice Taylor that the
question is one of balance [209].


If the balance tips towards heavier police involvement, there
would be substantial resource implications with which chief
officers, police authorities and I, as Home Secretary, would
have to be concerned.
If the balance tipped too far the other way stewards might find
themselves expected to deal with matters which call for the
authority and experience of the police.      Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation (broadly repeated from his interim report) for a
written statement of the respective functions of club and police
for crowd safety and control will, I believe, enable the right
balance for each ground to be struck in the light of local
circumstances.     I endorse this recommendation [and I welcome
particularly the clarification that the written document should
be seen as a statement of intent and not as a legally enforceable
contract].


The proper balance between police and stewards depends very much
upon the quality of the stewards.     I am sure that Lord Justice
Taylor is right to look to the clubs for an improvement in this
quality.     I welcome his recommendation   [R.42] for clubs to
recruit and train sufficient fit, active and robust stewards.


Increasing the capacity of the stewards would reduce the clubs'
call for special police services.     Such a reduction would
release police officers for duties outside the ground, not
necessarily connected with football: a benefit to the public
generally.


For these reasons, and because it is right in principle, I
support the Report's recommendation [R.53] that police
authorities should ensure that charges made to clubs for
policing inside grounds are realistic.      I shall encourage
consistency of police authority practice with regard to
charging, subject to the need, recognised in the report, for
local discretion.


The Report also makes recommendations about the training of
police commanders [R.52] and of police officers whose duties
require them to recognise crowd densities and to understand
crowd dynamics [R.12, 16].   I endorse these and the other
recommendations dealing with police planning.   I have no doubt
that chief officers will respond to these recommendations in
the same positive way that they did to those in the interim
report.


Lord Justice Taylor has some wise things to say in his report
about hooliganism. Like many before him, he has concluded that
there is no single measure which will defeat football
hooliganism and even a package of measures will take time to
have effect. [425.]

In recent years the Government has been attacking the hooligan
problem on many fronts: we have taken action against alcohol
abuse in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985;
we have introduced in section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 a
new offence of disorderly behaviour; the police have developed
their tactics by making effective use of closed circuit
television (CCTV) at grounds and by increasing the gathering and
use of intelligence on hard-core hooligans.
At the end of 1989 we established the National Football
Intelligence Unit (NFIU). It has already made a good start in
compiling and collating centrally intelligence on the most
serious and persistent football hooligans.

Turning to hooliganism abroad, at our initiative there has been
set up, under the TREVI arrangements for cooperation within the
European Community, an information network of permanent football
correspondents. We have developed guidelines on the policing of
international matches which we have put before our TREVI partners
and which have been warmly welcomed. We are cooperating fully
with the Italian authorities in providing advice and assistance
for their policing of British supporters attending the World Cup.

Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 has been welcomed by
Lord Justice Taylor. Under Part II of the Act courts may impose
restriction orders on those convicted of football-related
offences as defined in the Act. Those subject to restriction
orders will be prevented from travelling to key matches abroad.
I believe its provisions will have a salutary effect on those
hooligans whose disgraceful behaviour abroad has so blackened the
reputation of football. We plan to implement Part II as soon as
the practical arrangements and the remaining Parliamentary
procedures have been completed. [This is expected to be in early
May. ]


Following bilateral agreements with other countries our courts
will be able to impose restriction orders on offenders convicted
abroad of corresponding football-related offences. We are giving
priority to concluding an agreement with the Italian authorities.
We aim to have these arrangements in place before the World Cup.
I expect the provisions of Part II to have a useful deterrent
effect on the behaviour of football spectators abroad.

Taken together these measures against hooliganism which I have
described are having an effect. Lord Justice Taylor notes the
small rise in attendance at matches in each of the last 3 years.
His evidence suggests that measures taken in the last couple of
years have reduced violent misbehaviour inside grounds.

He expresses, therefore, cautious optimism about the situation
inside grounds. [280] But we cannot be satisfied with this
position. Even less can we be satisfied about misbehaviour
outside grounds and on journeys to and from matches.

I am determined that we shall pursue vigorously our strategy
against hooliganism. We shall encourage the enhancement of CCTV
     systems and the training of their operators. There is great
     potential here: good optical evidence identifies the culprit
     securely and may prevent him wasting the court's time by
     contesting the charge. We shall also develop to the full the
     potential of the NFIU. [A computer system is being procured as
     a matter of urgency and is expected to be fully operational
     shortly.J Lord Justice Taylor sees the work of the unit as an
     important element in the future strategy for reducing
     hooliganism. I agree with him. The NFIU will increase local
     forces' effectiveness by enabling them to target their resources
     on the ringleaders and organisers of violence.
m•




     Lord Justice Taylor recommends the creation of some new offences
     specific to behaviour in football grounds. He also recommends
     consideration of applying attendance centre orders and electronic
     tagging to convicted football hooligans. I shall consider these
     matters sympathetically against the background of the existing
     provisions of the criminal law. But it would be wrong for me to
     give an instant commitment to propose to Parliament changes which
     require careful consideration and consultation with the police
     and other interested bodies.

     In discussing strategy for combatting football hooliganism I
     have considered first the policing of football and the
     provisions of the criminal justice system. But football
     hooliganism has taken root and flourished in the particular
     circumstances in which football is played and watched. It is
     right, therefore, for a part of our response to hooliganism to
     be to look to change those circumstances.    [The national
     Membership Scheme, if it had proved workable, would have changed
     the atmosphere at matches by excluding the hooligan element.]
     There is a great responsibility here which rests on the clubs and
     the football authorities. [I have already dealt with the onus on
     them to improve facilities and I have dealt with our approach to
     all-seater stadia.] I have in mind particularly their
     responsibility for deciding who shall be admitted to their
     grounds. Membership schemes of various sorts are discussed in
     chapter 10 of the Report. Lord Justice Taylor recognises the
     practical difficulties and limitations of such schemes. Although
he stops short of making a formal recommendation for the
introduction of an away members only scheme he urges its further
consideration. I hope that the football authorities and
individual clubs will take his advice.

I come now to the report's recommendations in connection with the
proposed membership scheme. It was right for the Government to
plan for such a scheme. It must of course be clear, indeed it
always has been clear that if the principal advantage of a
national membership scheme was its ability to identify and deter
those people who have previously been identified as football
offenders, then its disadvantage was that it could not be
operated without some delay, however small, at the turnstiles and
some additional use of police resources to deal with those who
sought unlawful entry to grounds and so on. But what must be
remembered is that the problem which the membership scheme was
intended to address also causes disorder at the turnstiles and
is the major reason why it is necessary for up to 5,000 police
officers to be deployed on Saturdays to maintain order at
football grounds. There was always the possibility, and we asked
Lord Justice Taylor to assess it, that the balance of advantage
attached to the membership proposals would outweigh the
disadvantages, if the report had come to that conclusion then I
think that hon Members on both sides of the House would agree
that it would have been prudent and proper for the Government to
have proceeded with its proposals.

What Lord Justice Taylor examined was not the general principle
of the national membership scheme, but the feasibility and
practicability of the particular proposals which were the subject
of the invitation to tender which was issued by the consultants
employed by the football authorities. In the event he has
concluded that there are considerable disadvantages in those
proposals and we have for that reason decided not to proceed with
the setting up of the football membership authority. Lord
Justice Taylor has concluded that he cannot support the
implementation of Part I of the Act. For reasons which I have
already explained, we cannot agree entirely with that conclusion,
as it is our intention, as soon as practicable, to use those
sections of Part I to which I have already referred. We will not
bring into force those parts which relate specifically to the
football membership scheme and the football membership authority.

I have dealt in this speech with what I regard as the major
issues arising from the Taylor report. There are many more. We
shall of course encourage the Football League and Football
Association to liaise, perhaps with the Sports Council and
others, to set up an advisory council which can produce guidance
on football stadium design. That is a sensible and constructive
proposal. The report rightly criticises that minority of fans
who drink to excess, resort to hooliganism and cause public
disorder. But it is right to acknowledge that the vast majority
of people who go to watch football matches, even in the appalling
squalid conditions which exist at some major grounds, are decent
well behaved people who are not involvedin such conduct and who
want nothing to do with it.

The important thing about Lord Justice Taylor's report is that it
suggests a way ahead. It is not a way which will bring about
overnight improvements in conditions at football grounds or
overnight improvements in the conduct and behaviour of
spectators. It quite properly places major responsibilities on
all those concerned in professional football, to bring about
improvements in their sport.

I finish my speech tonight with the words which I used inmy
statement yesterday. Mr Speaker, we are giving the industryand
the clubs a final opportunity to put themselves in order.The
public will not forgive them if they do not now act.
4.




     BACKGROUND MATERIAL

     1.   The incident

     2.   The Inquiry

     3.   The interim recommendations

     4.   The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

     5.   The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987

     6.    The Inquiry's Press Release, which summarises the final
          report
%




     THE HILLSBOROUGH INCIDENT


     Basic details



    Bfite                    15 April 1989




    glace                    Sheffield Wednesday's Ground
                             Hillsborough
•
m




    Match                    FA Cup Semi Final between
                             Liverpool and Nottingham Forest



    The casualties           95 dead
                             Over 400 received hospital treatment



        police force         South Yorkshire Constabulary
    involved



    JEhe. local authority    Sheffield City Council
    responsible for the
    safety certificate



    The fire authority       South Yorkshire Fire and Civil
                             Defence Authority



    The ambulance            South Yorkshire Metropolitan
    authority                Ambulance Service (under the
                             Trent Regional Health Authority)
THE TAYLOR IN Q U IR Y




The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor

Appointed    17 April 1989 (Sir Peter Taylor)



Assessors:

Mr Brian Johnson QPM
     Chief Constable of Lancashire

Professor Leonard Maunder OBE BSC PhD ScD FEng FIMechE
     Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of
     Newcastle upon Tyne



Interim report

Delivered 15 April 1989



Interim recommendations

43 recommendations (Annexed)
                               CHAPTER 24-THE RECOMMENDATIONS
   315. The recom m endations which follow are the m inim um necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
inform ation I have received. They complement the recom m endations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.

  316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.

M axim um Capacities for Terraces
★     1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
    should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

    A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
    another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

★    2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
    Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

    (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
        in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

    (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
        margin.

★     3. Arrangements should be made:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


Filling and M onitoring Terraces
★     4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
    responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
    other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
    variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

★     5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
    area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
    sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
    period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
    or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
    below, and by radio to the control room.


Fences and G ates
      6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
    duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
    crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
    demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
    different crowd densities.

*      7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
    different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit".



                                                         57
★    8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
    when spectators are on the terrace.

★     9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
    a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
    The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
    stewards and police officers in that vicinity . He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
    either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★     10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the dub at each ground where there
    are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
    necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
    brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
    nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★      11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
    to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★     12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
    complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the
    maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
    reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
    which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
    ambulance service and the building authority. Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its
    object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
    substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
    recommendations in this report.

      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
    which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
    Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


       16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
    amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
    accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
    effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
    with the local authority’s rules.

       17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
    of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and ambulance services, of
    the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group’s terms of
    reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
    ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
    and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
    written reports for consideration by the local authority.


D uties of each Football Club
★     18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
    inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
    anticipated.


                                                         58
                 correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
      as to ensure that ail the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
      accordingly!        ^     ^      “ * * Can"0t *         the Capadty ° f that vie" in* ™     ^


      rM rhJi"arn ? lleS Sh0“ld bC c!oseidj when the Permitted capacity o f the area served by them is about to be
      S r lt w s fo r th T ^ S ^ S r           h* made *° *“ " * qUkk       effeCtiVe communication with ^ rn stile

      -J?*' Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
      concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

      r e v ie w ^ 'lt ih ^ r n ^ ^ H 5^
                                     ! 0" b° th ° UtSide     inside the *round should * comprehensively
      Ind cT ^'            w k!i •        arTangements for**ch "“ ‘eh, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
                                           a
      andclear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing


 *    t    h      l  tf°" °",ti^ etS Sh0uld h* unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
                       Provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
      should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

*                             dcketu rf ques? ng spectator to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
                                                  * m "",hM * c™             b *“ *i* —                           *

                                                                                 “ “ * • pr0Vls'0,, - PK-m*,ch

Police Planning

* J    6i / he 9 hif f Co"St^b,i o f each P°lice force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
                           It      ? T t0 I!” 8* With the mai,agement of each football club and local authority
     concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

*      3?' The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all




     sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

* r 29 A ™ ? °Pt!°n ^ P°s? one kick-ofT should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground
     Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

        30. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
     monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
     at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
     in the interpretation and use of these data.                                                           sniiieu


Com m unications
       3.1. There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
     received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operator £ 7 h e < 3 £>m
             w              “ Pacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
     Z n d n r ^ f i n ^ SSar^. i° «>revent. overc»>wding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
     sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                         59
V
          32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
        with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

          33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
        areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important
        announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
        noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on even programme sold for even
        match.

          34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
        Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
        the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


    Co-ordination o f Emergency Services
           35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
        liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

          36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
        ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
        spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
        concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
        rooms of each of the emergency services.

    ★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
        services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
        within the ground itself.

          38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
        the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
        they are required.


    First Aid, M edical Facilities and Am bulances
    ★      39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
        club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

          40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
        equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
        medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

    ★     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
        any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
        present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
        match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and be should be immediately
        contactable.

    ★     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
        attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

          43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
        be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
        requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                            60
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (1975 ACT)
The 1975 Act applies to all sports grounds with accommodation
for spectators. The main mechanism of the Act for achieving
safety is the safety certificate.
A safety certificate is issued by the local authority, ie:
     London:- London Borough Council
     Metropolitan Districts:- Metropolitan District Council
     Elsewhere:- County Council (in Scotland the regional or
     islands council)
in respect of grounds designated by the Secretary of State.
The Secretary of State may designate grounds with
accommodation for over 10,000 spectators. The Secretary of
State for Scotland exercises this power for Scotland.
All but one of the football league grounds are designated (the
exception in Torquay Utd which holds under 10,000).
International soccer and rugby grounds are also designated.
Other ("non-league") soccer, cricket grounds, Rugby union, and
Rugby League grounds in England and Wales identified as having
accommodation for over 10,000 spectators have also been
designated.

Terms and conditions of safety certificates are determined by
the local authority who are under a duty to issue such a
certificate in respect of a designated ground. The local
authority must consult the police and either the fire
authority or building authority about terms and conditions.
The local authority are also under a duty to arrange the
inspection of a designated ground at least annually.
FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987 (1987 ACT)
Part III of the 1987 Act applies to sports grounds with
covered accommodation which are not designated under the 1975
Act. The 1987 provides for safety certification of stands at
such sports grounds which can accommodate at least 500
spectators under cover. Local authorities determine which
stands require a safety certificate. Thereafter the system is
similar to that of the 1975 Act.
Part IV of the 1987 extends entertainment licensing to indoor
premises used for sporting "entertainment" to which the public
are invited as spectators. Those licenses are issued by
District Councils.
NEWS RELEASE
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
FINAL REPORT PUBLISHED                       29 January 1990

1.   The Final Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor is published today. In Part V
the Judge makes 76 Recommendations which he hopes will be
"instrumental in promoting better and safer conditions at sports
grounds in the future." (43 of the Recommendations are repeated
from the Interim Report and there are 33 new ones).

Football;   Present and Future

2.   Lord Justice Taylor paints a bleak picture of the current
state of football under the heading "Three Sombre Lessons After
Hillsborough". He notes how previous reports on crowd safety
have been unheeded, that complacency is still to be found at many
grounds even after Hillsborough, and that football is suffering
blight because of old grounds, poor facilities, hooliganism,
segregation, alcohol and poor leadership. He sets out ways in
which he thinks all those in the game could set a better example,
especially to younger fans, and embark on the task of creating a
better atmosphere at football grounds and upgrading stadia so as
to provide fans with modern facilities. He points out the many
sources of revenue available to the football clubs to enable them
to finance the improvements he is proposing. In the course of
his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor visited modern stadia in
Scotland, Holland, France and Italy as well as grounds in England
and Wales.

All-Seated Accommodation

3.   Lord Justice Taylor recommends that sports grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 should
become all-seater under a phased programme. For the English
first and second divisions, the Scottish Premier League and
national stadia he recommends a reduction of 20% in present
standing capacity over each of the next five years, so as to
eliminate standing by August 1994. For all other designated
grounds, he recommends an annual reduction of 10%, so as to
eliminate standing by August 1999. The first reductions should
be made at the start of the next football season in August.
Until then, Lord Justice Taylor recommends a slight relaxation in
the cut in capacity which he proposed in his Interim Report (13%
instead of the 15% he recommended then). The effect of these
recommendations is shown in the example below

     First Division Club

     Standing Capacity before Hillsborough:   25,000
     (calculated according to Green Guide)
     15% cut after Interim Report             21,250
     13% cut after Final Report               21,750
     First 20% reduction (August 1990)        17,400
     Second 20% reduction (August 1991)       13,050
     Third 20% reduction (August 1992)         8,700
     Fourth 20% reduction (August 1993)        4,350
     Fifth 20% reduction (August 1994)             0

Lord Justice Taylor also recommends that the FIFA ruling that
there should be no standing from 1993 onwards at high risk
matches (as defined in UEFA Regulations) should apply here.

Advisory Design Council and National Review Body

4.   To help clubs plan and build the necessary changes at their
grounds, Lord Justice Taylor proposes that the FA and the FL
should set up an Advisory Design Council to conduct and marshal
research and disseminate information and expertise regularly to
League clubs. Lord Justice Taylor sees a need for a National
Inspectorate and Review Body to review the way local authorities
carry out their functions of certifying sports grounds. Section
13 of the Football Spectators Act gives these powers in relation
to football grounds.
Fences and Gates and Pitch Invasions

5.   Lord Justice Taylor recommends that "prison-type fences" be
removed. He says that high, spiked fences are intimidating, ugly
and demoralising. He would like to see all perimeter fencing
removed in time but believes that would be premature at this
stage. He therefore recommends that no fences should be higher
than 2.2m and that they should have sufficient gates on to the
pitch to permit immediate evacuation in any emergency. Gates
should be painted and kept unlocked during the match. He sees
merit in safety corridors (such as those at Anfield, Goodison
Park and White Hart Lane), and balances his views on lowering
fences with a recommendation that it should be an offence to go
on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

Clubs and Police

6.   Lord Justice Taylor recommends that clubs and police should
agree written "statements of intent" setting out their respective
responsibilities. Clubs should check turnstiles, signs and
tickets and recruit adequate stewards. They should provide the
police with proper control rooms. The police are urged to review
their operational orders for police matches, their training for
senior officers in charge of matches, and their arrest procedures
at grounds. Their planning should provide that ticketless fans
should not be allowed to enter a ground except in an emergency.
They should consider options such as postponing kick-off, early
kick-offs or Sunday fixtures. Police authorities should review
the charges they make for the costs of policing inside grounds.

Other Recommendations

7.   There are detailed recommendations about communications,
Safety Certificates, the role of the local authorities, co­
ordination of emergency services, first aid, medical facilities
and ambulances. Lord Justice Taylor does not think that the
current rules governing the sale of alcohol in grounds should be
changed.
Offences and Penalties

8.   Lord Justice Taylor considers the problems raised by ticket
touts and suggests making it an offence to sell tickets on the
day of the match without the club's authority. He also proposes
that it should be an offence to throw a missile or to chant
obscene or racialist abuse. He suggests extending the powers of
the courts to make attendance centre orders and to use "tagging"
to keep convicted hooligans away from football grounds during
matches.

National Membership Scheme

9.   Lord Justice Taylor considers in detail the Management
Consultants' Invitation to Tender (ITT) and Statement of
Requirements (SOR) for the national membership scheme. This
follows undertakings by Ministers last summer that Parliament
would have an opportunity to consider any comments he might make
on it.


10. He says (paragraph 424) that he has grave doubts about the
feasibility of the scheme and serious misgivings about its likely
impact on safety. He also has grave doubts about the chances of
its achieving its purpose and is very anxious about its potential
impact on police commitments and control of spectators. For
these reasons, Lord Justice Taylor says he cannot support the
implementation of Part I of the Act.

11. He draws attention to the progress being made through the
use of CCTV in detection and in the collection of evidence, and
the better use of intelligence with the setting up of the
National Football Intelligence Unit. "Put together with progress
towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better facilities,
improved arrangements for crowd control and better training of
police and stewards to achieve it, I believe these measures would
give the best chance of eliminating or minimising football
hooliganism."
NOTE TO EDITORS



Following the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary


     "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
     ground on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about
     the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."

Lord Justice Taylor wasassisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson CBE, QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor
Leonard Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Secretary of the Inquiry
was Mr Robert Whalley from the Home Office.

The Inquiry heard oral evidence in Sheffield Town Hall in May and
June. Lord Justice Taylor produced his Interim Report on 1
August. He completed his Final Report on 18 January.
