                                                                 G   >
Prom: F J Smith                                      cc: Mr Boys Smith
      F8 Division                                        Mr Goddard, F8
      Ext 2952                                           Mr Watts, G1
      17 May 1989                                        Mrs Wilsdon, Cl
                                                         Miss Harrison, E
                                                         Mr Kinghan, DOE              /
Mr C^ok, C4
Mr Gillespie, C2
Mr Hillier, A
Mr Mould, G1
Mr Rhodes, F8                                             ft.    t rh*
Miss Rumble, Cl
Mr Wells, F3
Miss Wooldridge, F2
                                                                             Ma
Mr Lee, DOE                          fj- Ulfjlr-A                        .

                                    (jjU| /JaivJU)   4v
POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY                1*4 UTMiYL(l+\

I attach a first draft of the Police Department contribution to
the Home Office evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
the Hillsborough tragedy.                                                     q


Some passages are in reasonably full form but others (bracketed)                  A?/7
                                                                                     *-"
are very much in outline. I should be very grateful for
contributions or comments particularly as annotated on the
following contents list:

CROWD CONTROL


INTRODUCTION


The incidence of football hooliganism

THE LAW


     Disorder         (Mr Rhodes)


     Alcohol          (Mr Hillier/Miss       Rumble- are you content
                      with this reference to licensing powers and
                      68/1988?


                      Mr Wells - could you provide a short
                         contribution on the bye-law experiments,
                         please?)


     Exclusion of        (Mr Lee - reference to Football Spectators
     troublemakers       Bill and your evidence?)


     Ticket touts    j   (Mr Cook/Miss Wooldridge - can you help,
                         please, on criminal offences and police
                         powers?

                         Mr Lee - reference to Bill?)


     Forged tickets (Mr Cook - criminal offences?)


PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENTS


     Police operations and clubs


     Police intelligence and liaison


     Perimeter fences (Mr Mould - we spoke)


     Swifter Justice (Mr Gillespie - are you content with this
                     reference?)

MATCHES OVERSEAS


     Restriction orders


     Police liaison


     Football authorities (Mr Lee - would you like to contribute
     something here?)


Please could I have these contributions by the end of
Tuesday 23 Mav.
In addition I should be grateful for general comments from any
recipient on the emerging shape of the draft.




                                                  F J SMITH
CROWD CONTROL


INTRODUCTION


The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
football matches and other sporting events are to ensure that
necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist so that:


     - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


     - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is
     adequately deterred, and dealt with if it arises.


Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers of
the events (in relation to football, clubs and the football
authorities) and the police. Ultimately, no arrangements can be
entirely satisfactory without a large measure of responsibility
and self-discipline amongst spectators.


The incidence of football hooliganism F8


It is regrettably the case that we have come to associate
professional football with a persistent incidence of hooliganism
amongst some spectators. The annual criminal statistics
published by the Home Office do not identify offences inside
football matches or otherwise related to football as a separate
category. However, as a guide to the level of trouble at
matches, ACPO collate for each football season the total number
of people arrested at and ejected from Football League matches
('at' meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made outside but
directly connected with the policing of matches). In recent
seasons these have totalled:


     Season         Arrests        Ejections

     1985/6          4,143           4,356
     1986/7          5,531           6,466
     1987/8          6,106           6,542
Although as a proportion of attendances these figures are
relatively small (0.03% in 1987/8) they are a continuing source
of real trouble and certainly include many serious instances of
violence and disorder. Of particular note is that this level of
hooliganism exists despite a massive commitment of resources by
the police and others, for example:


     - typically 5,000 officers in England and Wales are assigned
     to football duties on a 'football Saturday';


     - rigorous segregation is routinely enforced, by police
     tactics, proscribed routes, fencing inside grounds, and
     controls on ticket sales?


     - closed circuit television and video systems are
     extensively used to record evidence of crowd disorder and to
     deter disorder from arising;


     - special efforts to promote good liaison and intelligence,
     to anticipate and prevent trouble; and


     - other important measures described below.


The Government's opinion is that, serious enough at existing
levels, football hooliganism is a problem contained rather than
solved. Without existing strenuous efforts, the Government
believes the problem would be considerably worse. Special
reference is made to some major incidents of hooliganism since
the tragedy at Hillsborough. At the Everton v Norwich City semi­
final on 15 April, 100 supporters were arrested. On 22 April, 94
were arrested in connection with the West Ham United v Millwall
match and 24 in connection with that at Chelsea v Leeds United.
Most seriously, in several incidents across the country on 13
May, the last full day of the 1988/89 Season, 220 people were
arrested. This included pitch invasions at Crystal Palace (by
Birmingham City fans) and at Bristol. Serious disorder occurred
on return journeys from matches: at a motorway service station,
involving Birmingham City supporters; at a public house in
Cheshire, involving Leeds United fans; at Weston-Super-Mare,
involving Sheffield United supporters; and at Tewksbury drunken
Bristol Rovers supporters disrupted a wedding reception,
assaulting the bridegroom and best man.

THE LAW


Disorder F8


(Summary of public order offences of disorderly conduct, racial
harassment, etc in POA 1986 and elsewhere; violence, damage;
other relevant offences and penalties.)   (Mr Rhodes).

Alcohol F 8 / D / £ / ^ (//p3


      - Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1975 put
      controls on alcohol on trains or PSVs to/from designated
      matches, and prohibited bringing alcohol or containers into
      grounds, or entering under the influence. Corresponded to
      similar provisions of criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980.
      (F8)


      - Extended in Public Order Act 1986 to include minibuses and
      to ban fireworks being brought into grounds.  (F8).


      - Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder) issued on 5 August
      1988 gave wide ranging advice reminding courts and the
      police of relevant criminal offences and powers to regulate
      licensing, including the power to close all licensed
      premises in an area when riot or serious disorder is
      expected.  (Section 188, Licensing Act 1964).  (A/Cl)


      - Bye-law experiments.    (F3/E)


Exclusion of troublemakers F8/DOE


Summary of POA 1986 - exclusion orders (Mr Smith).


This is without prejudice to a club's own entitlement to choose
who to admit, or refuse to admit, to their property.


The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace exclusion orders
- see [DOE evidence submitted separately?]


Ticket Touts C4


Extensive unregulated selling of tickets especially outside
grounds can undermine segregation of opposing fans and any
arrangements to restrict sales to authorised final recipients.
The expectation that ticket touts will operate can encourage
those without tickets to travel to matches declared to be 'all
ticket'.


Various powers do exist that enable the police or club officials
to take action against ticket*^outs, depending on circumstances:
to eject the person if he is on club premises; to [arrest? move
              f a -   tfW T tto ftO *
the person on?]^; to arrest for breach of the peace; or for
holding stolen property or forged tickets (see following
section), if the police have reasonable grounds for such a
suspicion.


However, it is difficult to foresee a practical and enforceable
criminal offence directed specifically at the activity of touting
tickets.   For example, it would be difficult to draw the right
distinction between undesirable activity, and the understandable
wish of a genuine spectator to sell a ticket he bought in good
faith but can no longer use. It may well be that a better
solution rests with tighter controls by the organisers of
sporting events over the distribution of tickets, and the
imposition of sanctions against those found abusing the controls
[DOE: perhaps in conjunction with the proposed national football
membership scheme?]


Forged Tickets F8/C4


Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
dishonesty, deception and fraud involved but also because they
could lead to serious overcrowding.   However practical
difficulties arise both with detecting forgeries, particularly
given advances in printing technology, and in identifying the
persons responsible.


The criminal offences and penalties available are [C4?]


Newspapers have reported that on 5 May Judge John Prosser QC at
Cardiff Crown Court sentenced 3 defendants to terms of 4, 3 and 2
years' imprisonment and a fourth to 1 year's detention following
the distribution of 2,000 forged tickets for Welsh rugby
internationals. It was also reported that problems of
overcrowding arose at the matches.


PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENTS


Police operations and clubs F8


(Explanation of Chapters 13 and 14 of 'Green Guide'. Perspective
roles of police and of clubs/stewards. Detailed police guidance
and operational decisions are a matter for ACPO and individual
chief officers.   Advance planning/liaison.   Cost of policing:
inside grounds recoverable, outside not.)

Police intelligence and liaison F8


Police operations at football matches are usefully reinforced by
suitable advance planning and, especially, by intelligence on
likely trouble at matches and on individuals thought likely to
cause that.


Good liaison generally exists between police forces whose
supporters are meeting in a fixture, and between territorial
('Home Office') police forces and British Transport Police. Many
individual forces have made efforts to collate intelligence on
football hooliganism.


The Home Office intends shortly to establish a National Football
Intelligence Unit to promote the further development of local
efforts and to take a central view on emerging national trends
and issues of concern. Some forces have also undertaken in-depth
investigations over protracted periods to identify small numbers
of hard-core football hooligans who engage in systematic,
organised violence.   Some such operations were unsuccessful when
evidence was brought into doubt and the trials concerned did not
result in convictions. But other operations have been highly
successful. Most recently in operation 'Omega' (... sentencing
expected 5/6 June. 25 out of 26 defendants have pleaded guilty
to all substantive charges, including conspiracy.   Heavy press
interest likely.)

Perimeter Fences F8/G1


(Safety must be the paramount consideration for spectators at
sporting events.   However it is clear from recent experience that
without sufficient counter-measures hooliganism would pose
unacceptable dangers and disruption to peaceful spectators.     One
(of many) possible such counter-measures is the use of perimeter
fences to assist with segregation of opposing supporters.
Adequate operation and escape arrangements have always been
considered essential, however.)


     [Mr Mould - we spoke.   Whether something substantive eg on
     these lines goes here or in your evidence is for discussion.
     Cross referencing between our sections and to the 'Green
     Guide' should be included].


Responding to major outbreaks of hooliganism - 'Swifter Justice'
(C2)


Home Office circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited the
courts, the police and others to formulate contingency plans to
bring very rapidly to court those involved in large scale
disorder. Swift action was intended to deter further outbreaks
and to demonstrate the determination of the agencies involved to
act firmly. The initiative envisaged disorder in general, but
could certainly include that arising in the context of football.
MATCHES OVERSEAS


The Government also considers it very important to do all it
reasonably can to deter and deal with football hooliganism by
those from our country who travel to matches abroad.


In 1985 very serious disorder by Liverpool fans at the Heysel
stadium in Belgium during a match with Juventus led to the death
of 39 people when a wall collapsed. A substantial police
investigation identified 26 suspects who were extradited to
Belgium; [?] were recently convicted (although some defendants
are appealing). Following the Heysel tragedy English clubs were
banned from UEFA competitions in Europe. Then in the Summer of
1988 over 300 English fans were arrested in West Germany during
disturbances at the European Nations Cup.


The Government has sought action in two main respects: through
powers to prevent certain hooligans from travelling to key
matches abroad ('restriction orders'), and through encouraging
effective international liaison between police forces and between
football authorities.


Restriction Orders


Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament
will provide the courts with a new power, on convicting someone
in England or Wales of a football related offence, to impose a
restriction order on him if the court is satisfied that would
help to prevent violence at or in connection with a designated
football match in other countries.   Provision is also made, after
designation of the appropriate arrangements, for a restriction
order to be made here in respect of a conviction outside England
or Wales for an offence corresponding to a football related
offence. A restriction order if imposed will be for two years
or, if the accused is sentenced to immediate imprisonment, five
years.


The effect of a restriction order is that the person must report
to an agency on the occasion of a designated match (outside
England and Wales), thus preventing him from attending.   Failure
to report as directed will be a criminal offence punishable by up
to one month's imprisonment or a level 3 fine (currently £400) or
both.


The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might for
example be the police, probation service or a private security
firm - or some combination of these. The Bill provides for a
degree of selectivity so that, for example, full internationals
would result in all persons subject to a restriction order being
required to report whereas when individual clubs were playing
abroad only some individuals would be 'called up'.   The Bill also
provides for someone to apply for exemption from a requirement
to report, where special circumstances exist, and for termination
of the restriction order.


The Government believes restriction orders will be effective in
preventing hooliganism at football matches outside England and
Wales by persons from those two countries, and will demonstrate
to other countries (especially neighbours in Europe) our resolve
to tackle this problem. The proposed powers have received
general support from all sides. The conceptual alternative of
withdrawing someone's passport was considered too ineffective
(since it is relatively easy to obtain a temporary British
Visitors Passport) and too sweeping a restriction (since it would
prohibit all foreign travel, whether a foreign match was taking
place or not).


Police liaison


Football hooliganism is discussed by European Community partners
under the 'TREVI' committee of law enforcement Ministers and
officials. Under the UK's Presidency of the EC in 1986 a network
of 'Permanent Correspondents' on football was established: each
country nominates such a person who then acts as the primary
communication channel between police forces in his own country,
and other EC countries, in connection with football.   (Police
forces remain free to communicate directly, if appropriate.) The
arrangements have been put to frequent good effect and are
recognised as a success.


During the European championships last Summer police liaison
officers from this country went to West Germany to provide on the
spot advice to the German police who were responsible for public
order at matches involving the English team. Advice was provided
on the handling of English supporters, and on the identity and
suspected intentions of troublemakers. Various other EC
countries provided similar support. This too was a considerable
success and the Government intends that it should be repeated for
the World Cup in Italy next year. The lessons from the
experience in Germany have been incorporated in draft guidelines
for international co-operation on the policing of international
football matches; these are being discussed within TREVI.


Football authorities


(DOE - international co-operation on security arrangements,
ticket sales, etc; and on the Council of Europe Convention on
Spectator Violence?).
