                          __________________                                   &mSLt
                                 «   n tf M 'r J in r            15 NOV f99f
              ffrtecc'5 fA^tr^p. ^^
 from:        MRS 6 I MOODY                 cc   Miss A M Edwards
              F2 DIVISION
              ® 273 2621                                 <?/ 1
              14 November 1991
                                                             -AAs)/ -

                                                             (3^
HMCIC
Mr Goddard         F8 Division
Miss Harrison      E Division
Mrs Catto          F5 Division

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : LETTER FROM GEORGE HOWARTH HP


Subsequent to the circulation of my earlier note dated 8 November
(not to Miss Harrison or Mrs Catto) , Lord Ferrers called a
meeting for 13 November to discuss the content of the reply to
the attached letter from George Howarth MP to the Home Secretary
on a number of issues arising from the latest developments in the
aftermath to the Hillsborough tragedy. The subjects covered in
Mr Howarth's letter are:-
         (i)     that   "no  detailed   investigation   around   the
         responsibilities of those concerned has yet been undertaken
         or published” (para 2 and the last paragraph,)

         (ii)    unhappiness as to the coroner's verdict (para 4,
         top of page 2); and these issues are linked with,
         (iii)   unhappiness as to the medical retirement ofChief
         Superintendent Duckinfield (paragraphs 1 and 5), although
         this seems to be linked to the erroneous notion that
         disciplinary proceedings constituted some kind of further
         investigation.

2    F2 Division's interest in these three Questions is solely
in the third, ie into any question of whether any officer might
have misconducted himself on this occasion. I should be grateful
if Miss Harrison could confirm that I have made use of the
material she has provided on inquests in a way acceptable to
E Division. As to the operational aspects of the policing of the
event, I believe F8 were the sponsor Division for the Taylor
Inquiry and I should therefore be grateful if they would confirm
that the passages in the draft covering their interest, ie those
refusing a further inquiry, meet their interests. Mrs Catto may
care just to confirm that she is content with the references to
medical




                             MRS 6 I MOODY

GIM-710.000                            7
j^piank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home

 Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.


 I should like to emphasize once more, as we have on earlier

 occasions, how deeply we feel for all those who lost relatives
 or friends in this horrific incident.     The whole Government

 was, as you know, deeply saddened to hear of this dreadful
 disaster at the time it happened.     It is because of our
 sympathy with their appalling loss that we have always tried

 to ensure that the circumstances which caused it should be as
 fully and as openly exposed as possible.     I do not therefore

 think it is being entirely fair to say, as you do, that "no

 detailed investigation around the responsibilities of those
 concerned has yet been undertaken or published” when in fact
 at least four investigations of the events have been
 undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were

 properly covered.




 The first of these was of course the formal inquiry by the

 Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor commissioned by the Home Secretary

 on the second day after the disaster.     The investigation

 inaugurated by the Taylor inquiry involved some 440 officers

 from the West Midlands police force, who took some 3,776

 statements as well as taking advantage of video film from 3

 separate sources providing, in all, some 71 hours of further

 evidence.     This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted

 and in my view the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor on


 GIM-710.000                      1
       disaster gives a very clear picture of police activity on

the day.


The inquest into the death at Hillsborough, which took over

100 days to examine the material facts, constituted a second
inquiry into these events.


The inquest, in fact, served a separate function, in that the

law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of

the deceased, and how, when and where he came by his death.
The Coroners Rules provides that neither the coroner nor the

jury shall express any opinion on any other matters.     In

addition, the rules specifically prohibit the framing of an
inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any

question of criminal liability on the part of a named person,
or civil liability.    Any issue of civil or criminal liability

is a matter for the civil or criminal courts and not the

coroners inquest.


If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest

including the verdict (as I believe some relatives are), it is

open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, to

apply with the authority of the Attorney-General, for the High

Court to quash the verdict and order a fresh inquest to be

held, either by the same coroner or by a different one from

the same administrative area.    Coroners inquests may also be

challenged by way of judicial review but anyone contemplating




GIM-710.000                      2
|^uch a course of action would be well advised to seek legal

advice at an early stage.


In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for
Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted

a further major investigation with a view to discovering

whether the disaster resulted from or was made worse by

criminal activity on the part of anyone.     This too was a very
large investigation, but the Director of Public Prosecutions

did not conclude that the results indicated that any one
should be made the subject of a criminal prosecution.



Perhaps it would be helpful if I comment on this.     It means

that, so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence amassed

has been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the
result of any criminal activity.     In particular, neither Chief
Superintendent Duckinfield nor Superintendent Murray nor any

other person have committed any crime.



For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end

of the matter.     For police officers however there remains the

question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,

they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

police officers.     The fourth investigation of the events of

the day covered complaints which had been made regarding

police behaviour.     This investigation was conducted by a

different police force (the Cumbria Constabulary) to ensure an

independent approach and involved the taking of a further 5341


GIM-710.000                      3
^^tatements as well as the scrutiny of all the material
  previously examined.    It was supervised throughout by the

  Police Complaints Authority, who subsequently expressed
  themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and

  thoroughly conducted.   The privacy of people who complain

  against the police is protected by the courts and the results

  of this investigation cannot therefore be published.


  In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police
  Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are

  required to consider whether there are ways in which the

  officer may have failed in his duty and, if so, to arrange for

  a formal hearing of the charges against him.    They did so,
  after receiving the report of the complaint investigation, and

  the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent Duckinfield and
  Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges.


 As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who

 were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in

 which your letter is written makes me think that you must be

  under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of

  police disciplinary hearings.   Such a hearing is held in
  private and is concerned only with whether or not the officer

  concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.

  The hearing would not therefore in any way contribute to

 public knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do

 more than receive and consider evidence already known as to

  the propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.     It is not
^^herefore really relevant to the question of a further
  investigation into police operations on the day which is, I

  understand, what you are really seeking.



  Another important issue in relation to police discipline which

  is often ignored is that the most serious punishment which the
  disciplinary tribunal would have been able to impose, had
  Mr Duckinfield been found guilty, would have been dismissal or
  requirement to resign.   This would be the heaviest punishment

  it would be possible to award an officer for the very worst

  offence he could have committed, and would be used in any case
  where it was clear that the officer's behaviour was such that

  it was inappropriate for him to remain a police officer.     By
  retiring, Mr Duckinfield has already left the force and thus

 made further action unnecessary.



  It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr
  Duckinfield's case since the Home Secretary is the appellate
  authority in police disciplinary cases, but I can and should

  say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no means

  certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr

  Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred

  against him.



  If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man it would not be

  right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds in order to
 hear charges which may or may not be proved and whose most

  serious result could only be that he leave the service he has
^P^lready asked to leave voluntarily.        This, however, like the
  other matters raised in your letter, is a matter for the South

  Yorkshire Police Force and its police authority and I suggest
  that your concerns might best be discussed with them.




  Your main concern however in writing to me was, if I have read
  your letter right, the feeling that there should be some
  further investigation of police operations at Hillsborough as

  a whole.      In the light of the very wide ranging investigations

  which have already been conducted, I find it difficult to see
  what yet another (fifth) investigation could achieve.      In
  fact, successive Home Secretaries have only consented to major

  inquiries of this nature where they considered that the whole

  conduct of a force in relation to the community it policed had

  been called in question.     This is not the case with the South

  Yorkshire force and I am sure that the Home Secretary would
  regard the inquiry already conducted by Lord Justice Taylor as

  having already covered these issues.



  I am sorry I cannot send you a more helpful reply despite the

  very deep personal sympathy we feel here for all those

  bereaved at this terrible event.




  GIM-710.000                       6
                                        m                                 m   » i



                H O U SE OF C O M M A S '
                    L O N D O N S W A OAA                     ^


5th November 1991                     ,                                   fa n^SL

Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.                       .'
Home Secretary                                       -.•*/. •
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                       •' *7' •
London SWIH 9AT
                                 -;         ,         •♦.»?           /
                                                          ■           *
Dear Home Secretary                                    '          /
RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                            '    '/
                                                            ■i
                       -y
X aro writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.
As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
t r a g e d y has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
This means, in effect, that specific responsibility
for certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.

Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if the families of those sadly killed at that event,
or, indeed, any of the survivors, are to be satisfied
that the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                                     (continued).
Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your ppwe^s^£o--l.oT^\
very closely at the inplications of Sout^Lancashire's^N
Police decision to effectively evade an inv§B-bjr€f-atioar-±nto
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
Vvhilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.
It is jji *-Ki s      that I seek your intervention in finding
some way—of •prepfea^Ly investigating in detail the role of
South (LancashireP^lice in general and the role of the
officer's"*— responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that event.

Yours sincerely



              rth M.P.


c.c. Mr    Peter Joynes
     Mr    P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr    Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr    Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr    Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr    Eob Parry M.P.
     Ilr   Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr    Frank Field M.P.
     Mr    Joe Benton M.P.
     Mr    John Evans M.P.
     Mr    Gerry Bermingham M.P.
#




                    hoc   M rs   V:OCpY
                                               H o m e O ffice
                                              QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                               LONDON SW1H 9AT




                                          November 1991




    J W   ftr.

    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
    Thank you for your letter of 4 November to
    the Home Secretary.
    Enquiries our being made and a substantive
    reply will be sent to you in due course.




                        R J PICKERING    v
                 Assistant Private Secretary




     George Howarth Esq MP
