                                                                                               0

INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                                     The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                                  50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                                  London SW1H 9AT
                                                                  01-273 2577/3602/2370
K E Rose Esq
General Manager
CACFOA                                N . T o k * .^
10/11 Pebble Close
Amington
Tamworth
Staffordshire                         IV   $\ k s u \ ~       -


B77 4RD                                                           ^14 November 1989
                                                                  Date


                                                      i»/■*



3).
  '<-Cl         IV/. 'Ro:sA
                           )
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


We spoke today about the meeting we are arranging at which Lord
Justice Taylor could meet officers of CACFOA to talk about crowd
control and safety at sports grounds. We have agreed 12 noon on
Tuesday 28 November at the Home Office here. We will let you
know which room later on. Lord Justice Taylor will be
accompanied by one of his Assessors, Mr Brian Johnson, Chief
Constable of Lancashire.

We shall have before us the submission which you put forward in
June 1989. If there are any particular points in there which you
would like to draw to Lord Justice Taylor's attention, the
meeting will give you an opportunity.

That apart, Lord Justice Taylor would like to discuss the
following points:-

          i.     perimeter fences and evacuation onto the pitch (interim
                 recommendations 6 to 10);

          ii.    co-ordination of emergency services (interim
                 recommendations 35 to 38, including the question of the
                 location of fire service representatives within the
                 stadium);

          iii. the Green Guide (any particular areas of weakness or
               difficulty).

I have grouped the             points we discussed in to three main headings
for the purpose of             discussion. But you and your colleagues
should regard this             as an informal discussion, and there will be
an opportunity for             you to raise any other points you might like.
You agreed to let me know if there was any change in your
representation. This currently consists of Mr Martin Rogers,
past President of CACFOA, Mr Bob Graham, Chief Fire Officer for
Greater Manchester, a representative from the London Fire
Brigade, and yourself.

                                       I O'**?   Sr^vCJ^WL,




                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
