Fr        D B Webb                           cc   Mr Turney
          G2 Division                             Mr Miles
          Ext 3650                                Mrs Moody (F2)
                                                  Mr Hopley (F8)
          23 January 1992                         Mr Wilson




Ms Rae

ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY: GEORGE HOWARTH MP (LAB)
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT
Further to Roger Miles' note of 22 January covering a draft
speech and background notes for Mr Lloyd1s use when replying to
the debate, please find attached additional briefing on the
requirement for football clubs to move toward all-seated
accommodation (as recommended in Lord Justice Taylor's Final
Report).
The briefing has been provided in the light of a report in
today's Evening Standard that the Opposition are proposing 'a
complete revision of the Taylor Report in so far as the 3rd and
4th Divisions are concerned'.




                                        D B WEBB
                                        Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department
ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY: GEORGE HOWARTH HP (LAB)
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT
ADDITIONAL BRIEFING ON TAYLOR'S ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENT

"Why should grounds go all-seated anvwav ?"

Lord Justice Taylor commented     in his   Final   Report   on   the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster:

11 There is no panacea which will achieve crowd safety and cure
all the problems of behaviour and crowd control.        But I am
satisfied that seating does more to achieve these objectives than
any other single measure."

He also recognised that moving to all seated accommodation was
consistent with the policies of both FIFA (the world wide
governing body of football) and UEFA (its European governing
body). From the start of the 1993/94 football season spectators
at 'high risk' matches, as defined by UEFA, will be admitted to
seated acomodation only. This will include all matches in the
later stages of the European club competitions. This means that
our biggest clubs, which would expect to qualify for the later
stages of these competitions, would need to go all-seated anyway.



"But I've stood on the terraces all mv life and so did my father
before me. The tradition of the terraces is as important as the
football1"

Lord Justice Taylor said in his Final Report:

"I am not convinced that the cherished culture of the terraces
is wholly lost when fans are seated. ... The communal spirit is
still there and finds ready expression. To such extent as the
seating limits togetherness or prevents movement, that price is
surely worth paying for the benefits in safety and control."

This is a view with which the Government is in agreement.
"But the capacity of grounds will be reduced if they are all­
seated and not everybody who wishes to will be able to get in."

Lord Justice Taylor pointed out in his Final Report that of all
the teams in Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League in the
1988/89 season only at Liverpool did the average attendance
exceed the projected all-seated capacity for the ground. Indeed
at 21 of these 44 clubs the projected all-seated capacity was not
exceeded at any time during the season.

Consequently the problem of over-demand for tickets may not be
as serious as some people envisage.



"But it costs more for a spectator to sit than it does to stand
and many people will no longer be able to afford to go.

Lord Justice Taylor commented in his Final Report that clubs may
well wish to charge more for seats than for standing but that it
should be possible for them to plan a price structure which suits
the cheapest seats to the pockets of those presently paying to
stand.



"What about Arsenal and West Ham's proposed bond schemes which
will cost the supporters between £500 and £1.500 and offer them
very little in return ?"

It is not for the Government to comment on the individual pricing
policies adopted by individual clubs.



"But the costs of converting a ground to an all-seater might
drive some clubs out of business."

The Chancellor's 1990 Budget released to the Football Trust the
proceeds of a 2.5% reduction in pool betting duty to provide
grant aid towards work carried out by Football League clubs in
line with the Taylor recommendations. The reduction is expected
to yield about £20 million a year for each of the five years that
the current agreement covers.     Projects for which the Trust
awards grants include cover, seating, new stands, ground sharing
and relocation.

Receipts from this source in 1990/91 amounted to £18,730,000 and
the interest received was £906,000.     Allocations to Football
League clubs and Scottish Football League clubs during the year
for major projects from this fund amounted to £10,589,000.

In addition to the money made available by the Government The
Football Trust expects to provide clubs with a further £75
million over ten years, in addition to almost £26 million
provided each year by television and pools companies.
Consequently there is a considerable ammount of money available
to football clubs to make the necessary ground improvements.



"But any cost mav be too much for certain smaller clubs, such as
Aldershot, who are already on the verge of bankruptcy."

The cost incurred by some clubs, particularly those in the lower
divisions, may be lower than is expected because the current
attendances at many of these grounds are well below the maximum
capacity of the ground. Lord Justice Taylor commented in his
Final Report that a small scale redevelopment, possibly involving
only part of the ground, might be sufficient in some cases.

Grounds do not neccessarily have to provide seated accomodation
on all four sides but (once the deadlines have been passed)
spectators will only be admitted to areas which do.        Leyton
Orient, for example have an average attendance of 4,000 and their
ground already has over 7,000 seats. Consequently they may not
require to carry out large scale development.
"I can understand the need for the big clubs to go all-seated but
why should those in Divisions 3 and 4 have to as well ?"

(The Home Affairs Select Committee on Football Hooliganism
recommended that the all-seater requirement be abandoned for
clubs in Divisions 3 and 4. It also appears from recent press
reports that the Labour Party support this idea and intend to
make it an issue at the General Election).

The Government is not at present convinced that any re­
examination of its proposals on all seated accomodation is
necessary.    Lord Justice Taylor recommended the progressive
removal of standing accomodation at all sports grounds designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. We have received
advice from the Association of Chief Police Officers that the
all-seated requirement does not yet need to extended to rugby
league or rugby union grounds. Our major cricket grounds are
already predominantly all seated.

We are not convinced of the need to relax the all-seater
requirement for clubs in Divisions 3 and 4. Indeed, some clubs
in Divison 3, such as Birmingham City, regularly attract larger,
more vociferous crowds than some clubs in Division 1 and many in
Division 2.
4s.1.22/adjourn.rjm

From:     R J Miles                      cc   Mr Turney
          G2 Division                         Mrs Moody (F2)
          x3322                               Mr Hopley (F8)
          22 January 1992

Ms Rae,


ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY: GEORGE HOWARTH MP (LAB)
   THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT
Further to Eric Wilson's note of 16 January, I attach at Annex A
a draft speech for Mr Lloyd's use when replying to the debate.
Also attached at Annex B are background notes on matters which
may be raised.
I can confirm that David Webb, also of G2 Division, Keir Hopley
of F8 and Gloria Moody of F2 will attend the briefing meeting
which has been arranged for 10.30 on Friday morning in Mr Lloyd's
office.
A copy of this note, with annexes,      goes to Eric Wilson in
Parliamentary Section.




                                         R J MILES

Encs
hs.1.22/adjournl.rjm
                                                    ANNEX A


ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY: GEORGE HOWARTH MP (LAB)
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT


1. In his Final Report of the Inquiry into the events at
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989, Lord Justice Taylor stated
that 'there is no point in holding inquiries or publishing
guidance unless the recommendations are followed diligently.'

2.   I am sure this House will agree that both Government and
those who run football have a moral duty to do everything in our
power to ensure that such a disaster is never repeated.

3. I intend therefore to demonstrate the Government's
continuing commitment to ensuring that the Taylor recommendations
are followed through.

4. However, before reporting on the current situation, and
describing the role the Football Licensing Authority will play
in implementing certain key recommendations, I should like
briefly to remind the House of progress to date.

5. At the outset, the Government asked for an interim report
with recommendations aimed at preventing any further disaster and
improving safety in the short term.       This was published on
1 August 1989.

6. Copies of that report were sent immediately to local
authorities.    It is local authorities who are responsible for
safety certification under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
and tinder the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.




                                1
^ 1.   The Home Office Circular which accompanied Taylor's Interim
^Report urged that where possible its recommendations should be
  implemented directly.    Some 28 of the recommendations were
 earmarked for implementation before the 1989/90 football season
 began, or immediately thereafter.

 8.   Thus even before the Inquiry had been completed, the
 Government was able to get on with the task of ensuring the
 reasonable safety of spectators at sporting events.

 9.   The Government's response to the Final Report of the Inquiry
 was given to the House on 29 January       1990. We accepted in
 principle all of the recommendations.Some of these could       be
 implemented immediately; some needed further work.

 10. I can confirm that this work has continued and is still
 continuing.

 11. Taylor's    Final   Report   contained   a   total   of   76
 recommendations, the scope of which reflected the thoroughness
 and professionalism with which the Inquiry team went about their
 task.

 12. Many of these recommendations were concerned with specific
 requirements relating to safety standards at sports grounds.
 Those requirements have been incorporated in the revised Home
 Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. This 'Green Guide' (as
 it is known) was and still is the chief source of information
 available for use by local authorities in drawing up the
 conditions of safety certificates. It therefore plays a central
 role in ensuring sports ground safety.

 13. The revised edition of the 'Green Guide' was published in
 November 1990, following consultation with local authority
 associations and others.  It has been widely praised for its
 clarity and ease of use.



                                 2
114.  The main changes included a revised test procedure for crush
 Carriers, guard rails and hand-rails, together with more detailed
advice on their inspection; guidance on first aid, medical and
ambulance provision; and additional advice on stewarding and
management responsibility was also strengthened.

15. Lord Justice Taylor rightly criticised the quality of
stewarding at football matches. He pointed out that the lack of
able and trained stewards placed a heavier burden on the police.
In turn, this had unnecessarily adverse financial consequences
for the clubs themselves. He therefore recommended that 'clubs
should recruit and retain sufficient competent stewards. They
should be fit, active and robust, and preferably between the ages
of 18 and 55.     Clubs should ensure that stewards are fully
trained [and] aware of their duties'.

16. The Government fully supports this recommendation. It is
in the interest of both the police, who are hard pressed on other
fronts, and of the clubs, who face policing bills, to reduce
police strength by the use of competent stewards. There will
probably always be a need for a residual police presence, but it
should be possible to reduce the numbers of police officers
deployed.

17. The Government therefore welcomes the initiative of the
Football League to produce a training package for clubs to adapt
to their own circumstances and use when training their own
stewards. Both my officials and senior police officers have been
involved in advising the Football League on this package. The
Football League has also been assisting in recruiting the
appropriate calibre of steward. This too is most welcome.

18. In the fight against hooliganism, Lord Justice Taylor
recommended that four new specific offences should be created.
A Bill introduced last session by my Honourable Friend, the
Member for Westminster North, was supported and strengthened by
the Government and welcomed on all sides of the House.      The
^Jootball (Offences) Act 1991, which it duly became, creates the
^^>ffences of throwing missiles, indecent or racialist chanting and
  going onto the playing area, which are broadly as Taylor
  recommended.

 19. Further, the police have put into place a sophisticated
 training programme frr match commanders. This and briefings to
 all officers invo ed emphasises the absolute priority of
 preserving public safety.

 20. The Government has also accepted Taylor's recommendation
 that there should be an offence of selling tickets for and on the
 day of a football match without authority from the home club.
 This will be introduced as soon as Parliamentary time allows
 although, as Honourable Members will know, that is unlikely to
 be soon given that our timetable is already very crowded.

 21. I turn now to the role of the Football Licensing Authority
 in ensuring that Taylor1s main recommendations - including those
 relating to all-seated accommodation - are met.

 22. The Football Licensing Authority was established on 1 June
 1990 under section 8 of the Football Spectators Act 1989. Its
 Chairman, Mr Norman Jacobs, was appointed shortly afterwards.
 The Government has decided that the FLA should perform the
 following duties:

       (a)   to act as a national inspectorate and review body as
             set out in Taylor recommendation 6(a);

       (b)   to operate a licensing scheme for grounds at which
             designated football matches are played; and,

       (c)   to advise the Government on the introduction of all­
             seated accommodation at Football League grounds and
             the national stadia in accordance with Taylor
             recommendations 1 to 4.


                                 4
jE shall deal with each of these duties in turn.

23. Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act empowers the FLA
to keep under review the discharge by certifying authorities of
their function under the 1975 Act in relation to sports grounds
at which designated football matches are played.

24. The FLA is aware of considerable variation in the standard
and contents of the safety certificates issued by certifying
authorities. It wishes to bring about greater consistency and
to promote best practice.    Accordingly, in November 1991, it
issued a consultation paper containing draft guidance on the
format and content of safety certificates and the procedures for
issuing and revising them.

25. Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act empowers the FLA
to require a certifying authority to include in a safety
certificate such terms and conditions as the FLA may specify.
However, the FLA intends to proceed, wherever possible, by
encouragement and persuasion. It will use its Section 13 powers
only as a last resort.

26. The FLA's Inspectors have been in the field since last June.
They have met certifying and building authorities, the police,
the fire and ambulance services, voluntary organisations and
supporters' groups.    They have also met club officials and
inspected grounds on both match and non-match days.         This
programme of meetings and inspections will continue up to and
beyond the issue of licences.

27. Section 9 of the 1989 Act, which creates the offence of
admitting spectators to unlicensed premises, will be brought into
force when the Football Licensing Authority is in a position to
issue licences. This is expected to be in time for the start of
the 1992/93 football season. The FLA are currently discussing
with the Home Office the form of application and content of
licences.


                                5
28. Taken together, recommendations 1 and 4 of Lord Justice
Saylor's Final Report were that the Secretary of State should
ensure that by August 1999 spectators are admitted only to seated
accommodation at matches played at sports grounds designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

29. Consequently, the restriction of the all-seater requirement
to football alone represents a deliberate narrowing of the Taylor
recommendations. There are good reasons for this:

30. In paragraphs 85-90 of his report, Taylor considered whether
his recommendations on seating and standing should be extended
to sports other than football at sports grounds designated under
the 1975 Act.    He concluded that all such grounds should be
required in due course to be converted to all seating.

31. The Government's initial response to the Taylor Report
indicated that we accepted the recommendation in principle. The
response continued:

     'The application of a recommendation to Scotland and to
     other    sports cannot be achieved under the Football
     Spectators Act 1989 but the Government will in any case
     wish to discuss it with the sporting authorities
     concerned.'

32. Home Office officials have since consulted representatives
of both the Rugby Union and the Rugby League.    Neither sport
would wish to see all-seated accommodation.    Most designated
cricket grounds are already all-seated.     The views of the
Association of Chief Police Officers were also sought.    They
agreed that the all-seated requirements should not be extended
to other sports.

33. Consequently, the Government has announced (Official Report,
16 January, Col 635) that whilst we still require Football League
clubs to move towards all-seater grounds as recommended by Lord


                                6
justice Taylor, for other sports we see no reason to depart from
  voluntary approach. We do not therefore intend to introduce
primary legislation.   However, we shall continue to keep the
matter under review.

34. Section 11 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 empowers the
Secretary of State to direct the FLA by order to include in any
licence a condition imposing requirements as regards the seating
of spectators.

35. The Government therefore intends to make an Order under
Section 11 which will ensure that the Authority may enforce the
Taylor deadlines in respect of UEFA high risk matches, the 4
divisions of the Football League and the national stadia.

36. The deadlines which we will be looking to the FLA to enforce
are well known, but I make no apology for repeating them here:

     (a)   for the first and second divisions of the Football
           League and the National Stadia, standing accommodation
           must be eliminated by August 1994;

     (b)   For the third and fourth divisions of the Football
           League, standing accommodation must be eliminated by
           August 1999.

37. Much publicity has recently been afforded to the creation
of a new Football Association Premier League.     The Government
has long held the view that the way football is organised and
administered is a matter for the footballing authorities. Our
sole responsibility is to ensure that those attending football
matches may do so in reasonable safety. To the extent that any
organisational changes have implications for post-Taylor safety
policies, including all-seating, we intend to make sure that such
policies are neither inhibited nor circumvented. Be it League
Division 1 or Premier League, the August 1994 deadline will
remain.


                                7
^ 3 8 . The tragic events which occurred at Hillsborough were the
^catalyst for changes which are sweeping the world of football.
   That these changes, recommended in the Taylor Report, are now
   being made is due to this Government's determination to see them
   through.
                                            ANNEX B




ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY:   IMPLEMENTATION
THE TAYLOR REPORT

                   BACKGROUND NOTES
j^ACKGROUND NOTES:   INDEX

Page 1    GEORGE HOWARTH MP

Page 2    SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND
          The Safety Of Sports Grounds Act 1975
          Grounds Designated Under The Safety Of Sports Grounds
          Act 1975
          The Football Spectators Act 1989
Page 3    The Fire Safety And Safety Of Places Of Sport Act 1987
          Should The Home Office Guide To Safety At Sports
          Grounds Be Mandatory?

Page 4    OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

Page 5    STEWARDING

Page 6    WHO IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TAYLOR?
          FA Premier League
Page 7    Reduction In Pools Betting Duty To Assist Ground
          Improvement
          Will The Premier League Clubs Continue To Have Access
          To This Money?
          Grants For The Rest Of This Season And The Forthcoming
          Close Season
Page 8    When Will The Government Announce Its Decision On
          Whether To Extend The Pools Betting Duty Concession
          For A Further 5 Years?
          What Will Be The Fee For Licences Issued By The FLA?
          Why Should Football Clubs Which Attract Small Crowds
          Go To The Expense Of Installing Seats When The Cannot
          Currently Fill Their Grounds?

Page 9    WHY THE ALL-SEATER PRINCIPLE HAS NOT BEEN EXTENDED TO
          OTHER SPORTS - if pressed
REASONS FOR NOT IMPLEMENTING TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATION
NO 24
What Is Recommendation No 24?
The Government's Initial Reaction
Why The Government Reconsidered
A Better Alternative
Right Of Appeal Against The Provisions Contained In A
Safety Certificate

POLICE RESPONSIBILITY AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
Draft Speaking Notes on Police Responsibility and
Disciplinary Procedures - if required
^pEORGE HOWARTH MP



 Lab: Knows ley North

 Co-sponsored Lawrence Cunliffe's Bill to extend compensation for
 injury and bereavement (Dec 1988)

 Insisted that a more effective emergency telephone system should
 have been set up for anxious relatives after Hillsborough (Apr
 1989)

 Wrote to the Secretary of State on 5 November 1991 on why the
 police officers involved (and in particular Chief Superintendant
 Dukenfield , the Ground Commander on the day of the disaster)
 were not prosecuted, and why there was not a 'detailed
 investigation1 into the policing of the event. Lord Ferrers sent
 Mr Howarth a full reply on 26 November 1991 - see note on Police
 Responsibility and Disciplinary Procedures below.
IAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND



The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

This Act applies to all sports grounds with accommodation for
spectators.   Safety controls are imposed primarily by safety
certificates issued by local authorities for grounds designated
under the Act by the Secretary of State. Any sports ground which
has accomodation for over 10,000 spectators and at which
football, rugby union, rugby league or cricket are played may
require designation.

The terms and conditions of a safety certificate are for the
local authority to determine although they are expected to comply
with the guidelines set out in the Home Office Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide).



Grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

There are over 160 Designated sports grounds in England and
Wales. Of these 91 are Football League grounds. (There is one
non-designated ground in the Football League: Torquay's, with
accommodation for fewer than 10,000 spectators.



The Football Spectators Act 1989

This Act created the Football Licensing Authority (FLA), a non-
departmental public body which was set up to ensure the
implementation of certain key recommendations in Lord Justice
Taylor's Final Report into the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster; in particular recommendation nos 1-4 (on the
introduction of all-seated accommodation) and 6(a), relating to
a national inspectorate and review body.
€heecommendations
       main instruments ensuring compliance with the Taylor
                  will be licences issued by the FLA for grounds
 used for matches designated under the 1989 Act.

 A designated match under the 1989 Act is one which involves a
 team which represents a Football League club, a country, or club
 from outside England and Wales - provided that the match takes
 place at a around which is designated under the 1975 Act.

 Section 9 of the 1989 Act, which creates the offence of admitting
 spectators to unlicensed premises, will be brought into force in
 time for the first licences to be issued in the summer of 1992.



 The Fire Safety and Safety of Places Of Sport Act 1987

 Part III of the Act brought into effect a system of safety
 certification and subsequent inspection of stands able to
 accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators ('regulated
 stands1) at sports grounds not designated as requiring a safety
 certificate under the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975. As with
 the 1975 Act, the terms and conditions of a safety certificate
 are for the local authority to determine.

 The Football Licensing Authority has no jurisdiction over safety
 certificates for regulated stands.



 Should the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the
 'Green Guide1 be mandatory ?

 We see the Green Guide as simply that - Guidance. There must be
 discretion to allow for the variation which exists even across
 the 90 or so Football League grounds; not to mention those in the
 other leagues, Scotland etc. Remember also that the Green Guide
 does not apply only to football but to all sports grounds,
 regardless of size or of the sport played.


                                 3
y F F E N C E S AND PENALTIES

  The Government     broadly   accepted Lord Justice       Taylor's
  recommendations that four new offences should be created
  specifically in relation to football matches. Three of these -
  throwing missiles; indecent or racialist chanting; and going on
  to the playing area - were created by the Football (Offences) Act
  1991. This was a Private Member's Bill introduced by Sir John
I Wheeler following the inquiry of the Home Affairs Committee into
  Policing Football Hooligauiism.     The Bill was supported and
  substantially redrafted by the Government and was welcomed on all
  sides of the House.     Mr Lloyd will recall that he took the
  measure through the House.

  We attempted, during the passage of the Bill, to extend it to
  create also the fourth offence recommended by Taylor, that of
  selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
  authority.   This was intended to act against ticket touts.
  Unfortunately, Sir John Wheeler had drafted his original Bill in
  such a way as to have amendments to include ticket touting ruled
  outside its scope by the House authorities.     A commitment to
  legislate remains but, in view of the very crowded Parliamentary
  timetable, this is not a priority.

  Taylor also recommended the extension of attendance centre orders
  to adults.    This has been rejected as beyond the scope and
  capability of attendance centres. Consideration of electronic
  tagging for football offenders is current as part of the
  discussions about implementation of the Criminal Justice Act
  1991.




                                  4
 TEWARP ING

Taylor was very critical of the calibre of stewards employed by
football clubs. Often, they were too young or too old or too
decrepid to preform their duties effectively.       He therefore
recommended that clubs should recruit more appropriate persons
to act in this capacity. To attract the right kind of applicant,
remuneration would have to be increased to a realistic level
rather of merely offering free entrance to the game as was common
practice. This encouraged stewards to watch the game rather than
concentrating on their functions.

Taylor argued that improving the quality of stewarding would
enable police numbers to be reduced. This is correct, although
there will always need to be some police presence giving their
peculiar powers under the law. Clubs have been slow to recognise
that it is in their interest to employ effective stewards and
thus reduce their police presence - and police bill. The move
towards full economic charging for police services should
certainly bring this home and there is some evidence that clubs
are starting to move in the right direction.

The Football League Limited have put together, with help of ACPO,
a training package which clubs can adapt to their own particular
circumstances. This is not at all a bad attempt. Officials met
the League and the police during the preparation of this package
and are due to meet again soon to review progress on the
recruitment and training of stewards. On recruitment, the League
has also attempted some central action: we are not yet sure as
to how successful this has been.
|7H0 IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TAYtOR?

Football Association Premier League

The FA's "Blueprint for the Future of Football" was published in
June 1991 and contained proposals for a Premier League, which
would break away from the Football League. The majority of clubs
in Division 1 of the Football League later voted to accept the
FA's plans and leave the Football League at the end of this
season.
                                                   j
                                                   i
The original proposals put forward by the FA were that the
Premier League would consist only of 18 clubs and there would
therefore be fewer matches per season for the players in the
country's top teams.   This, it was argued, would benefit the
players, improve the quality of matches and improve the England
team. Clubs in the Premier League would be expected to have an
all-seated ground with a capacity of at least 20,t)00.

It was originally envisaged that there would be greater
commercial opportunities for the clubs in the Premier League and
that the revenue would be divided between fewer clubs than at
present.

However, the FA have yet to prove from where this extra revenue
will be obtained. In addition, the prospective member clubs have
since voted for the Premier League to consist initially of 22
teams with a reduction to 20 in the near future.

Whilst it is expected that the Premier League will commence in
August this year there appears to be a long way to go before this
happens. There is also an underlying threat that the prospective
Premier League members may even break away from the FA and set
up their own league.
deduction in Pools Betting Duty to assist ground iimprovements

In his budget of 1990 the Chancellor made availably £100 million
to the football industry over a five year period               This was in
recognition of the expense of the work that needs to be carried
out at many grounds.         The Football Trust was se lected by the
Government to be the vehicle for channeling this gr,ant aid to all
Football League clubs.


Will Premier League clubs dontinue to have access to this money?


There is some question as to whether the Premier League clubs
will continue to have access to the monies made available by the
Government.    We are concerned that any new money arising from the
Football     Association's     initiatives,   as    outlined     in   their
Blueprint, should not just benefit those clubs at the top of the
game.


I know that discussions have been held involving the FA and the
prospective Premier League members to decide on how any income
from these initiatives should be split.            I am also aware that
until the relevant commercial contracts have been signed it will
be difficult to agree on the final split of these funds.


However, before the Government is able to consider the case for
the Premier League clubs having access to these monies, it will
                                                         I
need to have a clearer picture from the Football Association of
the likely allocation of these funds.



Grants for the rest of this season and the forthcoming close
season


We take the view that the Football Trust should continue to judge
each grant application on its merits, having regard to needs and
resources,    under the terms of the Trust's resolution of April
1990.    We would therefore support a Trust decision to pay grant
jgtto   any club    in the   present   first Division   for works       to be
^ co mpleted or substantially under way by the end of this close
  season.



  When will the Government announce its decision on whether to
  extend the Pool Betting Duty concession for a further 5 years?


  Such a decision is a matter for the Treasury.                 However,   the
  Government   have     already   indicated   that   football    must   first
  demonstrate its own commitment to making he necessary ground
  improvements.



  What will be the fee for licences issued bv the FLA?


  The level of licence fees is currently the subject of discussions
  between the Home Office and the Treasury.          An announcement will
  be made as soon as agreement has been reached.


  Why Should Football Clubs Which Attract Small Crowds Go To The
  Expense Of Installing Seats When They Cannot Currently Fill Their
  Grounds?


  There is no need for Football League clubs with small attendances
   to provide more seats than the number of spectators which they
  expect or hope to accommodate,         even after the 1994 and 1999
  deadlines.       However, once the deadline has been passed they will
  not be permitted to admit any standing spectators when designated
   football matches are played.
WHY THE ALL-SEATER PRINCIPLE HAS NOT BEEN EXTENDED TO OTHER
^PORTS - if pressed

The Government's interim response to the Taylor Report on 29
January 1990 indicated that 'designated sports grounds under the
1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league grounds
which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not be
practicable to deal with in this way'.

The Football Spectators Act does not apply to sports grounds
other than those used for football. All seated accommodation
could not be achieved at rugby grounds without primary
legislation and a significant input of money from Central
Government sources (there being no parallel to the Pools Betting
industry which provides some of the support for ground
improvement at association football matches).

As Taylor ackowledged in the introduction to his Final Report
'crowd problems are directly related to the nature of the event
and the numbers attending it...the numbers and the atmosphere at
a football match have created special problems such as
overcrowding and misbehaviour not, so far, to be found to a like
degree elsewhere'

In paragraph 85 of his Final Report, Taylor said 'wherever a line
is drawn complaint may be made that it is illogical, but two
possibilities seem more logical than most; either to confine
recommendations to the 92 clubs in the Football League or to
apply them to grounds designated under the 1975 Act as amended.'
In the aftermath of Hillsborough, Taylor opted for the latter.
Following consultation with those concerned, the Government has
decided on the former.




                               1
[EASONS FOR NOT IMPLEMENTING TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATION No 24.



What is recommendation 24?

Taylor's 24th recommendation was that the Secretary of State
should exercise his powers under either Section 6(2) or Section
15(A) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so as to make
mandatory in safety certificates those conditions specified in
the original Section 2(2) of the 1975 Act.



The   Government's initial reaction

The Government accepted this recommendation in principle, and in
answer to a Parliamentary question on 10 May 1991 announced that
an order under Section 15A of the 1975 Act would be made to
implement recommendation 24, and that consideration would also
be given to including within the scope of such an order provision
which would require terms and conditions addressing other aspects
of safety to be included in safety certificates.



Whv the Government reconsidered

However, having considered the matter further, it was considered
that making such an order would be inappropriate. This was for
the following reasons:

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, as originally enacted,
spelled out in Section 2(2) the minimum detail to be specified
in safety certificates which were to be issued by local
authorities for designated stadia.

The original Section 2(2) was removed from the 1975 Act by the
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.    Amongst
other things, this extended the requirements for designated
Stadia to cover designated sports grounds.

In making this change a new Section 15(A) was introduced into the
1975 Act which, together with the new Section 2(2), empowered the
Secretary of State by order to modify or to specify the terms and
conditions which should be provided for the safety certificates.

The 1987 Act in fact removed the original Section 2(2) from the
1975 Act because it was felt that Section 2(2) narrowed the
concept of safety. The thinking behind this was that, whilst the
provision might have been useful in 1975 in directing local
authorities to the relevant issues in a new area of law, that
usefulness had become outlived.

The tragic events at Hillsborough 2 years later raised doubts
about this line of reasoning, but the 1987 legislation received
the approval of Parliament. The Government feels that it would
be inappropriate to make subordinate legislation now, by means
of an Order under Section 15(A), which would restore a provision
which Parliament had, in fact repealed. Whilst the Government
still accepts the principle of the recommendation which was made
by the Taylor Report, there would be            difficulties in
implementing recommendation 24 in exactly the manner in which
Lord Justice Taylor proposed.



A better alternative

However, Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 came into
force on 3 June 1991.       This Section empowers the Football
Licensing Authority to keep under review the discharge by local
authorities of their function under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at which designated
football matches are played.
^ I t also empowers the Authority to require a local authority to
^^.nclude in a safety certificate issued to a ground designated
   under the 1975 Act any such terms and conditions as the FLA see
   fit. The FLA intend to regard these as reserve powers, to be
   used only after consultation with the local authority, the chief
   officer of police and the fire authority (where the local
   authority is in Greater London).



  Right of Appeal Against The Provisions Contained In A Safety
  Certificate

  Section 5 of the 1975 Act provides for a right of appeal against
  the inclusion of anything in, or the omission of anything from,
  a safety certificate.     However, there is no right of appeal
  against the inclusion in a safety certificate of anything
  required to be included in it by the FLA under Section 13(2) of
  the 1989 Act.

  We feel that using Section 13 of the 1989 Act serves to carry out
  Lord Justice Taylor's intentions, but in a more flexible manner
  and one in which we would avoid making an order under Section
  15(A) of the 1975 Act.
j ^ZACKGROUND NOTE•                     \>V>l\fUWV

  1    On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool Football Club
  were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
  In conducting the subsequent inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor asked
  the West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on his
  behalf.  Subsequently, further inquiries had to be made and a
  number of statements taken (many under caution) to determine
  whether criminal or disciplinary proceedings should be brought
  against a police officer, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
  Sheffield City Council or their advisers.

  2    The Police Complaints Authority decided, when considering
  the result of these investigations, that two officers of the
  South Yorkshire Constabulary should answer to disciplinary
  charges.   The senior of these officers, Chief Superintendent
  Duckenfield subsequently resigned on grounds of ill health, and
  the PCA announced earlier this week that the remaining officer,
  Superintendent Murray, should not be required to answer charges
  in the absence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

  3    None of these matters for Home Office Ministers but are the
  responsibility of the Police Complaints Authority, South
  Yorkshire Constabulary and the South Yorkshire Police Authority.




  GIM-M811.000
           ftXiCfc feSfQrtSV&UY/ 0*0 "b\WmWV
DRAFT SPEECH FOR ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - FRIDAY 24 JANUARY 1992
m
History


1       As Mr Howarth is aware the West        Midlands Police Force
undertook       two   major   investigations   into the   events   at
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.


2      The first of these investigations was, of course, the formal
enquiry by the Lord Justice Taylor which was commissioned by the
Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster.


3      The investigation, which was      inaugurated by the Taylor
inquiry, involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands police
force.         They took some 3,776 statements as well as taking
advantage of video films from 3 separate sources which provided,
in all, some 71 hours of further evidence.


4      This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted, and I
think that it is fair to say that the interim report of Lord
Justice Taylor on the disaster gives a very clear picture          of

police activity on the day.


Criminal Proceedings


5      In a second inquiry, which followed up their work for Lord
Justice Taylor,       the West Midlands Police Force conducted a
further major investigation with a view to discovering whether
the disaster resulted from,         or was made worse by,    criminal

GIM-M811.000
^^ctivity on the part of any individual.                The Director of Public
^Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that any
  one should be made the subject of criminal proceedings.                    Perhaps
  I could add a comment on this.               The conclusions at which the
  Director of Public Prosecutions arrived mean that, so far as
  anyone can discover - and the evidence which has been amassed has
  been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the result of
  criminal        activity.     .» The   result    is     that     neither     Chief
  Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray - nor, for
  that matter, any other person - has been charged with any crime.



  Disciplinary Proceedings


  6      For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end
  of the matter.           For police officers, though, there remains the
  question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,
  they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

  police officers.


  7      Another investigation of the event, of the day, therefore

   covered        complaints    which    had   been     made     regarding    police
   behaviour.        This investigation involved the taking of a further
   5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the material
   which had previously been examined.            It was supervised throughout

   by the Police Complaints Authority.


   8     The      Police   Complaints Authority         subsequently    expressed
   themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and thoroughly


   GXM-M811.000
conducted.         The privacy of people            who complain against the
police          is protected by the          courts.       The results of this
investigation cannot therefore be published.


9       In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police
Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are required
to consider whether there are ways in which the officer may have
failed in his duty.            If so, they are required to arrange for a

formal hearing of the charges against him.


10      This was done.         After receiving the report of the complaint
investigation,           the   PCA   decided       that     Chief   Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary

charges.


11      A police disciplinary hearing is held in private.                    It is
concerned only with whether or not the officer concerned may have
failed to conform to police discipline.                   The hearing would not,
therefore, in any way contribute to public knowledge of what
happened on the day, nor would it do more than receive and

 consider the           evidence,    which    is   already known,       as to   the

propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.


 12      There     is    one    important     issue    in    relation   to   police
 discipline which is often ignored.                       There are a number of
 punishments which can be imposed for bad discipline.                     The most
 serious punishment, though, which a disciplinary tribunal can
 impose, is that of dismissal or of requirement to resign.


 GIM-M811.000
^^13      This is -the heaviest punishment which it is possible to
^^award an officer for the very worst offence which he could have
  committed.          In other words, his conduct must have been so bad
  that it would be inappropriate for him to remain as a police
  officer.


  14      By retiring, in advance of whether or not he had been found
  guilty,        Hr    Duckenfield has,         in   fact,   done what    the worst
                                   •/
  disciplinary judgement could have imposed upon him to do. He has
  resigned.           He is no longer a police officer.               A disciplinary
  hearing can no longer be undertaken against a person who is not
  a police officer.


  15      I am sure that you will understand that it would not be
  proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr Duckenfield's case
  other than to say that it needs to be remembered that it is by
  no means certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found
  Mr Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred
  against him.


  16      Whilst our sympathies are all very much with those who were
  caught         up    in   this        terrible     tragedy,   the    position   of
  Mr Duckenfield needs equally careful and just handling.


  17      If Mr Duckenfield is a sick man, as seems to be the case,
  it would not have been right to refuse him retirement on medical
  grounds in order that charges could be heard against him, which
  might or might not be proved, but whose most serious result could


  GIM-M811.000




                                            0
 only be that he would leave the service which he was already
 ready to leave voluntarily.


 18       Finally, I should inform the House that on 13 January 1992
 the Police Complaints Authority announced that disciplinary
 proceedings against Superintendent Murray would be withdrawn.
 When explaining their decision the Authority stated that the
 retirement of the Chief Superintendent on medical grounds meant
 that what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty
 could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior
 officer.



 19      The Government continues to deplore the terrible events at
Hillsborough but they were the product of a number of causes
coming together and little comfort is likely to be provided to
the      relatives   nor   anything   learnt   for   the   future   by   the
continuation of attempts to pin the blame on one or another
person.




GIM-M811.000
