29-5.BM



Police: complaint against Mr Wright



Trevor Hicks and the HFSG appeared in essence satisfied with the
outcome of Mr Sharp's investigation into complaints against
Mr Wright of unjustified statements to the press, and were very
appreciative of Mr Sharp's visit to see the three complainants.
However,    their qualifications revealed deep felt views and
emotions:


     (i )   that formally they would go no further than    'reserving
            their position'    - it was clear this related to a
            particular suspicion and lack of trust directed at the
            police and police authority ie that a concession of
            their true feelings might be exploited;


   (ii)     that in order fully to accept that Mr Sharp's
            conclusions on the investigation were seen to be correct
            by the police (as opposed to the journalist's opinion
            that his story had been justified) they would appreciate
            Mr Wright's agreement with Mr Sharp's conclusions.       They
            felt that by not so doing, Mr Wright was leaving the
            public impression that he endorsed the newspaper report
            in question, and they feared that this perception might
            influence the jury in the inquests; and


   (iii)    that the HFSG had been upset and angered by being
            approached the day before the extraordinary police
            authority meeting to consider Mr Sharp's report, by
            journalists who were correctly predicting the report's
            conclusions and the police authority's acceptance of the
            them.     A local newspaper on the morning of the meeting
            had,    it was reported by the HFSG, carried a similar
            report.    Barry Devonside in particular had been offended
            by being challenged by journalist for a response to
            these suggestions, prior to the police authority
             meeting, while entering (or leaving) the inquest into
             his son's dea t h .   The HFSG clearly felt that a private
             intimation of regret that this had happened (without
             further clarification or explanation) would be in order
             and greatly appreciated.      In this and other respects
             during the meeting it seemed that the HFSG wanted simply
             to feel that they were being listened to by the police
             force and authority, but that at present they felt they
             were n o t .   They might well welcome any more in that
             direction provided they were convinced it was genuine
             and sincere.




                                         F J Smith
4 May 1990




                        i
   104-4.AH



  HILLSBOROUGH - POLICE INQUIRY AND TREVOR HICKS


  Mr Sharp, Chief Constable of Cumbria, now heads the police
  investigation by West Midlands officers into criminal and
  disciplinary matters arising from the Hillsborough football
  disaster on 15 April 1989.      He has personally investigated a
  complaint against the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr
  Peter Wright.


  Lord Ferrers will recall the gratitude Trevor Hicks of the
  Hillsborough Families Support Group expressed at the meeting
  on 3 May for Mr Sharp's thoughtful action in visiting Mr Hicks
^ ^ a n d others to explain why he did not uphold their complaint
  against Mr W r i ght.   Lord Ferrers may wish to thank Mr Sharp
  for this kind gesture, and share any reflections on the
  meeting with the Support Group.
