                                                                             10



                                                    5 1 MAY 198$'
180N/BN/MT




E o t ^ O L f ^ ^ ^ eetinq held on 25 Mav to discuss Hillsborough; Cost of
investigations by West Midlands Police


Present:     Lord Ferrers                   Cllr Ablett - Chairman
             Mr Addison                     Cllr Carless - Vice-Chairman
             Mr Nagler                      Cllr Sir Neville Bosworth
             Ms Ransford                    Mr W E Jarvis
             Miss Nicholson                 Mr Dear - Chief Constable
                                            Mr Barnfield - Solicitor
                                            Mr Williams - Treasurer
                                            Mr Tomlinson - Assistant Clerk



Having thanked Lord Ferrers for the meeting Cllr Ablett explained
that the reason for seeking the meeting was to try and resolve the
quandary his Authority was in over the financial implications of
the investigations into the Hillsborough disaster. This matter he
had to be sorted out and it had to be made clear, at the earliest
opportunity, where the costs involved should fall. If the
ratepayers of West Midlands were liable it had been estimated that
the loss of interest in capital would be about £400K.  His view
though was that as the investigation had been initiated by the
Home Office (Sir Richard Barrett having contacted Mr Dear) the
costs should fall to the Home Office. Mr Ablett then handed the
meeting over to Mr Dear so that he could give an account of the
events which led the West Midlands Police Authority being involved.

2.   Mr Dear explained that on the Sunday following the tragedy he
had been contacted by Sir Richard Barrett by 'phone and had been
asked whether he would agree to being the assessor or the chief
constable leading the investigation - or both (it had transpired
later that he could not be the assessor). Mr Dear subsequently
contacted Peter Wright (Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police)
that afternoon to confirm the situation.   Mr Dear mentioned that
he had asked Mr Wright specifically whether he had understood that
he was reporting to the enquiry to which Mr Wright replied that he
did.   Mr Dear added that it was his hope that in reporting
directly to Lord Justice Taylor any suggestion of a police cover
up could be countered.   He then referred to telephone calls which
he had made to the Home Office in the light of the statement which
the Home Secretary was making to the House on Monday 17 A p r i l . He



                                               /said that he had


                                    -   1
                                        -
E.R.

   said that he had not been happy with the text of the draft
   statement and had made it clear at that time that he would not
   work to 2 masters but only to Lord Justice Taylor.   He said that
   the draft had been amended, not exactly as he would have wished,
   but enough to have satisfied him.  Because of his concern about
   this matter he had sought a meeting with Lord Justice Taylor at
   which it had been confirmed that there was only one enquiry. As
   regards the enquiry itself Mr Dear refered to the various
   investigtions which were taking place, eg, into the construction
   of the ground and who paid the stewards simply because
   Lord Justice Taylor wanted a thorough investigation.   Given these
   circumstances Mr Dear said that he was absolutely certain that he
   was working for Lord Justice Taylor; that he was under his control
   completely and that therefore mutual aid could not be a matter for
   consideration.

   3.   Lord Ferrers said that he fully appreciated the concerns which
   had been expressed but that as he understood it, the decision to
   request the assistance of the West Midland's was because Mr Wright
   believed that South Yorkshire were too close to the incident and
   that another force should be called in. This had led to
   Mr Wright's contacting Sir Richard who then contacted Mr Dear.    In
   response to this Mr Dear said that South Yorkshire's involvement
   in the decision had not been mentioned by Sir Richard.   Mr Addison
   was able to advise Mr Dear that there was nothing unusual in
   this:   the Inspectorate often liaised between forces in this way
   when they were asked to advise on the possiblity that an
   investigation should be conducted by an outside force.

  5. Mr Addison referred to his recent meeting with officers of the
  South Yorkshire Authority, who, he said had accepted that the
  initiative had come from their Chief Constable.  It was not
  surprising therefore that there should be some confusion although
  having heard what Mr Dear had to say he wholeheartedly accepted
  his account of his part in the events.  The matter was clearly
  open to interpretation and it was quite possible that the Chief
  Constable of South Yorkshire had a different recollection.  Mr
  Dear referred to the immense pressure which had been placed upon
  Mr Wright at the time and which had led him to contact
  Sir Richard.  Noting Mr Dear's comments Mr Addison said that it
  was quite understandable that the invitation may have appeared to
  have come from the Home Office, but this was not the case. As far
  as the Home Office were concerned the distinction between the Lord
  Justice Taylor enquiry and the South Yorkshire investigation had
  always been recognised.

   6. Lord Ferrers referred to the Home Secretary's letter to Roger
  King MP (copy attached) in which it was made clear that additional
  -sosts would not be met by the West Midlands.  It also had to be
   remembered, he said, that in practice, with the Home Office paying



                                            /51% generally through.

                                   -   2-
E.R.

   Support Grant       ? P°llce specific grant, taken with the Rate
        *
   7nPP°J GJ anJ/ the Government would in effect be paying rouqhlv
   70   towards the costs of the enquiry.   Mr Ablett, whili °Ughly
   Lorfl°?ir    9     e^ istence of the communication referred to by
   guarantee618 S        ^ th6 Authority had received no direct


   rece^vinq16or                t0 th6 M l l s Which the Au thority were now
   e t c H       J      ? fc^ ings as accommodation and telecommunications
   anni'v     l        ^ S /nCe section 14 of the Police Act 1964 did not
   incited b v S J f h 1?   (remaining of the view that they had not been
           by South Yorkshire to conduct the investigation) had no
     1        to pay the bills. Moreover there was, in their vieS
   doubt about whether they could have lawfully paid for items such
   t M r s i t I J a t i o i 0bveZhn -Un?er ?ection 1 4 ‘ They had been advised of
   thaf                        J        legal adviser Mr Barnfield who confirmed
   that th!S was indeed his understanding.                Asked by Lord Ferrers
   Mr^blett replied^hat^h^                S°Uth Yorkshire about this aspect
   I ! " i t * reP lied that they had not.         This he said was simplv
   because no request had been made by South Yorkshire and this was
   mutual        event covered by section 14 which dealt only with
   JaveJot I           2 “ ?esource grounds.        As matters stood Mr Ablett
   that      1 ^       ,havin? / ; authority to pay, the result might be
   that his Authority would be forced to no longer retain buildina «5
   I n ^ T       T
                 b eiS V Sed f° r the P ^ P O ^ e s of thl investigation?
                   ?   F®frers to comment Mr Addison said that the
   assistance given did not in his view fall strictly under
   section 14, but that it was analogous.            Moreover it was not
   i nS n n      ?- °ne P^ liCe f0rce t0 invite another to conduct an
   rail               ? on its behalf.   The most obvious example was in the
                complaints and discipline enquiries but there had been
   H o m f Office
   Home                  I1-8
           n f f i r rlegal
                       r 81! advisers.
                                   0n the PQints raised could be sought from

   8.  Mr Williams (Treasurer) estimated that the cost of the
  to V ltZ S ™       far wa£\ c f 2 m i H i o n per month. This accounted
  f ?nn nnn    4-? ? accommodation - the accommodation coming to about
  mnn?hiv h   • J           If the Authority were not reimbursed on a
            Z          ad calculated that the interest charges per
  month would be somewhere in the region of £50 K.

  ^   L? ^ F^ rerS £eiterated the state of play as he understood
  fornp             °    Yorkshire who had recommended that another
  force conduct the investigation and that therefore it had always
  been accpeted by the Home Office reimbursement would be a matter
  between forces in the first instance, as was the case in mutual
           was further understood that the investigation was to look
  into the policing of South Yorkshire.  Lord Justice Taylor-s
  enquiry although in some ways connected was a separate matter.
  Having said this though Lord Ferrers said that he accepted that



                                                   /West Midlands had


                                        -   3-
E.R

      West Midlands had drawn quite a different conclusion.  He referred
      again to the Home Secretary's letter to Mr King in which assurance
      was given that the West Midlands would not be expected to meet
      additional costs.

      10.  In drawing the meeting to a close Lord Ferrers undertook to
      consider at the earliest and to write to the Authority advising
      them of what action they should take with regard to bills.  He
      also promised to consider the cash-flow difficulties, to get clear
      what had transpired when asking the West Midlands Police to become
      involved and the extent to which the work was being undertaken by
      West Midlands was not specific to the South Yorkshire policing
      enquiry.




                                  BARBARA NICHOLSON
                             Assistant Private Secretary




      30 May 1989

      Private Office, QAG.




      cc   Mr Walters
           Mr Yates
           Mr Chileot
           HMCIC
           Mr Woodcock
           Mr Brownlow
           Mr Boys Smith
           Mr Malone-Lee
           Ms Edwards, LAB
           Mr Addison
           Mr Sandiford
           Mr Nagler
           Mr Whalley
           Ms Ransford
           Mr Lidington
     SiC*f j.


                                              QUEEN ANNE'S CATE LONDON SW1H 9 AT


                                                            27 April 1989




           We have spoken in the House about the costs incurred by the Vest
Midlands police in their inquiries following the Hillsborough disaster.      You
and other West Midlands MPs are understandably anxious that these should not
fall on the West Midlands police authority.


          It seems   to me quite clear that, wherever the costs fall, they
should not and do not fall to the West Midlands.    The Chief Constable of the
West Midlands was initially invited by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
to review all aspects of the police operation.        And subsequently it was
agreed that the results of these inquiries should be made available to the
public inquiry which I announced on 24 April to be conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.


          It will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the
West Midlands police should be reimbursed.    But I can guarantee now that at
the end of the day no additional costs will be borne by the West Midlands.
                                  *




                                                                  /




Roger King, Esq., MP.
