From:        J L Goddard                cc      Mr Regan
             F8 Division                        Ms Spencer
             Ext 3314                           Mr K Sutton
                                                Mr Burns
             25 April 1991                      Mr Angel
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                Miss Clayton
                                                Mr Moorey
                                                Mr Addison
                                                Mr Bolton
                                                Mrs Catto
                                                Mr Clayton
                                                Mr Cogbill
                                                Miss Goose
                                                Mr Grant
                                                Mr Hickson
                                                Mr Jordan
                                                Mr Storr
                                                Dr P Young
                                                Mr Dent
                                                Mr Kerpel
                                                Mr Grantham



1.      Mr Narey
2.      Mr Pugh



HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL
HOOLIGANISM: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE


This submission offers a draft response to the Report of the Home
Affairs    Select   Committee   on   Policing   Football   Hooliganism:
invites Lord Ferrers to write to the Minister for Sport seeking
his agreement to publication; and invites the Home Secretary,
subject to comments by the Minister for Sport, to agree to
printing and publication.


BACKGROUND


2.   The Home Affairs Committee published its Report on Policing
Football Hooliganism on 5 February 1991.     The Home Secretary
wrote to Sir John Wheeler MP, the chairman of the Committee,
welcoming the Report and issued a press notice to this effect.
Copies of the letter and the press notice are attached at Annexes
A and B respectively.    That initial response promised full
consideration of the Report and a detailed response in due
course.  In answer to a later Parliamentary Question, we said
that this full response would be published "before the summer".

THE RESPONSE


3.    The Report is, on the whole, a positive and helpful document
which recognises both that considerable progress has been made
towards reducing the problems of football hooliganism and that
much remains to be done to continue this improvement and to
imiMrpve the lot of the football spectator. Many of the Report's
54^Rcommendations are directed towards the football authorities
and football clubs and are very much in line with Government
policy in, for example, encouraging them to upgrade the
facilities  provided   to   spectators   and   the   stewarding
arrangements. The Government can endorse these recommendations.



4.   One outcome of the Report is the Football (Offences) Bill.
In response to oral evidence from Lord Ferrers, the Committee,
believing (probably rightly) that it would not be possible to
find Parliamentary time to introduce a Government Bill to give
effect to the offences recommended by Lord Justice Taylor in his
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, introduced a
Private Member's Bill, in the name of Sir John Wheeler, to create
three of   the four offences Taylor recommended: these three are
throwing   missiles, obscene or racialist chanting, and running
onto the   pitch. Contrary to our initial expectation, the Bill
has made   good progress through Parliament.  The Government has
brought forward improving amendments which have been accepted by
Sir John Wheeler and enjoyed all party support.        The Bill
received its Third Reading in the Commons on Friday 19 April and
its first Reading in the Lords on Wednesday 24 April.                  The
Government commitment to create the fourth offence recommended
by Taylor - touting on the day of a football match - is
outstanding    but   this   by   itself   hardly   deserves   to   receive
Parliamentary time as a matter of priority.
5.   A full draft response to the Report is attached at Annex C .
The draft recommends acceptance or endorsement of most of the
Committee's recommendations, but there are three main areas of
disagreement:

      i.   the Committee recommend that the Government reconsider
           its plans for all seater stadia, arguing that the
           Government's current policy places too great a
           financial burden on clubs and uses money which could
           more usefully be spent on other ground improvements.
           The elimination of standing was a major plank of
           Taylor's recommendations and, we believe, an important
           factor in enhancing safety and public order. Both the
           Minister for Sport and the Treasury have agreed with
           us that there should no retreat from existing policy;

     ii.   the Committee similarly argue against the introduction
           of full economic charging of police costs. A detailed
           submission from Mr Addison on this subject is coming
           forward this week and the attached response is drafted
           on the basis that Ministers will approve his
           submission and reaffirm their existing policy;


    iii.     finally, the Committee seek to widen the role of the
             Football Licensing Authority to encompass a role of
             "honest broker".    We believe that this would be
             inappropriate: the Football Licensing Authority is a
             newly-created body which has not yet geared up to its
             statutory responsibilities (in the areas of safety and
             licensing) and it is far too early to contemplate
             giving it additional tasks.


NEXT STEPS

6.   The draft response has been cleared at official level with
all interested Departments. ACPO are also aware of its terms.
Officials at DES have indicated that the Minister for Sport would
be grateful if he could see the response in draft.       A draft
covering letter for Lord Ferrers to send him for this purpose is
at Annex D.    No other Department has         indicated   that   their
Ministers would wish to be involved.

TIMING


7.     Provided Ministers are content, we should aim to publish the
response as soon as possible following clearance by the Minister
for Sport. Mr Addison's submission on charging for policing in
football grounds has attached a draft letter for Lord Ferrers to
send to the Minister for Sport rejecting his arguments to delay
the introduction of full economic charging. That letter should
i s s ^ before the letter at Annex D to this submission. Provided
th^minister of Sport raises no further substantial objections -
which seems likely - we should be able to publish the response
before the Whitsun Recess.

ACTION


8.    Ministers are invited to agree that:


       (i)   Lord Ferrers should write to the Minister for Sport
             along the lines of the draft at Annex D (after he has
             written to him about charging (see paragraph 7
             above)); and


     (ii)    subject to any comments from the Minister for Sport,
             the response to the Home Affairs      Committee should
             issue, as soon as possible, as in the draft at Annex
             C.




                                 J L GODDARD
                    - 7 FEB 1991
                                               AnNcX            h        ^     ^
                                                                             d£?£.
                     (               Q l TE E N ANNE'S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9AT


                     >-'<3V                          t    February 1991




                                                         Cc'




         SECOND REPORT OF THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE:
                 POLICING FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM


  am writing to thank you for your recent report on the policing
of football hooliganism.

I am pleased that the Committee should take such a keen interest
in  this   important  subject.    I particularly    welcome  the
recognition of the good work done by the National Football
Intelligence Unit.   There i§ much meat in what you recommend.
We shall be giving full and urgent consideration to your
recommendations and will make a response in the normal way.




Sir John Wheeler JP, DL
House of Commons
London SW1A OAA
NEWS RELEASE                         50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW1 H 9AT
                                     (N igh t line 071 -273 4595)
                                     Contact Number:



5 February 1991                                    071 273 4610




                     POLICING FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM:
                  REPORT OF THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE


 Commenting on the Home Affairs Committee Report published today,
 the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Kenneth Baker MP said:

 "The  Government   welcomes  the Committee's    interest  in  this
 important topic. Their Report recognises the steps which have been
 taken to contain the problem of football hooliganism and sets
 out, in 54 wide ranging recommendations, the work they believe is
 still   to  be  done.  I am particularly     pleased  to  see  the
 Committee's recognition of the valuable work undertaken by the
 National Football Intelligence Unit. There is much meat in their
 recommendations and we shall be giving them full and urgent
 consideration, but it would not be sensible to make any detailed
 response now. I will publish a reply in due course."



 Background

 The Committee published a volume of Memoranda in November 1990 and
 subsequently took oral evidence from football organisations, the
 police and the Home Office. The Committee looked in particular at
 the way football is policed and how the problems of hooliganism
 were countered, as well as at police costs and efficiency.

 The Home Affairs Committee published their second report "Policing
 Football Hooliganism" on 5 February 1991. The Government welcomes
 the interest of the Select Committee and will consider its
 recommendations urgently.
                                                              NlxJ&X O   ,

E.R.
   31-4.JS



   RESPONSE BY THE GOVERNMENT TO THE SECOND REPORT FROM THE HOME
   AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (SESSION 1990-91): POLICING FOOTBALL
   HOOLIGANISM


  1.   This Memorandum gives the Government's response to the
  Home Affairs Committee's Report on Policing Football
  j^oliganism.


   2.   The Government is grateful to the Committee for
   undertaking this investigation and welcomes its Report.
   Football hooliganism has been a major problem for a number of
   y«n:s. Whilst the difficulties it still causes should not be
   underestimated, action taken by the Government and others is
   reducing the scale of the problem. The Committee's
   contribution to the thinking about policing football
   hooliganism is an important one which will be reflected in the
   debates and measures being taken over the coming months. The
   football clubs and authorities will also find much meat in the
   Committee's Report.


   3.   Over a period of years the Government has addressed, with
   some success, the problems of football hooliganism and already
   has in hand action to deal with some of the difficulties
   mentioned by the Committee. The Government notes with some
   satisfaction that the standard of behaviour at football
   matches has been improving recently but, like the Committee,
   recognises that there is still a long way to go. The
   Government and the police service are playing their parts - it
   is gratifying, for example, that the Committee should
   recognise the valuable work being undertaken by the National
   Football Intelligence Unit - and expect others to do likewise:
   there is still much to be done, for example, to improve
   facilities for spectators.


   4.   On publication of their Report, the Committee took the
   unusual step of introducing, in the name of its chairman, a
Private Member's Bill, the Football (Offences) Bill, to give
effect to three of the four offences recommended for creation
by Lord Justice Taylor in the Final Report of his Inquiry into
the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (Cmnd 962). The Government
welcomed that Bill, provided strengthening amendments which
were accepted by the Standing Committee considering the Bill,
and supports its passage into law in time for the new football
season. The new Bill will apply to England and Wales only as
existing powers in Scotland are adequate to deal with these
W f£ ences.


5.    A detailed response to each of the recommendations
follows.
HAC RECOMMENDATIONS


1.   We believe that the press ought to exercise much greater
responsibility when reporting football hooliganism.


The Government deplores irresponsible reporting of hooligan
behaviour and hopes that the industry will respond to the
Committee's recommendation, which the Government endorses.


      We recommend a determined effort by all football clubs to
H k e a much higher standard of facilities available to fans.

The Government welcomes this recommendation, which is in tune with
Locd Justice Taylor's view that improved facilities will enhance
sleety and encourage better behaviour. In recognition of the
importance which it attaches to the improvement of facilities for
spectators, the Government has made substantial financial
assistance available to football through the reduction of Pool
Betting Duty from 42 1/2% to 40%. This is on the understanding
that the full amount saved is used on capital expenditure to
improve the safety and comfort of spectators at English, Scottish
and Welsh football league grounds and at the three national stadia
in accordance with the recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's
Report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


3.   We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority pay
particular attention to ensuring that home and away fans receive
equal treatment at every ground.


The Government supports the aim of this recommendation.   However,
it is for the clubs to respond in the first instance, and for the
football authorities to ensure that their policies are carried
out.


4.   We recommend that the compulsory seating proposals be re­
examined in the case of the smaller clubs.


The Government is not convinced that any re-examination of its
proposals on all seated accommodation is necessary. Lord Justice
Taylor recommended the progressive removal of standing
E.R.
   accommodation at all sports grounds designated under the Safety at
   Sports Ground Act 1975. The Government has indicated that it
   proposes to apply this recommendation in England and Wales by
   means of the Football Licensing Scheme only to the national
   stadia, to grounds used for UEFA high risk matches and to those
   used by football clubs belonging to the four Divisions of the
   Football League (all but one of which has a theoretical capacity
   in excess of 10,000). There is no need for league clubs with


  «
     all attendances to provide more seats than the number of
     ectators which they expect or hope to accommodate, even by 1999.
   The Home Office will be inviting the Football Licensing Authority
   and the Football Trust to discuss the practical application of
   bl^s proposals with a view to issuing further guidance to clubs
   th&se
   oi^^n issue which has appeared to be capable of misunderstanding.



   The Scottish Office has recently issued detailed guidance to
   interested parties on the implementation of the Taylor Report in
   Scotland.


   5.   We believe that it should be a priority of clubs to provide
   the police and other organisations such as St John Ambulance with
   the facilities which they need to discharge their duties
   efficiently.


   This recommendation is aimed primarily at clubs and is supported
   by the Government. Guidance on the provision of first-aid
   facilities is given in the Home Departments1 Green Guide and in
   recent guidance issued in Scotland. The Government understands
   that the Football League has also recently accepted and commended
   to all Football League Clubs a detailed and comprehensive Report
   on first-aid provisions and training prepared by a Medical Working
   Party set up by the Football League in response to Lord Justice
   Taylor1s Final Report.


   6.   We recommend that the Government keep under review the rate
   of Pool Betting Duty, and, if necessary, decrease the rate to make
   more money available for ground improvements.
The Government will take an early decision on whether the cut in
pool betting duty should be extended for a second five-year
period. In coming to a decision, however, it will take into
consideration the plans the football authorities and the
individual clubs have made to finance out of their own resources
the cost of necessary ground improvements. The earlier the
commitment is clear, the sooner the Government will be able to
decide on the second five-year term.


(P   We add   our   voice to   all those who have called for an
imaginative   and   vigorous   campaign by the football authorities to
ensure that   the   money is   raised and the facilities at all grounds
improved to   the   level of   the best.

     recommendation, which is directed at the football
authorities, is welcomed by the Government.


8.   We recommend that the football authorities and the police
consult one another on match scheduling and heed one another's
professional expertise.


The Government agrees with the Committee that consultation on
match scheduling between the football authorities and the police
is essential. Scheduling is now subject to police advice. Much
is done at local level and, on the whole, relations between the
police and football clubs are good.


9.   We do not see any need for any further powers to prevent
matches taking place.


The Government agrees with the Committee that no extra powers are
required.


10. We recommend that the police remain alive to the fact that
football matches are intended as entertainment for the enjoyment
of the maximum number of law-abiding fans. There must be a good
reason for altering the day, venue or time of a game.


The Government accepts that football is an entertainment and that
most football supporters are wholly law-abiding. However, the
timing of matches, for example, is an important element in
reducing the likelihood of disorder and it is therefore important
that police advice is heeded by the football authorities. The
Government has no reason to believe that the police seek to change
the arrangements other than on reasonable grounds.


11. We recommend that all names and descriptions of hooligans
against whom high grade intelligence is possessed are passed to
clubs concerned by the National Football Intelligence Unit via the
local police force's football liaison officer.

•
The Government believes that, subject to proper safeguards
ir^^uding the Data Protection Act 1984, the pooling of
intelligence where appropriate is of benefit both to thepolice
and to football clubs. The National Football Intelligence Unit
will therefore consider what more might be done.


12. We believe it would be quite wrong for the police to use
tactics against away supporters which had the intention of
extending the Luton experiment [of banning away supporters] by the
back door.


The Government agrees that it would be wrong to attempt to
discourage away supporters by making conditions deliberately
unpleasant for them and has no reason to believe that this is
being done as a matter of policy.


13. We recommend that clubs whose teams are engaged in European
competitions organise attractive, good value and well-stewarded
package deals for travelling supporters, and that match tickets
are available only through these arrangements.


The Government endorses this recommendation.   It has encouraged
the football authorities and individual clubs involved in matches
abroad to organise travel clubs and to provide tickets only to
members of those clubs. Such arrangements encourage supporters to
travel with tickets and accommodation obtained in advance, assist
in the monitoring of their travel plans, and facilitate policing.
The genuine supporter therefore benefits.
14. We recommend that all league clubs establish community
programmes.


The Government endorses this recommendation. It believes that
such schemes can have long term benefits in combatting football
hooliganism in that the greater the involvement of the local
community with its football club the less likely it is that
members of that community will do anything to harm the club's
reputation. There can also be benefits for the local community
^jrough the involvement of particularly the young and those from
disadvantaged groups and ethnic minorities in sports activities
pj^^ided under the schemes. The Government therefore welcomes the
agreement between the Football League, the Football Association
and the Professional Football Association to provide, through the
Footballers Further Education and Vocational Training Society, a
programme of community development in every area of the country
including one at each Football League club. Government funding
for trainees employed on Football in the Community Schemes has
been provided by the Training Enterprise and Education Directorate
 (formerly the Training Agency).


15. We recommend that the football authorities and individual
clubs should establish regular liaison and dialogue with the
supporters' organisations.


The Government supports this recommendation and believes that
closer relations between clubs and their supporters can only be of
mutual benefit.


16. We recommend that gradual but steady progress towards
desegregation should be the aim of police and clubs.


The Government agrees with the Committee that, in principle, it is
right that gradual and steady progress should be made towards
desegregation. But that can only be done when safety and public
order would not be prejudiced; the timing and extent of such moves
are largely for the police and clubs themselves to agree in the
light of local circumstances.
E.R.
   17. We urge ACPO to come forward speedily with the new arrest
   procedures which Taylor recommended a year ago.

   The Government will consider with interest the proposals from ACPO
   which are expected shortly.


   18. We recommend that the Hcxne Office should continue to monitor
   developments in video technology, and the Football Trust continue
   to make money available for state-of-the-art equipment to be

  •installed.


   The Home Office has provided full advice on the appropriate use of
   v^J^o technology in recent years and will continue to do so as
   appropriate in order to enhance both public safety at football
   grounds and the ability to deter and apprehend hooligans. The
   Football Trust has provided funding for video equipment at
   football grounds; the Government, like the Committee, hopes that
   it will continue to do so.


   19. The Committee is convinced that the intensive gathering and
   sifting of intelligence is the most effective means of dealing
   with the menace of gang hooliganism and recommends that each force
   appoints a full-time football intelligence officer for each League
   club in its area.


   The Government agrees that good intelligence is the key to dealing
   with the menace of hooliganism. Indeed, for some clubs, given the
   quantity of information to be processed, more than one full time
   intelligence officer is required - and employed. However, at
   other clubs there would not be sufficient to occupy an officer
   full time. The decision as to the level of resources to allocate
   is for the police in each individual case.

   20. We believe that the National Football Intelligence Unit is
   fine example of police work sensibly co-ordinated on a national
   basis.


   The Government agrees and is gratified that the Committee has
   recognised the excellent work which is being done by the National
   Football Intelligence Unit.   It has a significant impact on the
   fight against football hooliganism.
21. We recommend that ACPO, ACPO (Scotland), the Home Office and
Scottish Office monitor the performance of all police forces in
the dealings with NFIU and ensure that, where there are lapses,
they are vigorously brought to the attention of the Chief
Constable concerned, since this effective relationship bears
directly upon the proper use of police resources.


The Government recognises the importance of close and constructive
relationships between the NFIU and police forces. In England and
Wales, monitoring is carried out through a Steering Committee
^Jhnprising senior Home Office and police representatives.

2 ^ p We recommend that the Government meet all reasonable demands
made by the NFIU for resources.


The Government has committed more than £600,000 to the NFIU since
its establishment at the end of 1989. Requests for additional and
appropriate resources are always considered sympathetically
against the background of normal Government expenditure
constraints.


23. We recommend that consideration should be given to the
appointment of a Scottish officer to the NFIU.

The Government recognises the merit of a Scottish police officer's
being appointed to the NFIU and discussions are taking place
between the Scottish Office Home and Health Department and ACPO(S)
about the practicalities of such a secondment.


24. It is important for police officers as for the general public
to appreciate that the overwhelming majority of fans, home and
away, are law-abiding and have a right to be treated with respect
and dignity by the police.


The Government agrees with the Committee and recognises the
importance of the police's establishing the right balance between
firm policing to ensure public safety and public order and the
rights of individuals to pursue their lawful activities.


25. We recommend that ACPO and ACPO (Scotland) initiate
discussions between the police, supporters' organisations and the
Football Licensing Authority with the aim of preparing a national
E.R.
   statement of good practice for police to follow when dealing with
   supporters. We further recommend that individual chief officers
   should ensure that individual grounds are policed on different
   occasions so far as possible in the same way.


   This recommendation is directed at ACPO and ACPO(S). Details of
   policing particular grounds are operational matters for the
   appropriate chief officer; consistency is desirable wherever
   possible but it will not always be right to police a ground in the


  «
     me way as such factors as the importance of the particular game
     d the following of the visiting team will need to be taken into
   consideration.


   26. We endorse the need for continued constructive dialogue
   between ACPO and the NFIU and the national football authorities,
   and between each individual club and the local ground commander.


   The Government agrees that such dialogue is helpful and
   understands that liaison at national level and in most local cases
   is increasingly seen as useful by all those concerned.


   27. We recommend that all chief officers ensure that there is a
   regular system of liaison between supporters' organisations and
   local ground commanders.


   It is for each chief officer to establish arrangements for
   consultation with supporters' organisations in his force area.
   The Government endorses the Committee's recommendation.

   28. We expect this momentum [to develop police training] to
   continue in the future.


   The Government understands that, in response to Lord Justice
   Taylor's report, a working party was set up by the ACPO Personnel
   and Training Committee to produce a training package for Ground
   Commanders. During 1990, courses took place at training centres
   in the West Midlands, Manchester, Hendon and Kent.   These courses
   were attended by Ground Commanders from all forces in England and
   Wales. In addition, the Police Staff College held a seminar last
   summer for all Ground Commanders.
During 1991, the Central Planning and Training Unit will assess
these courses and the results of the assessments will be taken
into account when planning future training courses.

In Scotland, a seminar was held at the Scottish Police College
last year for all Ground Commanders and further seminars will take
place on a regular basis.

 29. We recommend no change in current arrangements for paying for
^^>otball-related policing outside and away from football grounds.


    Government agrees with the Committee that clubs should not be
required to pay for football-related policing outside and away
from football grounds as this is a normal policing function.


30. We endorse the proposal for a consistent national charging
policy [for policing inside grounds].


The Government welcomes the Committee's endorsement of its view
that there should be a consistent national charging policy for
policing inside football grounds. It does not believe, however,
that the Committee's own proposals would constitute a fair and
workable policy.

31. A town cannot be deprived of its soccer club because the bill
for policing bankrupts it. It would hardly be conducive to good
police/community relations for this to happen since the police
would be blamed for the closure.


The Government has some sympathy with this recommendation and
believes that phasing in full charges over a period of up to five
years will go some way to solving any problems which might occur.
Nevertheless, football clubs, like other places of entertainment,
must meet the conditions of the health and safety regulations.
The Government sees no reason why football clubs should be treated
more favourably than other providers of entertainment in respect
of the   costs of ensuring safety for the events they stage.


32. We consider that it would be inappropriate to charge clubs
the full cost of policing when that cost can ultimately be
determined by one party to the bargain alone. We therefore
E.R.
     recommend that the cost of policing a football match should be
Vr   assessed on the marginal costs of doing so.

     The Government rejects this recommendation.   Charges are paid to
     the police authority, not directly to the force; chief officers
     therefore have no financial interest in deploying more men than is
     necessary to secure the orderly and lawful behaviour of
     spectators. The responsibility for maintaining order rests,
     however, on their shoulders and it would not be right for their
     ^^ofessional judgement about the risks to spectators to be
      outweighed by a club's financial concerns. It is open to a club
      t^^-educe its policing costs by improving the standard of
      stewarding as Lord Justice Taylor intended.


     Charges based on marginal costs only would lead to considerable
     variations depending on the amount of overtime involved and the
     extent to which unpaid special constables were used. More
     significantly, though, charges based on marginal costs would not
     meet Lord Justice Taylor's requirement that they should be
     "realistic and businesslike". If a club hired stewards from the
     private security industry, it would be charged full costs
     (including overheads); where a club requires a police presence to
     provide special services, other than to carry out normal police
     functions, the Government believes there is no good reason why the
     club should not meet the full costs (including all overheads) of
     deploying a trained officer.


     Full costs are already charged by the police in a number of other
     areas and it would be inconsistent if football were exempted from
     these arrangements. For example, full salary costs are paid by
     Prison Department for police officers who would not normally be
     involved in the management of prisoners. Where police patrols are
     provided to improve security on the Underground, salaries,
     incidental expenses and administration charges are paid by London
     Underground Ltd.


     Full cost charging is already made for policing football matches
     within the Metropolitan Police area: charges are based on salary
     and allowances plus an amount for overheads (ie the cost of
supporting operational officers such as training, accommodation,
transport, communications and administration).


Full cost charging has been the practice in Scotland since 1981.

33. We recommend that the Hcxne Office withdraw its current draft
circular, and produce new proposals for charging sports clubs for
policing on the basis of varying percentages of the gate takings.



«
  is recommendation is also rejected. The Government believes
  at charges based on percentages would bear little relation to
th^actual costs of policing, the levels of which do not depend
sorely on the number of spectators attending: rather, police
presence will reflect the particular teams involved, the
importance of the match and the likely presence of any known
troublemakers.


The basing of charges on percentages would also fail the
"realistic and business like" test: the Audit Commission estimate
the unsubsidised costs of policing to be around £5.5 million as
against receipts of £3.5 million.   A 20% increase in receipts, as
proposed would be worth £0.7 million, giving a total of £4.2
million - still leaving £1.3 million subsidy.


The original draft circular is being amended to reflect the
possibility of phasing in full charges (see recommendation 31).

34. We recommend that the Home Office consider whether section 15
of the Police Act 1964 should be amended to reflect more clearly
the desirability of charging differential costs for policing
private events depending on the value to the public of the event.


The Government believes that it would be very difficult to make
consistent or rational judgements as to the "value to the public"
of particular events and rejects this recommendation.


35. Higher profile stewarding supported by low profile policing
is the way forward.


The Government agrees with the Committee that a greater reliance
on stewards would be preferable, on grounds of cost and otherwise.
E.R.
   But a prior condition is that stewards are fit and well-trained.
   ACPO is working with the football authorities to improve the
   training, quality and competence of stewarding.

   36. We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority monitor
   carefully the way in which the stewarding provisions of the Green
   Guide are followed, and not hesitate to use their powers against a
   club which does not meet the requisite standard.

   The need for effective stewarding arrangements was emphasised by
  ^^rd Justice Taylor, and detailed principles have been outlined in
   th^^reen Guide. Clubs must satisfy the local authorities
   responsible for safety certificates that their arrangements are
   adequate, and the police will take into account the quality of
   stewarding in deciding the level of police deployment. It is
   therefore in the clubs' best interests, financially and otherwise,
   to improve stewarding arrangements. It will be for the Football
   Licensing Authority to determine the extent to which it should
   have regard to stewarding arrangements in exercising its statutory
   powers.

   37.   We recommend that the Government reconsider the need for the
   catch-all offence of disorderly conduct at sports grounds.


   An offence of disorderly conduct at a sports ground was
   recommended by Mr Justice Popplewell in the Report of his
   Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
   Grounds. However, the Government agrees not with that
   recommendation but with those of Lord Justice Taylor in his Report
   on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that specific offences should
   be created to cover defined acts of undesirable conduct. The
   Government is supporting legislation broadly along the lines
   recommended by Lord Justice Taylor and does not intend to create a
   catch-all offence of disorderly conduct at sports grounds.



   38. We believe that there should be no delay in bringing the
   Taylor offences [throwing a missile, chanting obscene or racialist
   abuse, going on to a pitch without reasonable cause and ticket
   touting] on to the statute book.
E.R.
•
    39. We recommend that the House pass the Football (Offences) Bill
    without delay.


    The Government supports the aims of the Football (Offences) Bill
    and is assisting its passage into law (with strengthening
    amendments). The Government hopes to introduce legislation
    against ticket touting at football matches in England and Wales
    when Parliamentary time allows; ticket touting is already an
    offence in Scotland.

    \
    40.wWe recommend that the law be amended so that breach of an
    exclusion order may be punished by the imposition of a consecutive
    exclusion order.


    The Government believes that the courts already have powers under
    Part IV of the Public Order Act 1986 to make a further exclusion
    order as part of the penalty for a breach by a disorderly person
    of an existing one and that no amendment to the law is therefore
    necessary.


    41. We recommend that the Home Office again issue a circular to
    magistrates and clerks to justices drawing attention to the
    availability, efficacy and appropriate use of the exclusion order.


    The Home Office reminded the Courts about the proper use of
    exclusion orders in its circular 69/1990 issued in August 1990.
    It will explore with the Crown Prosecution Service and other
    interested parties what further advice and guidance might be given
    to encourage the Courts to make full and efficient use of the
    exclusion order scheme.


    42. We recommend that in the case of serious football-related
    offences, the police ensure that the Crown Prosecution Service are
    aware of the accused's likelihood to travel to football matches
    outside England and Wales, and that where there are grounds for
    imposing a restriction order, the CPS draw the court's attention
    to its powers to do so.


    The Government sees merit in the Committee's recommendation and
    the Home Office and the Crown Prosecution Service are exploring
    how best to give it effect.
E.R.
   43. We recommend that British Ministers and officials continue to
   apply pressure in TREVI to encourage countries with different
   criminal justice systems to see the value for themselves and other
   countries of securing conviction of British football hooligans.

   The Government's strategy has been to seek to persuade other
   countries of the value of securing convictions against British
   football hooligans and welcomes the Committee's endorsement of
        approach. Pressure will be maintained in both TREVI and the
       cil of Europe. Moreover, the Government is seeking to
   establish more bilateral agreements to enable those convicted of
   football-related offences abroad to be made subject to restriction
   orders.

   44. We recommend that the Government reconsider the Taylor
   recommendations to extend the scope of attendance centre orders;
   that more of these facilities be made available in areas of the
   country which do not at present have them, and that alternative
   methods of staffing them be explored.


   The Government has reconsidered the Taylor report recommendation
   for extending the scope of attendance centre orders in the light
   of the Committee's comments but remains of the view that the
   practical difficulties are such as to preclude the extension of
   the arrangements as proposed in the Report.


   The Government believes that attendance centre orders continue to
   have an important place in the range of sentencing disposals for
   young offenders under 21. Home Office Circular 69/1990 about
   football exclusion orders reminded courts and others that
   attendance centre orders might often be the right sentence to
   accompany exclusion orders. The Government keeps the size of the
   attendance centre network under review. In considering the case
   for establishing new centres, the Government has to have regard to
   their viability bearing in mind the use that is likely to be made
   of them by the local courts. The number of young offenders
   convicted by the courts has sharply declined in recent years, and
   the Government does not believe that an expansion of the network
   is justified.
E.R.
   45. We recommend that research be undertaken to assess any
   differences in the level of drunkenness at grounds where (i)
   alcohol is not available (ii) low-strength beer is available (iii)
   ordinary beer is sold.



   The Government will consider research into the consumption of
   alcohol at football grounds as part of its concern for public
   order and the safety of crowds at matches.


   4 ^ We recommend that local authorities, in consultation with
   lc^pL police commanders, make full use of new power [under by­
   laws] where appropriate to cut down on public drinking in the
   streets near football matches.



   The Government's decision to make more widely available the byelaw
   prohibiting the drinking of alcohol in designated public places
   recognised the success of its experimental use by a number of
   local authorities. Most of these experiments involved the use of
   the byelaw to tackle public drinking in shopping centres or town
   centres. But, as the Committee states in its Report, the local
   council decided to designate the streets near to Scarborough
   Football Club as areas where the byelaw applied. There would be
   nothing in principle to prevent other local authorities using the
   byelaw in the area surrounding football grounds.


   As the Committee recognises, it is for local authorities to decide
   whether the problems which they have with public drinking would be
   helped by the byelaw. The Home Office issued guidance to district
   and borough councils in England and Wales on 29 October 1990 on
   how to apply for the byelaw. This guidance emphasised the need
   for consultation with local agencies, including the police, in
   deciding whether or not to apply the byelaw. In the case of
   football grounds, the operational judgement of the police on the
   value of the byelaw will be particularly important. Where local
   authorities and police consider that the byelaw would help in the
   overall strategy for the policing of football matches, the Home
   Office will be happy to consider applications.
E.R.
•
    47. We recommend that the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
    Etc) Act 1985 be amended so that all public service vehicles as
    defined in European law are covered by the Act.

    The Government believes that existing legislation already meets
    the Committee's concerns about the carriage of alcohol on
    minibuses to football matches. The Sporting Events (Control of
    Alcohol etc) Act 1985, as amended by section 40 of the Public
    Order Act 1986, prohibits the carriage of alcohol on minibuses
    which are not public service vehicles but which are capable of
    c4(^ying more than eight passengers.


    48. We recommend that the network of football correspondents
    [under the TREVI organisation] be extended to all European states
    which wish to participate. We further recommend that primary
    responsibility for the European convention on Spectator Violence
    and Misbehaviour should pass from the Department of Education and
    Science to the Home Office.


    The Government, like the Committee, can see advantage in extending
    the network of football correspondents more widely than at present
    and will consider what might practically be achieved.


    The Government agrees that it is now appropriate for primary
    responsibility for the European Convention on Spectator Violence
    and Misbehaviour to pass from the Department of Education and
    Science to the Home Office and will act accordingly.


    49. We recommend that the United Kingdom Government should
    propose at the next meeting of the Standing Committee established
    under the European Convention on Spectator Violence and
    Misbehaviour (a) the establishment of a European register of
    football hooligans and (b) an effective means of preventing
    hooligans from travelling abroad.


    (a)   The Government believes that the exchange of accurate and up-
          to-date intelligence on football hooligans is crucial to
          preventing and tackling disorder at international matches.
          The way to achieve this is through closer co-operation
          between the police forces of different countries so that each
          other's problems are fully understood. At present, the
          Government is not convinced that a central register of
      football hooligans would contribute to this end. But the
      Home Office will give further thought to the suggestion in
      consultation with other countries' representatives in the
      Standing Committee.

(b)   A convicted football hooligan subject to a restriction order
      is prevented from travelling to matches abroad. Thus far,
      relatively few orders have been made, but the Government will
      continue to encourage the courts to make full use of the
      scheme and, where bilateral agreements exist, to encourage
      overseas jurisdictions to ensure that appropriate details are
      forwarded to this country. The Government is also seeking to
      negotiate more bilateral agreements so as to extend the scope
      of the scheme.

      Restriction orders apart, it is for overseas authorities to
      determine whom they will or will not admit on the basis of
      intelligence received.

50. We recommend that ACPO carefully consider in future whether
intelligence co-operation with foreign forces should be
complemented by visible and friendly policing [of English fans
abroad].


This is a matter for ACPO to consider, but the responsibility for
policing football abroad lies with the foreign government and
police forces. Their wishes will have a large bearing on any
British police presence and role abroad.


51. We recommend that the Home Office set a swift timetable for
bringing into force all the sections of the Football Spectators
Act which relate to the Football Licensing Authority (except those
dealing with the national membership scheme), and that the
financial and manpower resources necessary for the job are
provided to the FLA.


The Football Spectators Act 1989 (Commencement No 3) Order 1991,
bringing into force section 13 of the Football Spectators Act
1989, was laid before Parliament on [   ]   April 1991.
The timetable for introducing Section 9 is more difficult to
determine at this stage. The inspection of grounds and related
work, which will be necessary before licences can be issued, is
bound to take time and it is this preparatory process which will
enable the Authority to determine the terms and conditions of
licences for individual grounds, which is the critical part of the
work. The issuing of the licences themselves will only signal the
end of that process. The Authority considers that each ground
will have to be inspected at least twice: once when a match is
beffcg played and once when the ground is not in use. Further re­
inspection may be necessary in individual cases, including some on
match days. Inspection proper of grounds in use will start
effectively at the beginning of the 1991-92 season, once
inspectors are fully trained and have gained familiarity with the
grounds. There are 92 football league grounds to inspect and
possibly some others. The Authority considers it unrealistic to
expect that inspection of all grounds at which designated matches
are played can be completed before the end of the 1991-92 season,
which lasts only about 38 weeks. It has said that it is unlikely
to ask for the introduction of Section 9 (making it an offence to
hold a designated match without a licence) before the beginning of
the 1992-93 season.


The Government is satisfied that the Authority shares its wish
that the Football Licensing Scheme should become effective as soon
as possible.


52. We recommend that the FLA and Home Office endeavour to fill
one of the remaining vacancies on the Authority with a person
acknowledged by the supporters' organisations to understand the
needs of ordinary football spectators.


It is not proposed that the two outstanding vacancies on the
Authority should be filled until the Authority has had more time
to establish itself, and both the Government and the Authority
have learned from experience what additional qualities or
expertise might most usefully be added. The views expressed by
the Committee will be borne in mind in filling those vacancies in
due course.
E.R.
   53. We recommend that, when section 13 of the Football Spectators
   Act is brought into force, the FLA promote consistency and high
   standards of safety at grounds.

   The Government supports this recommendation. This is one of the
   main reasons why the FLA was created, and its policies will have
   this as one of their foremost objectives.

   54. One of our principal conclusions from this inquiry is that
   fcx^ball badly needs an honest broker between the competing
   iil^prests of clubs, police, local authorities and Government. We
   are confident that the FLA, under its present Chairman, and with
   adequate financial backing from the Government can play this role.
   We recommend that the Government realise the inherent potential in
   the FLA to improve the future of the game.



   The Government believes that there is a widespread interest in the
   health of football as a national game. The public will support a
   sport that provides good entertainment and good value for money in
   a safe and attractive environment. The football authorities and
   football clubs have a responsibility to improve the management of
   the game and enhance the facilities for spectators as well as for
   the safety of those invited onto their premises. The Government
   is encouraged by the developing climate of cooperation amongst all
   concerned. It will continue to play its part in promoting this
   climate.


   The responsibilities of the FLA are defined by the Football
   Spectators Act 1989.   In the exercise of those statutory
   responsibilities, it is likely that the FLA will be able to exert
   significant influence in respect of many aspects of football
   ground safety and spectator management, but the Government does
   not see it as an arbitrator; the Authority has yet to prove itself
   and it is too early to envisage any formal widening of its role.


   Neither the Government nor the Authority itself has any reason to
   believe that the financial resources so far allocated to the
   Authority are inadequate to enable it to establish itself fully
   and properly discharge its statutory functions.   Funding provision
for the Authority will, however, be reviewed regularly under the
established arrangements applying to all Government expenditure.


The necessary delay in bringing into force Section 9 of the Act
must not, however, be seen as justifying any delay in progressing
reductions in standing accommodation in accordance with the
timetables recommended by Lord Justice Taylor. The Secretary of
State will therefore be looking to the Football Licensing
Authority, as soon as its inspectors are operational, to monitor
p^rress towards meeting those requirements and to advise him
wl^ffher such progress is satisfactory.
E.R*
  27-4.JS                                           Annex D




  DRAFT LETTER FOR LORD FERRERS TO SEND TO

  Robert Atkins Esq MP
  Minister for Sport
  Department of Education Science



   *
  HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE: INQUIRY INTO THE POLICING OF FOOTBALL
  HOOLIGANISM


  I enclose a copy of our proposed Government Response to the
  Report of the Home Affairs Committee on Policing Football
  Hooliganism.

  I know that your officials have been in close touch with mine on
  matters which touch on your interests but I thought you might
  like the opportunity to see the full response in final draft
  form.   We should like, if possible, to publish the response
  before the Whitsun Recess.    If you have any comments on the
  draft, therefore, I should be grateful if your officials could
  let mine know of them as soon as possible.
