XISTQLJ X FI Y   IN TO     THE       H ILLSBO R O UG H


            S T A O X UM          O XS A S T E R




                          Before


                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                            and

                     PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                        (ASSESSORS)




                            At

                     The Town Hall,

                        Sheffield,

                            on

                 Monday, 26th June, 1989




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                    (Afternoon Session)



         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
              Official Shorthand Writers,
          55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                      (AFTERNOON SESSION)

                                                  Page

WILFRED EASTWOOD,   re-called

     C r oss-examined by   MR. WOODWARD (Cont.)    46
     C r oss-examined by   MR. TOULSON             49
     Re-examined by MR. COLLINS                    76
     Further c ro ss-examined by MR. TOULSON       83

GLYN PHILLIPS,   called

     Examined by MR. PHILLIPS                      85
     C ro ss-examined by MR. KALLIPETIS            96
     C ro ss-examined by MR. WOODWARD              98

FERENC MORTAH,   called

    Examined by MR. GOLDSACK                       99
    C ro ss-examined by MR. JACKSON               102
    C ro ss-examined by MR. GLASGOW               104
    Cross-examined by MR. W O O DWA#©   ’         104
SBD1                                         46




                          TW EN T Y - E IG HT H DAY'S PROCEED ING S

                                MONDAY,      26th JUNE,     1989

                             WILD RE D EASTWOOD,        re-called


                                   (AFTERNOON SESSION)

                             WIL FR ED EASTWOOD,        re-called

                     C r o ss -e xa mi ned   by MR.   WO OD WAR D   (cont.)


       Q.   Dr. Eastwood, I was about to ask you about barrier 144 and
            its removal.     Perhaps I can deal with it quite quickly.
            When it was suggested that that section should be taken
            out did you offer any advice or give any argument against
            that course being taken?     A. Yes, it was John Strange who
            was there, of course, not me, and John Strange pointed out
            the implic at io ns of taking it out.  Calvert said

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What implicati ons ? A. The general
            ones of opening up the gap and also there should be a do w n ­
            grading of capacity.  Inspector Calvert took the view that
            —  took the police view -- that with that barrier out that
            pen would be safer than it had previously been, and that
            was put very strongly, that v i e w - p o i n t .

       Q.       MR. WOODWARD: Did you accept it?  —  A. It was not for
            us primarily to accept it, this was a Working Party meeting.

       Q.   Did you seek to persuade to the contrary conclusion?  John
            Strange put forward the contrary arguments.   Having said
            that he could see the force of Inspector Calvert's arguments.

       Q.   Would you have removed it if you had been given the decision?
            —  A. I shall only be speaking with the benefit of hindsight.

       Q.   The answer is that you probably have removed it at that
            time.  Is that correct?  A. I did not hear Inspector Calvert's
            arguments myself in detail.  I may well have been persuaded
            by them.

       Q.   Once one proposal is likely to impinge upon matters of
            safety did you regard it as important to suggest how the
            loss of safety might be compensated for, if that course
            was taken?  A. Yes, we did consider this.  It would have
            been possible to put another barrier, perhaps offset.

       Q.   Did you give any advice to that effect?  A. We did not
            give advice because we looked at it and beleived that that
            would create an equal difficulty.

       Q.   If you had been asked to consider the safety of pen three with
            that barrier removed, with the central rail removed In 1986
            in 136, you would have had no criticism? A. The central rail



              4
SBD                                  47
 L2

                                                        W. EASTWOOD

           removed in 1985, 136 or whatever, I do not think is at
           all relevant to the present circumstances.   Standing
           there and looking at the lay-out of the barriers now and
           where the other one was I can see the force of Inspector
           Calvert's arguments.  I can see that if we had put one
           somewhere else it would either itself have become dangerous
           or would have created danger lower down.   It may well have
           funnelled people more directly.

      Q.   If the club came to you and said: "Mr. Eastwood, is there
           anything we should do to ensure the safety   of our s u p p o r t ­
           ers or at tenders in pen three because we know that barrier
           144 is coming down?" would you have given them any advice?
           —  A. Our advice was that it was difficult to improve
           the si tuation by overall improvement, by putting in another
           barrier in that area.

      Q.   The answer would have been there was nothing you could have
            suggested.  Is that right?  A. Something I could have
            suggested rather than recommended.

      Q.   There is nothing you would have rec omm end ed?    A. No.

      Q.   May I ask you about corrosion, please, the last matter.
           Corr os io n is, of course, a problem in metal structures of
           this type?     A. Yes.

      Q.   Of long standing?   A. Yes.

      Q.   You me ntioned in your evidence that the covering over by
            the ad ditional layer of concrete was the setting of a trap?
            A. Yes, that is a rather dramatic way.   In the event the
            corrosion down below was not so excessive as     in this
            pa rticular case cause the failure of the barrier.   It did
            not break down below and pull out,

      Q. Do you know the relative depths of the layers of concrete?
          —  A. It appears to vary.  It is as little as three inches
          and perhaps as much as about eight because the new steps
          do not coincide with the old.

      Q.   You will have known, by 1989 or 1988, that there had been
           a good deal of concreting on that terrace?  A. Not by 1988,
           S i r , no .

      Q.   Had you not excavated or had excavated the terrace in
           order to insert the radial barriers?     A. Yes, and this had
           shown us —   it had shown us there was new concrete, that
           we knew.   We were not surprised that it was on top of old
           concrete.   What it  had not shown us was that the old barriers
           had been set at the lower level.

      Q.   Given that this was an old terrace and that the barriers
           were old barriers,  many of them, at what level did you assume
           they had been set?   A. I assumed that they had been newly
           set in 1965, 1966.

      Q.   You assumed that these barriers had been set in 1965?
SBD                                    48
L3

                                                        W. EASTWOOD

           -- A. That the most      likely time when they were set was
           1965/1966.

      Q.   From the early days you observed that there was corrosion
            in a number of these older structures. —  A. Not serious
            corrosion at this particular place that you are referring
            to .

      Q.   There was co rrosion under the clips.      You were aware of
            that?  A. Yes.

      Q.   That was someting that had ma nif est ed   itself as early as
            1982, to your knowledge?  A. Yes.

      Q.   It would be right that that would affect the load bearing
            capacity of any of these barriers?  A. Any one that was
            badly affected this would show up in the load test.

      Q.   In 1983 again there were cases of clips failing?       A.   A
            clip p r o b a b l y .

      Q.   There were two cases I think in 1983, your doucment page
            95 refers to it.   Two cases of clips retained in the
            ho rizontal tube deformed.  These were in barriers on the
            relevant terrace, were they not?   A. Yes.

      Q.   This barrier that failed had in fact been part of a larger
            barrier, had it not, 124(a) had been part of the 124 to the
            south side of the radial fence? A. Yes.

      Q.   And in fact barrier 124 on the occasion of your test in 1988
           had a problem with clips, did it not?  A. Yes.   Can I come
           back to your previous question, please, because you mentioned
           the failure of clips.  My report over the page says the
           only failure was the centre support of barrier 141 and the
           angle length parted during the first load application.
           That was the only failure that day but there was deformation
           of two clips.  They did not fail but they were clearly
           moving and they would have taken a higher load but obviously
           they should be replaced.  I think failure is the wrong
           word .

      Q.   Is not that just a matter of semantics in the cir cumstances?
            —  A. I would prefer to have the accurate w o r d .

      Q.   Very well.  In 1988, when you checked barrier 124, your
           page 206 refers, there was a prob lem with the clip, was
           there not?  A. Yes.




                              /Q.    Did it occur to you that
SV$)
M   S                                   49


                                                                   W. EASTWOOD

        Q. Did it occur to you that there might be a similar state of
           affairs existing in the other clips of that barrier of
           which 124A had been part? - A. There will clearly be some
           corrosion in any of these clips.  They are all out in the
           open.  All will corrode.  It is capricious the behaviour
           of corrosion.  Can be one here, one over there, another the
           other end of the ground.  That is the way it behaves.
           Now, if because of one failing in one barrier you are
           asking should not that mean it is more likely another on
           that barrier will fail I think the answer is no.   If you
           look at the statistics of all our testing all over the
           ground we do not find that we have a pattern of failures,
           all three in a particular barrier or all four.   It is one
           here, one over there.

        Q. It may be the case, Dr. Eastwood, the barriers have not
           yet failed but is there not a time-foomb there potentially
           where every old clip exists? - A. The time-bomb, the picture
           is that with the overload that is applied it is that over­
           load which triggers your time-bomb before it is triggered
           by the design load.

        Q. The testing of barrier 124A involved the sequence that has
           been described, 1 and 2, 2 and 3? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Does that mean that thecentral          section by the end of your
             test had had nine loadings?- A.         No, no.Six.

        Q. 1, 2. - A. Yes.   1 and 2 tested together.          Each of those
           gets three loadings?;

        Q. Yes.  And then you test .... - A ....... 2 and 3 and each of
           those gets three loadings.

        Q.   Yes. - A. So the second     span has had six.

        Q.   Only six? - A. Yes.

        Q. According to the sequence.

                  M R . WOODWARD:    Thank y o u .

                         Cross-examined by MR. TOULSON:

        Q. Dr. Eastwood, may I start with the topic of inspection and
           testing? You were asked whether in 1988 you were unable to
           test the barriers at the rear of the West terrace because
           they were too close to the wall behind.  You said if that
           was the case you had forgotten.  May we just look to see
           what the position was, please?- A. Yes.

        Q. Would you turn in the core bundle, please, to page 464
           and have also before you your drawing 16 10 64E which
           gives the numbers of the barriers? - A. Get my drawing.
             I have it, thank you.
M L                                 50



                                                               W. EASTWOOD

      Q. May we take this point shortly? Do your test records show
         that from No. 187 in the left-hand corner through to No.
         153 on the right-hand side - I have not taken it further
         to the right than that - that all those barriers in the
         rear row were in fact tested and their results recorded?
         - A. I do have to apologise, sir.   When I said a minute
         ago I had the drawing before me Iin fact pulled out the
         wrong drawing and I do not have it.   I would be pleased
         if you could find me that.  Thank you.

      Q. May we just work left to right?

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Give me the number of the
           drawing, will you, please?

                MR. TOULSON:     16 10 64E.

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Thank you.

                THE WITNESS:    I do apologise, sir.  I have not got
           it here either.   I have now found it, thank you.  I am
           all ready now.

      Q. May vre work   left to right from 187? - A. Yes.

      Q. Core    bundle page 465. - A. Yes.

      Q.    Bottom line. - A. Do excuse me. I am in great difficulty.
           I have got my papers so mixed up here and I am trying to
           work from my documents rather than the core.  Page 465?

      Q.   If you please.   I am now there.    Page 465.

      Q.   Bottom line. -      A. Yes.

      Q.   187? - A. 181,      yes, sir.

      Q. 187 I think that is. - A. Sorry, 187, yes.         Yes.

      Q. Next one, going left to right, No. 147, core bundle page
         471.  Bottom line. - A. That is so.

      Q. Dr. Eastwood, I see from the transcript of the opening
         thatthere was a reference to some Counsel playing bingo.
         I am   afraid I am having to shout numbers at youbut we
         can take it through as quickly as we may. - A. Yes.

      Q.   The next block, 148, 149, 150 and 151, do       we find the test
           results at page 464? - A. That is so.

      Q.   152 and 153 at page 465?- A. That is so.

      Q.   So is the position this, that all those barriers were in
           fact test loaded in 88? - A. Yes.

      Q. I have omitted 154 which is in the corner which does not
                             51


                                                     W. EASTWOOD

   appear to have been tested and I do not think has any
   relevance in those circumstances but is there something
   peculiar about the location of that barrier? - A. Yes.
   It is the angle at which it goes and it is difficult to
   get a load applied in the correct direction.

Q. Very well.  Next may I deal with the question of testing
   in blocks as distinct from one here and one there and may
   I deal with you first with the facts and then with what
   the guide said? I do not want to take up time with you
   on the construction of your correspondence with the
   Licensing Authority on the subject but did you for each
   year notify them of your intention to test? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you send them ....

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Toulson, perhaps I can
   tell you that I do not think we are troubled about
   testing of blocks.

        MR. TOULSON:   No:

Q. The next point may we deal x>7ith is the question of visual
   inspection for corrosion because the point was made
   something may pass the test but yet have visual signs
   of corrosion which ought to put the competent engineer
   on enquiry. - A. Yes.




                                  / Q. May we look
                               52


                                                W. E A S T W O O D

Q. May we look, please, at the letter, page 462.    I take
   this year only because it is the last year, the year before
   the 1988/89 season began and I am not going to weary by
   going through earlier documents.   Would you look, please,
   at the bottom paragraph of the page.   A.   Yes.

Q. Was it your practice on each inspection to inspect for
   signs of corrosion every barrier on the ground, not merely
   those which were the subject of load tests?   A.   It was
   standard procedure every year that every barrier on the
   ground was visually inspected.

Q.   On the top of the next page, 463, do you recommend replacement
     where you thought appropriate, even  if it had passed the
     test?   A.   That is so.

Q.   Did that include those clips which appeared             to be requiring
     replacement?   A.   That is so.

Q.   I think you have been asked in the last few minutes
     questions which related to another document which showed
     similarly a recomme nd at io n for clip replacements, that
     is the document at page 180 in this bundle, your bundle 95.
     Suffice it to say, was the question of possible vulnerability
     in the clips something to which you paid a ttention at the
     time of your i nspec tion?     A.   Every year particular attention
     paid to the clips.

Q.   Next, may I pass to the method of testing.    The Green Guide
     does not say, does it, over what length of barrier loads
     should be tested simu lt an eo us ly ? A. No.

Q.   And I think   when Mr. Collins was asking you questions this
     was a point   upon which you and he were in agreement, that
     it would be   desirable that the Code should so indicate?
     A.   It was   desirable --- ?

Q.   That the Code   should so indicate.   A.        Indeed      it should,
     yes.

Q.   You have told the Inquiry that your method is to load
     two sections simultaneously.   A.   Yes.

Q.   Do you know, as a matter of fact, whether other engineers
     all do the same or is your test more stringent than some?
     A.   Our test is more stringent than some and perhaps I
     should explain, too, why loading two panels of the barrier
     is more onerous than loading every one, particularly with
     regard to the foundation, the clip and the vertical.    If,
     sir, you load two bays together, as I explained on Friday,
     the load is not shared in the ratio of 1 : % :    it is
     actually three-eighths, one and a quarter to three-eighths.
     I do not need to go into why this is so technically but
     it is a function of a continuous barrier so that if every
     panel of the barrier is fully loaded each of the internal
     ones will take the load from about one span but if you only
     load two bays then the clip, the support and its foundation
     actually takes one and a quarter, which is another 25%
|Nl>-

                                            53


                                                                     W. E A S T W O O D

             overload, and this is a very important feature of our testing
             and it means therefore that all internal posts get not just
             the equivalent of the 6 kN which itself is an overload but
             7%, the clip, the middle stanchion and the foundation.

        Q.   Have I understood the point right that if I just use that
             d i a g r a m a t i c a l l y , if you are test-loading on to both halves
             the load on that central point is going to be greater
             than it would be on either of those if you were merely
             loading on to one section?                  A.   Unfortunately, I can't
             see very           well your diagram but loading one span obviously
             does not fully load an internal support.                  It is only
             loaded on one side.

        Q . I f you have got three uprights between which load is being
             applied to the horizontal will the load on the central
             upright be higher than if you are merely applying load
             between two uprights.   A.   By applying the load to two,
             you ensure that a higher load, at least as high or normally
             higher load is applied to each of the internal stanchions
             than if you applied the load everywhere or in single panels.

        Q.   Does that lead on to Mr. Kallipetis's point earlier when
             he was asking you whether when you - I was going to say dot
             and carry one;   you load on to two and then move half way
             along.   A.    Yes.

        Q.   He was suggesting to you, I think, that the rail, the middle
             of those three, the right-hand on the first test and the
             left-hand on the second, was merely getting a repeat load
             and there was in effect nothing new about the load which
             was being imposed on it on the second test.   Is that sound
             or unsound?   A.    As far as the rail itself is concerned,
             the conditions are identical so far as the maximum bending
             mode goes but if I may, sir, I am going to have to resort
             to sketching.    I do apologise.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I don't think anybody has attacked
             the method of testing, have they?

                  MR. TOULSON:    No.   What I am seeking, I hope accurately,
             to challenge is the c onclusion which has been drawn that
             when you test in   the way that these were tested the right-
             hand on the first test and therefore left-hand on the second
             is going to be put through its paces in the same way as on
             the first occasion and therefore if it say recovers to the
             tune of 76?o on the first test, the first limb of the second
             test, inferentially it would have done worse the first
             time around.    The new element in the equation, of course,
             is that there is a new post coming in for the first time.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I think I followed that at
             the time Mr. Kallipetis was putting   it in cross-examination.

                  MR.     TOULSON:   Then   I leave     the point.

                  THE     WITNESS:    Thank      you,   sir, for saving     me sketching.
                                  54


                                                               W. E A S T W O O D
Q.        MR. TOULSON:   If I may then come to the question
     which a lot of evidence has been directed to - your
     interpretation of the annexe to the Green Guide, Annex                         (c)
     Paragraph 5 where it deals with if the recovery is 75 %                        -
     it does not define 75?o of what.  A.   Yes.

Q.   You were asked questions this morning by counsel for the
     Local Authority about the steelwork British Standard Code
     inforce now.   Is the current one a   1985 Code?  A.  Indeed

Q.   And are there similar codes in relation to  other structures?
     A.   Both concrete and steel came into being in 1985 but
     timber structures I am not sure of the date.

Q.   If the structural engineer under the terms of the code for
     testing steelwork is used to testing in that way, if the
     1986 Green Guide was intended to require a different
     approach, would it have been helpful had the draftsman
     spelled that out?  A.    Indeed, I think it is essential
     it should.   If, my Lord, you will permit me just to
     quote from the Structural Steel Code ---

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that one of the documents
     that --- ?  A.   That was referred to this morning, sir,
     so I now have a copy here.

Q.   It   was one of the documents,         was it?       A.      Yes.

Q.        MR. TOULSON:    This is the Steelwork Code BS5950 Part                          1
     1985?    A.   If I can refer you, sir, to Paragraph 954
     which is on page 9/2.

Q. Do you have the concrete code or the steelwork code?
   A.   This is the steel one I am looking at, 8110.

Q.   8110 is the concrete   ---        A.     I am sorry,        it    is concrete.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Are  we sticking to concrete
     or ---?   A.   We can stay with the concrete one or the
     steel, I don't mind.




                                              /MR.    TOULSON:         It might.
                              55


                                                   W. EASTWOOD



Q.        MR. TOULSON:     It might be thought still is closer? - A.
     More relevant, y e s .

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     All we have had isstill so far.
     On steel, you want to say something? - A. The thing about   the
     steel one is the reference on paragraph 7.3.2.

          MR. TOULSON:    Page 91.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is that what Prof. Maunder in
     telling me about it would describe as a shakedown? - A. A
     shakedown, sir, yes, and this says:

          "Prior to any test it may be advantageous to apply and
          then remove preliminary bedding down loading not
          exceeding the unfactored loads".

     So that is one thing which makes me believe that the first
     loading test is not part of your main test.  It tells you in
     this code to do that first and then you start your test.

Q. You are arguing from that that because this steel document
   provides specifically for a shakedown the absence of such
   provision in the Green Guide means that the first test under
   the Green Guide is not a serious one? - A. That is so, sir.
   That is summit it up.  "Not a serious one" is not the words I
   am using.

Q. Not one upon which findings should be based? - A. Yes.        It is
   the reload which then is your main test.

Q.        MR. TOULSON:   It is perhaps more fundamentally that
     there is likely to be some shakedown in steel as recognised
     and allowed for specifically in the steel code? - A. Yes.

Q. When you come to the Green Guide you find that there are the
   three loads to be provided for? - A. Yes.

Q. With the knowledge that steel has this shakedown propensity
   the engineer asks himself, "Why the three loads?"? - A. Yes.

Q. And you have come to the conclusion which you have which may
   or may not be what the author intended? - A. That is so.

Q. But you say if he intended otherwise it might be helpful for
   it to be spelled out? - A. Yes.  If I might take time, my
   Lord, to look at the one I first started with, the 8110.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   This is concrete? - A. Yes, this
     is the concrete.  If I just read the words there.  This is the
     paragraph headed, "Test criteria", 9.5.4:

          "In assessing test data and in recalculation procedures
          the following criteria should be considered...."

          MR. TOULSON:   Pausing there,   I am not sure the Inquiry
                                                W . EASTWOOD


has copies of this.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     No, but I am listening.

     MR. TOULSON:     May I hand up one copy.   (Document
produced)

     THE WITNESS:   9.5.4, subparagraph (b).    This is
referring to the first load test.  It says:

     "Where significant deflections have occurred under the
     normal loads given in 9.5.2 the percentage recovery after
     the second loading should be at least equal to that for
     the first loading cycle and should be at least 75% for
     reinforced concrete and class 3 pre-stressed concrete,
     and 85% for class 1 and 2."

Now, in effect the second loading there is separate completely
from the first.  You interpret on the second loading only.  So
where you have had significant deflections on the first
loading, after the second cycle loading the recovery
should be at least 75% etc.   In other words, this code
also leads you to use the last of your two or three
tests as the criterion, which is what we have done.

     MR. TOULSON:    At all events, without wanting to knock
the draftsman of this code, both those two codes are much more
explicit as to what is to be done.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The concrete one is no            more
explicit about   what the datum point is. - A. It is           completely
explicit, sir.

It talks about recovery, but it does not say recovery against
what datum point? - A. No.  It is this one which is absolutely
specific about the datum point which I have just read out.  It
sa y s :

     "The percentage recovery after the second loading shall
     be at least equal to that for the first loading".

In*other words, it is separating them:

     "And the percentage recovery after the second loading
     should be at least 75% for reinforced concrete",

and so on.   So it is separating them.   It says:

The second one   shall be at least as good as the first at it
shall be not less than 75%.

     MR. TOULSON:   Yes, but I think Lord Justice Taylor’s
question is but 75% of what?  It is two bits . It must be less
than the X percentage of the first but not less than 75% of
what? Itself or overall?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     That is the problem, which is the
Y^ \                                57

                                                        W. EASTWOOD


            same as the Green Guide.  If I may say so the fact that the
            green Guide needs clarification on this I think needs no more
            emphasis.

       Q.       MR. TOULSON:   Moving on to a separate point but still in
            relation to your testing, you did make the point, Dr.
            Eastwood, that whilst no engineer dare ever use the word
            "impossible" that once you had got down to 0 on your second or
            third test the idea that on a retest you were going to get a
            failure, I won't use the word "unrealistic", but that was the
            sense of your evidence? - A. Yes.  I am even stronger about
            this now having thought about it.  It is getting near to
            impossible.  There would be some, only if it were a fatigue
            failure, and this kind of loading is not fatigue loading in
            the normal sense.  There are so few cycles.

       Q. In support of that may we just look back again shortly at the
          test loadings, core bundle 463 onwards, because I think they
          illustrate one point.  Is it a fact that wherever you get a 0
          in the unload column for either the first or the second
          application of load invariably you will find also a 0 under
          the unload column in both the second and third or third column
          as the case may be? - A. That is so.

       Q. Do you want to amplify why you say that is so and why you
          therefore express the confidence you do that having got down
          to 0 you were going to be 0, or is that going to take us into
          lengthy complicated sums? - A. I think, unless my Lord wants
          me to speak, it is a reasonably self-evident thing.

       Q. Only one other matter I want to ask you about in relation to
          theses tests.  If one goes through the exercise of marrying up
          which of the barriers tested were Eastwood barriers and which
          were the pre-Eastwood barriers, one finds that there is a
          pattern emerges of more initial movement on the pre-Eastwood
          barriers than on the Eastwood barriers, although they all come
          down on the shakedown, those that need it, to 0. - A. Yes.

       Q. I say "all", all bar a tiny handful.  Is there any reason why
          your barriers should show very little movement at all, whereas
          the pre-Eastwood barriers present more of a pattern of
          movement on first test? - A. I think there are two reasons.
          Firstly, we put in very large foundations under the Eastwood
          barriers to limit movement of the ground, and the second one
          is that the form of the joints between the uprights and the
          horizontal rails in the Eastwood barriers is such that there
          is not a sort of shakedown situation there.   You don't have
          the clip which can bend, for example.  So there are those two
          reasons why ours consistently give in effect no initial
          movement on the first load.

       Q. Before leaving the matter of testing, may I invite you to
          glance back to what you said in conclusion in your statement
          of evidence, and would you go in your statement to page 47.
          In paragraphs 109-112 you describe the test, the post-tragedy
          tests carried out on the two barriers which showed visible
          deformation after the match in pen 4, and the results of your
O h
                               58

                                                     W . EASTWOOD


         tests which showed broadly that the barriers must have had
         bear a load substantially in excess of design load? - A. Both
         above the design load and above the test load.

      Q. You conclusion you express in paragraph 113, the final
         paragraph of your statement, the first four lines. - A. Yes.

      Q. Nobody in questioning you to date in this Inquiry has
         challenged that conclusion. - A. That is so.

      Q. Are you satisfied that it is a correct conclusion? - A. I am
         sure it is reasonable to believe, yes.

      Q. Now, may I turn to a different matter, the separate but
         related matters of capacity and distribution.  For capacity
         purposes we know that the Green Guide allows an average
         maximum density of 5.4? - A. Yes.

      Q. But before you get to the capacity section in the guide it has
         already dealt in the chapter on crush barriers, Chapter 9,
         with the fact that there may be uneven distribution in the
         distinction it draws between peak viewing areas and other
         viewing areas? - A. yes.

      Q. It may be helpful just to glance back at the Guide, although
         no doubt everybody is very well familiar.  The distinction is
         recognised is it not on page 36, paragraph 117, and then there
         are the consequent different requirements as to maximum
         horizontal spacing? - A. Yes.

      Q. You have made the point already that the spacing on this
         terrace was closer than the Guide required? - A. Yes.

      Q. Whilst recognising, therefore, that on a mixed terrace there
         is likely to be a higher density in the peak area than the
         other area, does the Guide anywhere attempt to set a maximum
         local density figure? - A. No.




                          /Q. May we just call
SBD                                  59
PI
                                                       W. EASTWOOD

      Q.    May we just call that max imu m local density figure 'x'
            because it is not defined.        We do know, do we not, that
            the guide at page 65, pa ragraph 224, recogn ize s that"Even
            di st ri bu ti on of spectators on the terraces may be difficult
            to overcome", which I take is intended to mean achieve
            rather than overcome, " N otw ith sta ndi ng the measures in
            the guide because spectators may prefer to gather in a
            certain part or parts of the terrace.        There is an
            ex hortation to ma nagement to take such factors into account"
            A. Yes.      I think the first word should be uneven instead
            of even.       That is the error.

      Q.   I see.   Uneven.   The sense is obvious.   A. Yes.

      Q.   So we have this situation, do we, under the code, that the
           code prescribes an average max im um density, recognizes that
           it is not going to be an across the board figure, and really
           allows for that by two things: one, setting an average
i          figure and (two) requiring a higher degree of crash barrier
           in the peak areas?  A. Yes.

      Q.   If it took as the max im um permitted figure what I have
           termed 'x' no doubt the fear will then be that in the local
           area you are going to get 'x' plus which, by definition,
           would be unsafe?  A. Yes.

      Q.   But the code does not ap proach the matter in that way, it
           approaches it in terms of set a lower average, provide
           for better values in one place than another, and tell ground
           manage me nt to keep the point in mind? A. Yes.

      Q.   Th erefore talking about what is the m a xi mu m local density
            is really a defined area.   A. Is not a?

      Q.   Defined area.   Local density, I am sorry.   The higher
            denisty to be ex pected in that part where they have said
            there must be superior barriers. A. Indeed.   I do apologise
            it is the acoustics.   I am just having a little difficulty
            picking up.

      Q.   That really then becomes a matter for dis tri but ion to
            prevent the figure over 5.4 in the peak areas not exceeding
            ' x ' . A. Yes.

      Q.   The guide does not offer a lot of assistance, does it, on
            the matter of distribution?  There is a certain amount on
            page 56  in the stewarding chapter, where it said to be a
            matter of effective stewarding amongst other things, to help
            disperse spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd
            pressure and under 195(a) "Control or direct members of
            the public who are entering or leaving the ground to help
            achieve an even flow to the viewing areas". A. Yes.

      Q.   Does the code therefore make   it an operati ona l matter how
SBD                                 60
P2

                                                         W. EASTWOOD

           you control the flow, given that there is likely to be
           some imbalance, so that the amount in any area does not
           reach an unsafe one?  A. Yes.

      Q.   Do we get echos of the same at page 59 under the paragraph
           Crowd Movement?

               LORD JUS TI CE TAYLOR: Is not this a matter really of
           submission and suggestion for possible later alterations
           or clarifica ti on ? I do not know if the witn ess can take
           us much further on i t .

                MR. TOULSON: May I go from there to the question of
           the actual configuration.           May we start, because we have
           been asked a lot of questions about the changes in c o n ­
           figuration of the barriers and I apolo giz e if my i n t r o ­
           duction to it has been inappropriate.           With those matters
           in mind let us just take the position as it was after your
           retainer i n i t i a l l y , to advise on how the ground was to be
           brought up to what were then 1976 code standards.            As we
           have seen from the drawing you have prepared initially
           the barriers covered the whole of the terrace in undivided
           pens providing little ef fective way of control lin g where,
           wi thin the terrace spectators chose to go?          A. Yes.

      Q.   After the 1981 semi-final we have heard that the police
           asked for and the Working Party approved the introduction
           of the first two radial fences?  A. Yes.

      Q.   What was the express purpose of their introduc tio ns so far
           as you un derstood when you re ceived your instructions?
           A. That these barriers would be used as a means of p r e v e n t ­
           ing the over crowding which had invariably taken place
           prior to 1981 in that central area.

      Q.   When you wrote core bundle page 145, your bundle page 69
           you had been in structed by the club to organize the
           install at io n of two radial fences and in paragraph three
           "By dividing the terrace more control over supporters
           should result".     Was that in accorda nce with instructions
           you had received from the club?     A. Yes.   I would not say
           that it said ev erything that the club had said to me.

      Q.   You have been asked a number of questions about the report
           in the Civil Engine er in g Journal about your attitude to
           radial fences.   I just want to ask you one matter about that
           at the time when radials came in.     May we look please at
           your letter wr itten a few months afterwards, page 169
           of the core bundle, 86 of your bundle.     A. Yes.

      Q.   I think you were specifi cal ly dealing here with a police
           sugge st io n that the barriers ought to be cut back, the
           crash barriers ought to be cut back to the radial fence.
           You made the point at the top of 170: "The consequent
           loss of calcu la te d spectator c a p a c i t y " , and then deal
           with the safety , the safety hazard of having a strip
                             61

                                                W. EASTWOOD

     going straight to the ground. Then you make a comment
     in the next paragraph about the pros and cons of the
     in tr od uc ti on of radial barriers. A. Yes.

Q.   Did that express ac curately your balanced view at the
     time?    A. Yes.   I do not think I could have worded it
     better even with foresight to the events that came about.
     I do start on the first page in the bottom paragraph by
     di scussing this issue which the police had raised, that
     by keeping in the crash barriers the fans could climb
     over.    Over the page,in duscussing whether or not they
     should be cut out I say first there would be a loss of
     calcu la te d spectator capacity but a major hazard would be
     created because a strip of that wi dth without a single
     crash barrier would be created.     In effect, in the i nt er ­
     vening months -- digging my heels in is the wrong word
     -- I had been not taking action on the request by the police
     that more barriers should be cut out.

Q.   I want to come back to that a little later, if I may.
     A. Yes.   The following paragraph on the second page "Should
     be kept in mind that the in tr od uct ion of these radial
     barriers effected a very great improvement from the point
     of view of segreg at io n spectators but to achieve perfection
     from the point of view of segrega tio n brings with it other
     disadvantages.   I believe that what we have done is a
     re asonable compromise between the various interests".

Q.   You said in answer to Mr. Hytner that, of course, the
     corollary of the in tr od uct ion of radials would be the
     need to exercise op erational control so that fans were
     distri bu te d as appropriate.   A. Yes.

Q.   That you saw was the corollary.  Was it,   as you understood,
      also the expressed purpose? A. Yes.

Q.   From the time when those radials were first introduced
      up until the tragedy eight seasons later were you ever
      informed that the introd uc ti on of radials was producing
      any di fficulty in terms of di str ibu tin g fans? A. No.

Q.   We know that in 1985 the request was made that the system
      of radials should be extended and two new fences put
      in and that was done with the authority of the Working
      Party?  A. Yes.

Q.   May we just look in the core bundle at page 235, please.
      Look, if you would, at the numbered letter paragraph *B * .
      This was the licensing au thority wan ti ng central area of
      terrace to be divided in half by a new central radial fence
      running from the tunnel to the pitch side so as to permit
      entry to be diverted to either half as appropriate.
      A . Yes.

Q.   Obviously wh oever was going to be doing the diverting was
      not going to be you.   It was going to be whoever was in
SBD                                    62
P4

                                                          W.    EASTWOOD

            op erational   control   of the ground?   A. Yes.

      Q.   As long as the purpose for which those radials were
           in troduced was implemented do you think that there was
           anything unsafe about the con fi gu ra ti on of either the
           radials or the crash barriers?    A.    I do not believe that
           there was anything unsafe if the capacity had been kept,
           as it says there, by di verting into these two pens up to
           a safe level.

      Q.   We know that the ma xi m u m local density, which I have
           termed 'x' has never been defined but as a matter of
           practical reality how did you unders tan d such diversion
           was going to be done?      How were these pens actually going
           to be operated? A. As part of this exercise in 1985 the
           gates which are the lower end of the tunnel we arranged
           a device so that those gates could be swung independently
           and one fastened and the other opened, or vice-versa.     In
           other words this committed people to be committed to
           one half and then the other or two together but when one
           was getting full it could still be closed and people could
           still go into the other.

      Q.   It requires someone to be keeping an eye on the situation
           and when one pen seems to be getting full in common-s ens e
           terms shutting it off?  A. Yes.

      Q.   May we come please to the question of the removal of barrier
           144.  Can we just go back because I have said to you we
           would go the point you were seeking to make a little
           earlier in relation to the letter at page 169.  A. Yes.

      Q.   The other members of the Inquiry will have it well in
            mind.   You were holding out against permitting a strip
            to be created   running straight down to the ditch?
            A. Yes.

      Q.   When you come into that terrace through the tunnel, as one
            knows you have got to go straight ahead of you. A. Yes.

      Q.   Was barrier 144 a co nvenient viewing point for fans?
            A. Yes, indeed.   It is possibly the best view from that
            point of the whole of that terrace and so it was not
            unnat ural that some sp ectators wanted to stay there.

      Q.   There you are dead in line with the goal and also high
            enough to be able to see over the perimeter fence?
            A . That is s o .

      Q.   It has been su ggested that removing 144 created a
            diagonal channel down towards the corner where the
            barrier collapsed.



                                        /With 144 in place
CSk. \
                                    63


                                                              W. EASTWOOD

              With 144 in place was there in fact already a direct
              channel in that direction? - A.,Yes, indeed.   In that
              direction the channel was already there.   144 did not
              contribute to it.  If anything it may have meant that
              fewer  - let me put it this way. The direct channel if
              lines  are drawn on it ....

         Q. Y e s . Well, we can perhaps see the point ourselves from
            any plan one cares to look at.    You you have got 144 in
            there there is in fact a diagonal channel? - A. A diagonal
            channel, yes.

         Q.    Running from the gap between 144 and 149   to the next gap
              between 136 and 136A? - A. Yes.

         Q.    So was that channel in any sense created   by the removal
              of 144? ~ A. No, it was not created.    If anything it was
              made easier because instead of everybody being in effect
              directed down that channel by the barrier sticking out
              it now gave the option of going between barrier 136
              and the fence.

         Q. If 144 is causing congestion and blockage so that something
            had to be done about it, had you replaced it by putting
            another barrier more to the left as we look at it what
            would have been the likely consequence of that in terms
            of crowd flow? - A. I think that that new barrier would
            itself have become another stopping off point for
            spectators and it would itself have then had a big load
            on it but it would have pushed people straight down the hill
            which was undesirable.

         Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: That was exactly the situation
              in 4, was not it, in pen 4? You had a barrier, not very
              different position from 144, and you had a straight run
              down from the top? - A. By pushing people down, sir, I mean
              tempting people to go down there whereas in pen 4, the
              other side of the fence, that gap between 132 and the
              safety fence is not a very attractive one for people to
              go down.

         Q.       MR. TOULSON:    In pen 4 you have got a gap between
              144 and the radial fence. - A. Yes.

         Q.    Then where does the faatu. get to next? 132.And then when
              he has got round 132 he has got 125 and 127and then     in
              front of that 126? - A. Yes.

         Q.   So he has simply got one gap? - A. Yes.

         Q. The Police, as we know, had wanted a strip free of barriers
            to be created all the way down? - A. Yes.

         Q. And you were against? - A. Yes.
                           64


                                                    W. EASTWOOD

Q. If 144 was causing blockage and obstruction warranting its
   removal to a degree you are opening up a straight channel
   ahead of you, are you not? - A. Yes.

Q. But that is offset by the fact you have got 136A and then
   you have got 125 in front of that? - A. Yes.

Q. But if you were to put another barrier at 45 degrees in
   the way of the diagonal channel which already existed
   there before what is going to be the combined effect of
   removing 144 and blocking off the diagonal channel? - A.
   Well, it will merely divert the people down theinside.

Q.   Down the straight bit? - A. Straight bit.

Q. Which was the one about which you had expressed maximum
   concern? - A. Anxiety, yes.

Q. You said earlier in answer to questions that as a matter
   of balanced judgment you accepted the working party's view
   removal of 144 was a good idea.  Do these decisions always
   involve a matter of balance? - A. Yes, balance indeed.

Q. As a matter of small detail, the diagonal channel which
   existed before 144 and continued to exist afterwards,
   does that exceed 60 degrees? - A. No.

Q.     _ LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The gap between 136 and 136A
     which was created, as I understand it, by removing some
     barrier that was there before, that gap was in fact tv/ice
     the width proposed in the Green Guide?- A. One-and^-a-half
     times the maximum, sir.

Q. Pardon? - A. That gap is about 2.1 metres and the maximum
   recommended in the Guide is 1.4.

Q. Well, according to the measurement on the plan we have got
   from Braden Associates it is 2.325 and I thought it was
   1.1. - A. 1.4 is the maximum, sir, 1.1 to 1.4.

Q. I see.  Thank you.  That is quite a sizable gap, is not it?
   - A. Yes.  It was important to have a sizable gap if the
   people were to be packed.  Introducing the radial barriers
   had created new difficulties in packing.

Q.        MR. TOULSON:   I do not want to be facetious about
     it but is it swings and roundabouts? - A. Yes.  There is
     never something which is clear-cut, the best thing to do.

Q. One suggestion put to you was should not there have been
   more gaps but narrower? The more gaps you have is it the
   case that the more you are going to be incapable of prod­
   ucing angles greater than 60 degrees? - A. Yes.

Q. So you endeavour to avoid that? - A. Yes.
                                                 W. EASTWOOD

The Police complain that 144 is in fact causing blockage
and obstruction so the working party think it is best to
remove it. That in turn produces these other considerations
- A. Yes.

May I just before leaving this area deal with a matter this
way with you? Whatever configuration you adopted here,
whether you had kept 144 or put another diagonal one in
beside it if you had got the situation of, whether it is
a couple of thousand or merely some hundreds of fans
being allowed in an uncontrolled way down the tunnel
en masse when the pens are already for practical purposes
full, can you see any configuration of barriers which is
going to eliminate crushing at some point?- A. No.   It
might have merely moved it up the slope, if there had been
more barriers, causing greater congestion there.   It may
well be it would have been more serious on the day if
barrier 144 had been present.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well, it would have acted
probably as a retarder, would not it, for those coming
down the tunnel?- A. It might have but it might have been
the one which became so overloaded that it failed.  This
is my concern.

     MR. TOULSON:   We can speculate about this, cannot we?
The possibilities are infinite.  Supposing the Police were
right and that even on ordinary match days 144 was causing
obstruction and blockage .... - A. Yes.

 .... and then you get a mass of people allowed down the
tunnel, they get a hold-up there, somebody in the tunnel
slips and falls and others trample over him, who is to know
what the consequences of that scenario may be? - A. Yes,
w e l l i my greatest fear would be the pressure being built
up not just from the strip of terrace but all the people
in the tunnel pushing forward as well, so that barrier 144
might have been the most fatal one on the day if it had
been present.      On the other hand, sir, I have been surprised
at the photograph over there and I would ask, sir, that you
look at this particular point on it after our session today
and it is interesting that the least crowded part of that
whole central pen is in front of the tunnel on the left-
hand side as we look at it and it is quite remarkable how
few people there are in the general area where barrier 144
would have been.      It is really quite remarkable.  I haye
never seen that photograph before I came into the Inquiry
and it says to me that there was not a pressure from people
there going diagonally down because the people are not even
touching each other.      It is really quite a remarkable dis­
tribution.      In other words, 144 had loosened up that area
but it had not created pressure from behind where 144
would be.
                          66


                                                   W, EASTWOOD

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The other view is, of course,
     when that photograph is taken it has happened, has not it,
     and they have gone   through? - A. They may well have,sir.
     There is enormous crowding down below and not there.   You
     mean they may have got out of the tunnel?

Q. Well, they have come down through the tunnel and were
   pressed up to the front. - A. Yes.  No,,the point I am
   making, sir, is that at any rate by that stage - and I
   am not sure whether the barrier 124A had as yet collapsed -
   but at that stage pressure from behind where 144 would have
   been had become, I think, zero at that stage.

Q.        MR. TOULSON:   One of the matters you have been
     criticised for is not having a gangway.  Now, you spelled
     out this and the pros and cons in your initial report
     to the working party back in 79.  Supposing there had been
     a gangway in the obvious place for a gangway, down along
     by the radial fence with nice yellow lines painted on it
     telling everybody they are not to stand on it, then on
     the occasion in question the gates were opened and a couple
     of thousand fans come down the tunnel with a man at the
     bottom saying please do not use the gangway, again, what
     would be the likely result? - A. That would have been of
     course the most dangerous part, if there had been a gangway
     created down there, it would have become on the day because
     of the gross overcrowding the most dangerous bit of the
     whole terrace.

Q. So you say, and we can follow the reasoning through, gang­
   ways would be inappropriate, therefore we must make other
   gaps sufficient to enable people to get by?- A. Yes.

Q. Hence, you say, you allowwa gap between 136 and 136A wider
   than you have if there were a gangway alongside? - A. Yes.

Q. Now, it   was put to you earlier is not that a case of saying
   well, a   gangway is one form of safety requirement, becausee
   we have   not got that we will abandon another one also.
   That is   not, I imagine, the way you would ask the Inquiry
   to view   it? - A. No.

Q. You have already indicated what you fear would have been
   the consequences if you had had a gangway but if you had
   not got a gangway for reasons discussed and explored have
   you got to have a gap somewhere else to allow people to get
   down? - A. That gap has to be wider than a gangway because
   if it is a gangway and sunken people do not stand round
   the end of the barrier but if there is no sunken gangway
   they do overlap the barrier and constrict the space that
   is available.,

Q. Yes.  Well, I do not want to labour the point.   You have
   obviously, I imagine, agonised over this many times since
   the incident.  Can you in all conscience::conceive of any
                         67


                                                   W. EASTWOOD

   configuration of barriers within those pens which could
   have averted a tragedy of this kind if the numbers which
   were allowed in were allowed in when the pen was already
   effectively full? - A. With those numbers it was inevitable
   whatever the configuration of barriers that people would be
   crushed.

Q. Now, just before leaving the question of those alterations,
   I want to ask you also about capacity again.  You said
   that you did raise with the club and with the working
   party the inevitable consequence of removal of barrier
   would be loss of capacity calculated in the Green Guide.
   May we in this context just go back to the letter because
   we were looking at it earlier at page 169 of the core
   bundle, 86 your bundle? - A. Would you give me my page
   again, please?

Q. Your 86. ~ A. 86.   Yes.




                              / Q. Did you there
                              68

                                               W. E A S T W O O D

Q. Did you there spell out at the top of 87 that the removal
   of rails would involve a consequent loss of calculated
   spectator capacity?   A.   Yes.

Q.   I do not know if you are aware of it or not but it appears
     that others were considering the point.     This will not, I
     fear, be in your bundle, Dr. Eastwood.      Can you go in the
     core bundle to 165, where this is the Police, I think,
     writing to the Licensing Authority, Paragraph 2 referring
     to the new radials - those are the first two, of course,
     in the Leppings Lane terrace, reporting that they are
     working well.    Then in the next paragraph complaining
     about the fact that the barriers did go right up to the
     radials, so providing a climbing over point and also raising
     the question of dangerous pieces and arguing for their
     removal.   Then the passage I want to look at, the second
     half of that paragraph;     "This matter has been drawn to the
     attention of the Club Secretary who has been advised of my
     intention to bring it to your notice.      I point out that
     Mr. England totally agrees with the Police observation
     regarding the c on st ruction of radial fences and I understand
     from him that it is being suggested that any alterations
     could conceivably result in a reduction of the capacity of
     the Leppings Lane terracing."     Did that come from you?
     A.   I am sorry?

Q.   The suggestion that the removal of railings     -----          A. Yes.
     Yes.

Q. And then follows the view:  "I am not aware of the thinking
   behind that but for my part see no reason why that should
   be."   Does the position appear to be this, that you wrote
   to the licensing authority making reference to loss of crush
   barriers equals loss of capacity if you are going per Code?
   A.   Yes.

Q.   Unknown to you, the Police view expressed    to the licensing
     authority, "No reason to alter capacity."      A.   Yes.

Q.   Are you privy to the internal decision of the licensing
     authority, whether they actually reduce capacity or no?
     A.   No, not privy in any way to either its correspondence
     or its proceedings except in so far as we get a letter
     after a meeting telling us what has been decided.

Q.   In terms of safety, did you consider that when you issued
     the C ertificate you were referred to this morning that
     those structures were capable of safely a cc ommodating the
     number that the licensing authority was allowing so long
     as the intended system was implemented?    A.    Yes.

Q.   In that respect, although some barriers had been lost,
     what were the offse tting factors?  A.   That the radial
     fences had been put in and this gave a means of controlling
     the numbers in that central area at roundabout 5.4.

Q.   So that is a plus   - they have been introduced to permit
     greater ---   A.     Very considerable plus because I am sure
                               69

                                                        W. E A S T W O O D


     that prior to the radial barriers being in the packing
     density in that area had been very s ig nificantly higher.

Q. Are radials themselves           approved   and rather   encouraged            by
   the Code?   A.   Yes.

Q.   On the plus   side,   that had enabled more effective           control?
     A.   Yes .

Q.   You were making a point earlier about the horizontal spacing
     of the barriers;  does that have relevance here or not -
     spacing from front to rear?   A.   Yes.   We do know that
     on average the spacing between the barriers - the rows of
     barriers - is significantly less than would be permitted -
     higher spacing would be permitted so the load is less on
     the barriers for that reason.

Q.   So in terms of safety you have got barriers more closely
     spaced than required fronttto back and therefore less
     loading.   A.   Yes.

Q.   Radials providing capability of better control             but against
     that loss of barrier.  A.   Yes.

Q. An equation     to be made by the licensing authority?                    A.        Yes.

Q.   Your personal opinion as to whether it made it safer or
     less safe or no material difference?        A.   I think that
     the overall picture was one that I felt that the radial
     barriers had counte r- ba la nc ed the missing out of some crush
     barriers - the taking out of some crush barriers.

Q.   You have explained I think now more than once how the
     2,200 figure came to be on the plan which you provided the
     Club with at its request.     It was for ticket allocation
     purposes.   Can I just ask you about the later plan which
     came in after the central pen was divided into two and one
     has that drawing with 1,000 on one and 1,200 on the other.
     Was it ever in c on templation as far as you are aware that
     the two halves of the central pen, that is to say 3 and 4,
     would be allocated to opposing groups of spectators?
     A.   No.

Q.   Because obviously had it been, you would have had them all
     going down the central tunnel together and all leaving
     through the central tunnel together.   A.   Yes.

Q. So if it was never in contemplation that Pens 3 and 4 were
   going to be awarded to opposing fans, was there any point
   in sub-dividing those pens for ticket allocation purposes?
   A.   No.

Q. Were you ever asked to do so?   A.   We were asked to give
   a guidance in 1981, I think, 1981 or 1982, to the Club as
   to the number of tickets which should be sold in total if
   two major parts and one major part were allocated to different
   clubs.
                               70

                                                       W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   That goes   back to the 2,200    figure?     A.    That is the
     2 ,200 .

Q. But the fellow who put 1,200 and 1,000 on the plan which was
   later provided, was that anything that the Club or anybody
   else had asked him to do?   A.   No, nobody had asked and
   it shouldn't have been put on and ---

Q. Did it make any sense in terms of allocation of tickets?
   A.   No.   There was no way it could have been used for
   allocation of tickets.

Q. Of course you, as we know, starting in 1981 and then more
   fully in 1985 developed a scheme by which each pen would
   have been wholly independent of every other pen.   A.  Yes.

Q. Does the Code, when it deals with radials, talk about that
   as being ideal?   Had that gone through, of course, there
   would have been mechanical control?   A.   Yes.

Q. Without that but with the penning you had an intermediate
   position dependent on a modicum of human control?   A.  Yes.

Q. Did you regard that as unviable?    A.   No, I think that with
   careful o bservation and appropriate action on the day it
   would have been possible with the arrangements of doors
   for which we made special fastenings at the bottom eifid of
   the tunnel, but with that arrangement of doors the number
   of people in those pens could have been controlled at a
   reasonable level.

Q.   I am very grateful to Mr. G i b s o n - W a t t .   In fact the paragraph
     is 206 which talks about less problems            occuring when the
     terraces are divided both radially and laterally.              "Each
     section should be ideally self-contained", etc., etc.
     A.   Yes.

Q.   That ideal would have     been achieved by your     1985 plan?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   You talked about gates, let me move swiftly to that.    You
     produced earlier a drawing - I do not ask you to look at it
     again - it was Drawing 11424/5 which shows the various exits
     from the pens and you told the inquiry that ycu regarded them
     as being a very good primary escape route which met the
     evacuation times per Code and also a very good secondary
     escape route which included perimeter fences.   A.    Yes.

Q.   The suggestion put to you was that was all ex post facto
     reasoning and that nothing of the kind was really thought by
     you at the time.    Just two points in relation to that.
     Would you look, please, in the core bundle at page 240,
     your bundle 128, last sentence.    Were you there contemplating
     use of the perimeter gates if necessary as a method of
     evacuation?   A.    Yes.

Q.   The other point is this:  the q ui ck-release devices which
     you devised, core bundle 414, your page 189, I do not want
                            71

                                               W. E A S T W O O D


     to trouble you with the details of that.   Were they
     intended precisely to be able to operate when there was
     crowd pressure that your lock was so designed as to enable
     it to be opened simply even in those circumstances?
     A.   Yes.   We had been concerned and the Fire Service
     had played quite a part in this with the friction on any
     ordinary bolt if there was big crowd pressure.   The
     Policeman or steward would not be able to open that bolt
     and we therefore had to have something which, so far as
     we could, ensured that the gate could be opened under
     intense crowd pressure and that is what we achieved.

Q. Dr. Eastwood, I want to leave those matters and just deal
   withtS®E misce ll an eo us points put to you.   You were asked
   about the variation in heights of barriers.         Firstly, are
   all the barriers which you installed of a height recommended
   by the Guide?     A.     Yes, the preferred height.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can we just go back for a moment
     to that point?   You specifically designed a quick-rele ase
     through one of these gates to meet the problem that if there
     had been intense crowd pressure against a gate with a bolt
     there might be difficulty in opening it in an emergency?
     A.   Yes, emergency or for Police purposes, yes.

Q.   That scenario must surely have brought to mind the question
     whether through that gate, however opened, that amount of
     crowd pressure might have dangerous results?   A.   Whoever
     opened it, they might spill out, sir, is that what you mean?

Q. On top of each other.     A.   Yes,   it did indeed,       sir.

Q. Or block it?    A.   It did indeed.   It is obviously,
   again, one of these matters of balance but, sir, when the
   first of these was installed all the members of the Working
   Party took an interest in it but there was one occasion ---
   They did not go to look on the same day;   it was two meetings
   because they could not all go at the same day.    The day
   the Fire Service went some Fire Officers in fact did push
   against that gate whilst it was open to see what happened.
   It was in e verybody's mind, were we doing the right thing?
   And the Fire Officers I believe did, you know, fall through
   when they pushed hard against the gate and it was suddenly
   opened.   It is one of these difficult matters.    If you
   have got crowd behind it, is it better that you have a gate
   that cannot be opened or can be opened?     I think it does
   have to be opened, even if there is a risk of some people
   being injured as it happens.

Q.        MR. TOULS0N:   I am not sure whether you are meeting
     the point that is being put.   A.   My Lord was meaning
     should it have been a wider gate?

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That certainly was one point.
     Put it this way, what I had in mind was this:  we have
     heard a lot of talk about the size of the gate being
     dictated by the need for Police Officers possibly to get
     in to see to something and one can quite see that if you
     are thinking of it in those terms you are thinking of
iSOip
                                     72

                                                          W. E A S T W O O D


             one or two Officers going in, but if you are actually
             briefed to create a release device capable of coping with
             such intense crowd pressure that you cannot release a bolt,
             then the very posing of that quesstion seems to contemplate
             the need, does it not, to cope with that degree of crowd
             pressure for which the gate is going to have to be opened,
             and once that question is posed, a gate 0.85 in width looks
             a bit puny, does it not?   A.   You will recall, sir, that
             on Thursday or Friday I showed you the drawing which explains
             that the tunnel before the radial barrier had six exit widths
             going out.  When the radial barrier ---

        Q . The Units?   A.  The units, yes, sir, and the units were
            two at the top at each side, which is four, and one at each
            gate at the front, and an 850 wide gate is a very adequate
            single unit so we had six.    Now, the main tunnel, used by
            itself, gives an ev acuation time, depending on whether you
            count it 5 or 6 units;; but under 6 minutes, under 7 minutes,
            that sort of order.

        Q. But I am not talking about getting people out.    I am talking
           about the very degree of intense pressure which the
           requirement of your new quick-rlease seems to contemplate
           at that point.   A.   I was contemplating the normal crush
           barrier loading, sir.   The normal crush barrier loading
           design load of 5 kN/m is something just under half a tonne
           on that gate, now half of that nearly half a tonne would
           be on the bolts at one side, the other half on the hinges.
           Now, if you could imagine whatever it may be, 6 cwt. or
           7cwt. of load on those bolts and somebody is trying to open
           it, and that is going to be very difficult.

        Q.        MR. T0ULS0N:   I wonder if I might pick up the matter
             this way.   Firstly, I do not want to carp but on a point of
             detail were you briefed to do this or was this something you
             did of your own initiative?   A.   I think it was one of
             these matters that was discussed as a matter of concern over
             the years.   Certainly the Fire Service were concerned.
             We were concerned.   The design of the bolt was our initiative.

        Q.   The next point is this, did you ever c ontemplate a scenario
             of the kind that actually happened on the day which we are
             now i nv estigating?  A.   No, not at all.   Not at all.

        Q. But you clearly did have in c on templation that there were
           these various difficulties;   there was the tunnel, there
           was the gate in the radial fence at the top, there was this
           one on to the terrace and it is known that on terraces there
           may be crushes, hence the need to have crush barriers that
           can stand up to them.   A.  Yes.

        Q.   How does the concern arise, that if you have got a gate
             which is able to stand up to the crush of a crush barrier
             it may cause difficulty for the man who is trying to open
             it?   A.   Yes.

        Q.   Hence, Eastwood says,   how are we going to resolve that          one?
             A.   Yes.
                           73

                                            W. E A S TW O O D ^

Q. And you do it by your quick release knob?          A.      Yes.

Q.   If it is being suggested, would that gate have been intended
     to meet a situation depicted there?   A.   No.   No.  On the
     other hand, I don't know how many people would have had to
     have been let out from that crowd to have relieved the pressures
     which were killing people, but suppose letting out 250 through
     those gates alone at the bottom, the two gates, at 60 per exit
     width per minute, in two minutes you would have relieved the
     most intense pressure if the gates,had been opened at the
     right time.   2 x 60 is 120 a minute and 2 minutes is 240.
     Now, if getting 250 people out ofthere would have relieved
     the intense pressure, it was as short a time as that which
     was needed.

Q. May I reheat the coals a moment, or throw some more water
   on them, because I suspect that Lord Justice Taylor may
   also have had in mind in the question,the point about the
   step to be got over because there was a reference in the
   question to the possibility of somebody tripping.    Was that
   matter discussed with members of the Working Party?
   A.   When we were first appointed on the first walks round
   of the Working Party, the two gates into this particular
   area are not, of course, the worst in terms of steps but
   where steps are put in people standing on those steps can
   then more easily get over the fence.   They can also stand
   on the steps.  Your terrace is down here, the ground outside
   is up there, somebody goes up the step, he is now stopping
   the view of people behind which can cause trouble, cause
   difficulty, so that it is a very difficult matter about
   having steps.   Obviously you have to have them.    You
   put them in in the no-man's land because that was a very
   considerable height.   Now, there though there weren't
   going to be spectators to go and stand on them.




                            /Now   in these particular.
                            74

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


     Now, in these particular areas we do have steps, but it is
     only one step up,I think 1 and 2.   I do have copies of the
     photographs I can perhaps remind myself.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   26. 28 isprobably the best, in
     the West Midlands bundle. - A. Yes.That shows the      stop, and
     it is a goodly step.     It is quite a step up.  There is a
     concrete step in the bottom, as you    will see, but a second
     step was not put in,    and it was for this particular
     reason. The fence was already in existence, of course.
     One step was put in and a second step would have made it
     much easier for people to climb over the top and to be a
     nuisance.

Q.         MR. TOULSON:   I am sorry to ask what must seem fatuous,
     but is the whole contemplation that the gate will be opened at
     the proper time? - A. Yes.

Q. And I d o n ’t know whether you have seen - I am about to make a
   submission.     I will go to a question.  In 1981, the whole
   introduction of radials and the subsequent discussions which
   we are now looking at through the reverse telescope, whereas
   you were going through the events forwards, began with the
   1981 Semi-Final in which fans had in any event been evacuated
   through the gate? - A. Yes, and it worked.

Q. And it worked.  Now, I would like to turn to remaining points
   about which questions have been put to you.   Firstly, the
   height of barriers. I think you told his Lordship that your
   barriers were Green Guide recommended height.   So far as the
   old barriers were concerned a decision therefore had to be
   made ultimately by the licensing authority whether, bearing in
   mind the strictures in the code about adaptation to existing
   grounds, whether the divergence was such as to make it
   necessary to remove them.  May we just look in the core bundle
   at page - I am sorry, my note has let me down.   Was a barrier
   removed at one stage early on because it was significantly out
   of line with the recommendations? - A. Yes.

Q. I think we will find also in the documents if we need to
   matters where the height of barriers on the Kop were
   discussed? - A. Yes.  In fact, two successive meetings of the
   working party in which the heights of barriers on the Kop were
   discussed, and a decision was postponed until after testing.

Q. I have found it.    It is page 60 in your bundle, page 121 in
   the core bundle.    The second page of the letter, third
   paragraph:

          "One further barrier was modified because it was
          initially significantly lower than the minimum height” .

     So the point got addressed? - A. Yes.

Q. You were asked a number of questions by Mr. Kallipetis about
   the length of step based on the Ralph Braid drawings.  As a
   matter of interest, are the risers precisely 90 degrees? - A.
                             75

                                                   W. EASTWOOD


     no, I think there is a very slight slope, a couple of
     millimetres on the front.

Q. If we are actually talking of millimetres and depending from
   precisely what point you put your tape measure if you have a
   rounded edge, do you know what is the exact....

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   With respect to Mr. Kallipetis, I
     d o n ’t think we are too troubled about the width of the steps.

Q.        MR. TOULSON:   You were asked by Mr. Collins a question
     about one internal document which I fear I have lost the
     reference to, but it is a note of you being told that
     STrange had been told by the Police that they thought the
     capacity was too high.  All I want to ask you about that
     is this.  Was that view ever expressed by the Police at
     any meeting of the working party at which you were
     present? - A. no.

Q. You of course were not present as you indicated at working
   party meetings other than the ones which happened to be at the
   ground and which you were invited to attend? - A. That is so.

Q. Were you ever informed that that view had been put to the
   working party? - A. No.

Q. Lastly, the question of supposed breaches of the licence.   I
   am not going to go into questions of law with you whether a
   departure from terms of the licence can possibly be a breach
   if the licensor knows and approves.  All I want to know is
   this.  Were the various departures from the letter of code
   which you have been questioned about all matters which were
   known to and discussed with the working party? - A. Yes.

          MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, before my friend re-examines may I
     correct one mistake that I put to Dr. Eastwood unfairly,
     because I put the matter too much in shorthand.  You will
     recall I put to him - the only bundle it is in is 208 of his
     own bundle, and he accepted that that drawing represented the
     knowledge of the firm at the material time.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That is the 1989 drawing?

          MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, yes.   I ought to have pointed out and
     I apologise for not doing so in fairness to him that it was
     actually drawn after the event.

          THE WITNESS:   I am very relieved, sir, because i was
     very worried it should appear my firm had done that drawing.
     It was a complete surprise to me.  It is after the event.

          MR. GLASGOW:   I am sorry about that.    I thought it fair
     to put it right before he was re-examined.

          MR. MULLER:   Sir, before my learned friend re-examines
     may I just mention one thing for the purpose of clarification.
     If you will be good enough to have a look in the core bundle
                             76

                                                        W. EASTWOOD


     at 374-375 you will see it was as a result of this letter from
     the Fire Service on 18th February, and if we go to page 375,
     that the bolts which you have recently referred to, it was
     suggested should be changed.    Sir, what had actually happened
     as a matter of information, but I can call evidence about it
     if necessary, was that the Fire service had tested the bolts,
     and the result of the test was that if one person pressed on
     the gate it was very difficult to open the gate, and if two
     people pressed it was quite impossible. So the basis of
     perhaps on which may be   D r .Eastwood was approaching the
     subject certainly was not the basis on which the Fire Service
     was approaching it.  It   did not require anything more than two
     people pressing against   the gate to open it at all.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.

                      Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q.   One or two matters, Dr. Eastwood.   Can i ask you to look at
     the photograph in the WestMidland bundle we were looking at a
     moment ago, photograph 27.   This is purely a factual matter -
     27 or 28.   Do you see running down to the gate in both those
     photographs there is what appears to be a slight indentation
     on the concrete and what looks as if it might at one time have
     been intended to be a gangway.    I d o n 't know. - A . Y e s .

Q.   Can you help about that at all? - A. No.I know nothing about
     it.  Obviously these crush barriers that are there, their legs
     are embedded in.

Q. Indeed. - A. One can't imagine that a crush barrier was three-
   quarters of the way across a gangway.

Q. It seems improbable. - A. Improbable.  So I finally came to
   the conclusion that it must have been a last piece of
   infilling concrete.

Q. If you look at 29 in fairness it does appear that             might be so
   because there are clear lines down where you have             got
   presumably the shuttering or whatever it may have             been that
   put the various wedges of concrete in, if that is             the right
   way of putting it? - A. Yes.

Q.   You c a n ’t help about that? - A.   I c a n ’t help, no.

Q.   Can I ask you to look at another photograph. I am afraid
     there is only one copy of it.  (Photograph handed to witness)
     It is a photograph of the end of 125, and shows a hole? - A.
     Yes.

Q. That is the sort of thing that your firm would have been on
   the lookout for on any inspection? - A. At the annual
   inspection, yes.

Q. I appreciate that hole could have come into existence or could
   have developed in the 9 months whatever it is from July 1988
   to April 1989, but had that hole been seen would that have led
                            77

                                                     W. EASTWOOD


     to a condemnation of that barrier? - A. Yes.  The clip would
     have been taken off and there would have been a new tube put
     on the end, probably with a liner.  The system that we use is
     that when we take off one of these clips a new length of tube
     is put in and inside that, so that you can put it in, is a
     second tube of smaller diameter, and the whole lot is welded
     up.  In other words, it produces virtually a double strength
     join from then onwards.

Q. If in an old barrier one clip has obviously got corroded and
   has obviously to be replaced, would not it be sensible to
   check every other clip, because they can each be unbolted,
   c a n ’t they? - A. Yes, I believe they can be.

Q. Is that not something which ought to happen, because if
   corrosion exists under one then the chances it might be under
   another if they are of the same age? - A. I am sure this was
   done in the early years, and what was found was, it is quite a
   capricious thing.  If you have a barrier with three clips, and
   one of them is getting to a poor state, if you open up the
   others there is no more likelihood than any other.

Q.   Can I ask you to pass that up to Lord Justice Taylor.
     (Photograph handed to Lord Justice Taylor) Could you turn to
     page 180 of the core bundle.   The test of June 1983 of the
     same barriers that were tested, or virtually the same as were
     tested in July 1988.   You see the second paragraph, second
     sentence:

          "Some spans of 144, 145, 146, 149 and 150 could not be
          tested because being towards the back of the terrace the
          absence of a suitable reaction point or obstruction
          prevented jacking”?

     - A . Yes.

Q.   It was pointed out to you by Mr. Toulson that in July 1988    you
     did apparently manage to test most of those barriers? - A.
     Yes.

Q. What had happened in the intervening five years to get over
   the problem of the absence of a suitable reaction point, or
   obstruction? - A. I believe we had devised a method, using
   some spare parts, so to speak, to fit into the rig,
   which enabled us to do a test where there was
   confined space.

Q. You recall that specifically? - A. I recall specifically
   something was done.  Whether it was redrilling or whatever was
   done, something was done so we could now take a bore.




                                 /Q. Can I ask you
SBD                                  78
T1
                                                    W. EASTWOOD

      Q.   Can I ask you please to have in front of you two plans,
            the first is 11424/8 which is the latest of the three in
            relation to the c o n f igu rat ion of the barriers. The other
            is Braid 1340/02, which is the one of the detailed lay-out
            of the terrace. A. Yes.

      Q.   Have you got those two?        A. Yes.

      Q.   When you were being asked by Mr. Kal li pe ti s in connection
            with the Braid drawing about the gaps as I unders too d your
            evidence you were saying that the width of the gaps was
            something which you had carefully consid ere d and had come to
            a positive decision that they ought to be wider than usual
            because that was safer, having reard to the set-out on
            this terrace.  A. Yes.

      Q.   Did I correctly understand that?   A. It depends on the gap,
            of course.  We have some very tiny ones in places where it
            does not matter.

      Q.   But generally speaking, looking at the gaps that are
            important on this.  A. Yes.

      Q.   As I unders to od your answers to M r . Ka lli pet is it was a
            carefully co nsidered matter in —     I think the way he was
            putting it was way back in 1981 but in fact it was obviously
            not until 1985.    A. Yes.

      Q.   In fact, if we look at 11424/8 it is clear that those gaps,
           with the exception of the one which existed between 124
           and 125, were created by the removal of the relevant
           barrier rails?  A. Yes.

      Q.   And therefore their width was dictated merely by the width
            of the barrier rail that was removed? A. Yes.

      Q.   So you did not create a width, you simply    removed a barrier
            rail, and that caused the width of that dimension?    A. No,
            that is too simplistic.   If you will look at our drawing
            11424/8 you will see that in the barriers which we put in at
            earlier times we have chosen that width.   I have not got
            the numbers of the barriers along here but looking along from
            the left-hand end where it says"rails and posts removed
            August 1986" im mediately to the right of that is a three
            span barrier purpose built by Eastwoods.

      Q.   You are looking at barrier 132, the one down in pen four,
            is that the one?     A. I am looking at the moment at this
            one h e r e . That one particularly, where we put in a
            space of exactly that same dimension, or near enough.
            The same applies over on the right-hand side.    If you look
            down at the left-hand side front there is a two span
            blue barrier, where again we have put in a span roughly
            equal to one of the others, between it and the red one.

      Q.   Are you saying that when you re-did the hole in 1979,
            before the Safety Certificate, you del ibe rat ely chose
SBD                                      79
T2
                                                             W. EASTWOOD

           widths between the barriers which exceeded the 1.4?
           A. Yes, because there were no gang ways we felt this
           was desirable because of the way people crowd round a
           barrier.

      Q.   This, of course,         was contrary   to the Green Guide
            reco mm en da ti on ?    A. Yes.

      Q.   What you were doing was delibera tel y —      and I am not for a
            moments saying whether or not it was wrong or right
            to do it, but what you were doing quite clearly was
            de li be ra te ly contrary to the Green Guide rec ommendations?
            A. It was a de liberate decision, yes.

      Q.   You knew by the terms of the Safety Ce rti fic ate that it
            was at the very least arguable that the ground ought to
            comply with the Green Guide rec omm en da ti on so far as
            structural matters were concerned?     A. I am at a d i s a d ­
            vantage of not being a lawyer but it does seem to me to
            be quite absurd that if the Green Guide says you can
            use your judgement and the Safety Ce rti fic ate then says
            you cannot you have to stick exactly to the Green Guide
            rules.  That is incomprehensible.

      Q.   All I am suggesting is this: Since you were clearly
            del ib er at el y and advisedly going against a specific Green
            Guide reco mm en da ti on surely it is something you would have
            put in writing if only to protect your own back if anyone
            raised trouble later.       A.  This is put forward as a
            suggestion in the first instance to the Work ing Party.
            It is the kind of thing which is then discussed and turned
            over as these things were, in a whole series of meetings
            between December, 1978, and June, 1979.       Although there
            were many many things of this kind and these were not listed
            in detail, they were talked about and discussed and changes
            made as a result of discussions at meetings.       I did not
            write a letter       about every one of them to protect my back.
            This is a Working Party full of people of integrity and I
            do not need to protect my back.       They took the decision,
            with me present at most of their me et ing s but not at the final
            ones.     I do not think that I need to protect my back when
            it is something as overt as this.

      Q.   Except that you were, for reasons which no doubt seemed
           good to you, were setting yourself up as effectively
           overr ul in g the re co mme nd at io n of the Green Guide in
           this respect. A. I did not overrule          the re co mme nda tio n of
           the Green Guide.     I am completely unable to do that.          If it
           is overruled it is by the licensing authority, albeit sitting
           many times with my p a rt ici pat ion and the decision taking.

      Q.   What I am really wonde ri ng is why somewhere there is not
           something in writing because this, after all, is quite an
SBD
T3                                  80


                                                         W. EASTWOOD

           important difference, is it not, because it affects
           very considerably, or may affect, the capacity.
           A.  It was very overt, everyone knew about it, and it
           did affect the capacity that was agreed in 1979.    You
           will recall that there was a down-gr adi ng from 10,900 and
           something based on the 5.4, to 10,100 with the specific
           words in my report "because of the gangway situation".    This
           is part of the gangway  situation.   I said in my report we
           are going to use gaps between barriers.

      Q.   5.4 of course is an extreme, that is it is a maximum.     It
            is not an average, it is a max im um liable according to
            the Guide, assuming every thi ng conforms with the guide
            r e co mm en da ti on s? A. Yes.

      Q.   That, of course, was therefore a max im um figure that would
            have been permis si bl e on any terrace anyway? A. Yes.

      Q.   On a perfect terrace 5.4 and no more.   Anything less than
            perfect should reduce the capacity? A. Yes.

      Q.   When you put that radial fence in, if I may come to it, in
            1985, the one down the middle, you then ahve to change
            the c o n f ig ur at io n of the barriers in what becomes pen three
            because if you do not you have got a complete barrier
            across the middle of the pen?          A. Yes.

      Q.   That has and must have an immediate effect      on the capacity
            of that part of the terrace? A. Yes.

      Q.   So mething which you indicated would     be the case? A. Yes.

      Q.   By you I mean your   firm? A. Yes.

      Q.   But which does not seem to have affected in any way other
            peoples    view of the capacity, by which I mean the Working
            Party?    A. I only know the view of one member of the
            Wor ki ng Party, and that was the police, and they said in
            their view it did not affect them.

      Q.   But the police, with respect to them, may well not know the
           ins and outs of the Green Guide and the details of capacity.
           They are thinking of co ntr oll ing crowds and control lin g
           people on the terraces. A. The references to the Green
           Guide were almost every five minutes.     When any discussion
           was going on in the Working Parties everyone     was fully aware.
           Everyone had done their homework.     The discussion was very
           knowledgeable.    I just cannot concede of the senior officers
           members of the Working Party not being familiar with the
           Green G u i d e .

      Q.   When you had decided to place that barrier across the mouth
           of the tunnel, 144, o r i g i n a l l y , why had you done so?
           Try to envisage 144 without any radial fences at all in the
           original form, which in fact I think isll424/6 —            I am
           sorry /7.  Barrier arrangement at the end of 1980.
                                           81
SBD
T4
                                                                 W. EASTWOOD

      Q.    It was not a       barrier     put in? A. It was already    there.

      Q.   I know it was but you could have removed it.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: It was part of the scheme which
           was produced by the combina tio n of what was there and what
           you introduced? A. That is so, Sir.

      Q.       MR. COLLINS:         That   is your   scheme   for the terraces?
           A. That is.

      Q.   Why was that barrier there then? A. The fairly obvious reason
           of the possibility of pressure from people coming in through
           the tunnel entrance.

      Q.    It was there to, as it were,         stop the mo me ntu m of people
—x         coming down the tunnel on to the terrace? A. Not the
            momentum, no.         I was not thinking of people charging down
            with m o m e n t u m or even walking.

      Q.   Disperse people,         to prevent them going straight ahead,         to
            have the filter          round that barrier? A. Yes.

      Q.   It performed that same function when it was in the mouth of
           pen three, did it not? A. Yes.

      Q.   The removal     of it therefore      would   stop that happening?
            A . Yes .

      Q.   It also has the effect, if we go back to the detailed plan,
           the Braid one, of creating a channel down not to the front
           but to barrier 125, t h re e-q uar ter s of the way, two-thirds
           of the way down the pen.     A. One moment, please.      Yes,
           barrier 125, it created the channel.

      Q.   The channel down, just the very            dange rou s thing that you were
            talking about back in 1985 when           the police wanted the channels
            down to the front? A. Yes.

      Q.   Al though a slightly lesser degree because it does not go right
            down to the front, it only goes down two-thirds to three-
            quarters of the way down. A. Yes, the police pressure had
            been to take it out in 125 as well and so it would have
            been from top to bottom.

      Q.   You said that      that was clearly       dangerous?   A. Yes.

      Q.   It is dangerous         to do what you did by removing 144, is it
            not? You create         an exactly similar channel three-quar ter s
            of the way down         the pen? A. I removed that barrier on the
            ins tr uc ti on s of    the Working Party.

      Q.   I am not interested in that, with respect, Dr. Eastwood,
           It would have been as dangerous -- not quite as dangerous
           but it would have been as dangerous in the same way to
SBD
T5                                82

                                                    W. EASTWOOD

           have removed that barrier, what eve r the Work ing Party
           may or may not have agreed. A. it was the police view.

      Q.   I am not interested in the police view, I am interested
           in your view. A. My view has tobe influenced by the
           police view.

      Q.   Why? A. The police policing that terrace observing, I am
           sure, what happens, how the crowd behave, where possible
           danger points build up.  They have been doing that and it
           now appears for some months, and had been intending to
           ask the next meeting of the Working Party to have this
           barrier taken out for safety reasons.  On the day when they
           explained to the Party what they wanted and gave their
           reasons for it the statement was made that it was believed
           that the terrace would be safer with it out than with it
           in .

      Q.   But you knew that was not true, you knew that it was
           dangerous, you said so back in 1985. A. No, I had argued that
           in 1985 and it had ended in a compromise, some coming out
           and others not.  There is no way that I can say to the Working
           Party it is not coming out.  The licensing authority has
           the final say.

      Q.   You could say to the licensing authority: "That will not
           come out unless you tell me to take it out because in my
           view it is dangerous to take it out. A. We were told that
           afternoon to take it out.

      Q.   You could have said to the licensing authority: "In my view
           it is dangerous to take that out.  I will only take it out
           if you order me to do so and you put it in writing".
           A. If I had thought that it was going to seriously increase
           the dangers to the spectators that is the course that I
           would have taken.  On all other occasions, of course, we
           did get it in writing within about two days.

      Q.   But it did create a danger because it created a dangerous
           channel down to the crash barrier 125. A. But it removed
           another danger in the view of the police around the tunnel
           opening.

      Q.   We are obviously not going to get anywhere.   That   is all
           I wish to ask.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I can see that it would increase the
           flow of spectators entering through the tunnel down the
           terrace but I do not for the moment see how the removal
           of the barrier would make it safer.    Will you explain that
           to me?   You may say it would not make it dangerous but
           how could it make it safer?



                                                    /The barrier was set
                                                  W. EASTWOOD

 - A. The barrier was set forward, sir, as you see, the line
 144, there is a bit of it still left, and it is set forward
 relative to the other barriers in the same row by a couple
of steps or so. Now, that means that it was getting to the
very limit of the length of terrace behind it which a
barrier can support and the Police apparently were finding
 that they were getting a great mass of people concentrated
 there because it was a prime viewing position right in the
 centre and at the highest level.  The combination of that,
 the pressure on the barrier, plus the fact it was also
clearly an obstruction in their view and possibly it is
better that you ask the Police because they will be able
 to give you the reasons why they ask for it but that is
 the situation as I understand it and I did not believe
 that was so unreasonable as for it to be appropriate for
me to say no.   As you will know, I have not hesitated to
say no.   I did not hesitate to say no to the barriers
being cut off when they impinged on a radial fence and
•that went on for four or five months before there was,
in effect, in the end a compromise.   Now, I am not afraid
to say no.   On this occasion the Police view seemed to me
to be a tenable one.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.     Thank,you.

     MR. TOULSON:   Sir, I am a little concerned about
the last questions for this reason.  We, of course, were
not here for Mr. Collins' opening of this part of the
Inquiry but I have read the transcript carefully in order
to acquaint myself with the criticisms being made and
the criticisms which were being made were of that diagonal
channel with whichtWee have dealt.  No criticism has been
made at all in relation to this downward channel - the last
few questions put in Mr. Collins' questioning.  If it is
going to be a matter of criticism of him that he permitted
I think Mr. Collins put it as high as to say a dangerous
channel and I do not want to take false points but in a way
which has not been covered in the Salmon letter or in the
opening and which I therefore had not dealt with in my
questions, in fairness I would like to ask a question or
two about it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Please do.

     MR. TOULSON:   I am grateful.

        Further cross-examined by MR. TOULSON:

Dr. Eastwood, may we just address therefore this question
of the straight down route from the tunnel towards 125?
- A. Yes.

In the photograph album we have got somewhere a picture
which shows that area with those diagonal yellow lines
across it. - A. Yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Probably 23 is the relevant
one, I think.
'x'l
                                 84

                                                          W. EASTWOOD

       Q.        MR. TOULSON:   Yes.  So that is somewhere, is it,
            where spectators are not supposed to stand, intended to
            be free for people to distribute?- A. Yes.

       Q. Once you have got the radial fence going down then, self-
          evidently, spectators coming into pen 3 if they are met
          with blockage cannot go sideways round it into what is now
          pen 4 .... - A . Y e s .

       Q. As a person enters he has not got, as it were, 180 degrees
          in which to turn, he is entering in the corner and he has
          got a 90 degree angle? - A. Yes.

       Q. This point, we can see, I think you described it earlier,
          is a prime viewing point looking straight down the ground?
          - A. Yes.

       Q. Now, if the habit of spectators coming in there is to take
          up a position there and not budge and crowd is crowding in
          the entrance a matter of safety concern as well as sheer
          convenience? - A. Yes.

       Q. Because what is going to happen if you get a build-up of
          people trying to come in when the entrance is crowded? - A.
          Yes, if that barrier had been replaced in, whatever it is,
          125.

       Q. Now, if you have got the Police raising as a matter of
          experience and concern to them that you are getting a
          blockage there, is it desirable in the interests of
          safety as well as other things to try to relieve the
          blockage? - A. It is indeed.

       Q. If you are going to remove the blockage does that mean
          removing 144? - A. Yes.

       Q. If you are then going to remove 144 you have got certain
          alternatives, have not you? You can put 144 back where
          it was but a little further forward? - A. Yes.

       Q. Is that merely to undo what you have just done? - A. Well,
          the difficulty about that would be that it would be partly
          undoing and, in addition, might have been creating a little
          more danger behind 144.

       Q. If you move it diagonally to what was previously said to
          be the dangerous channel do you merely exacerbate the problem
          of what is now said to be the dangerous channel? - A. Yes.

       Q. So you cannot win? - A. It is a very difficult situation.

       Q. Therefore if you have got the actual problem being com­
          plained of, that there are blockages here, does a balanced
          decision have to be taken what is the best thing to do?
LA'S                                85


                                                               W. EASTWOOD

            - A. Indeed.

       Q. You had already expressed concern about not having a
          through route straight down to the perimeter fence? - A. I
          hav e.

       Q. By removing 144 you were going.some way towards allowing
          such a channel but not the extent that the Police wanted?
          - A. That is so.  If I had acceded in 1985 there would
          from that day have been a channel from top to bottom.

       Q. Balancing those problems did you think that the request
          was a reasonable one?- A. I believe that they had good
          reason for the request, that it had been well thought out
          over a period of time and they were quite convinced that
          they were making the situation safer.

       Q.   When those decisions are taken are they taken lightly or are
            they taken after discussion with people with the benefit
            of experience as to what is actually happening?

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Well now, Mr. Toulson,II did
            allow you to ask some supplementary questions.

                 MR. TOULSON:      That may have been going a little far.

       Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Can I just ask, the remaining
            bit of 144 in pen 4, why does not that fall into the same
            category?- A. If you took out the one bit - sorry, may I
            have a look at that? We did take out of 144 in the
            neighbouring pen.  We took out the first span, sir.

       Q. Yes. - A. Now, it seemed to have been believed by the
          Police with that different configuration, because they
          are different on the two sides of the central barrier,
          it seemed to be believed that just taking that one out
          would relieve the difficulty in the right-hand pen - the
          layouts are different - and this was their view.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.   Thank you.

                MR. TOULSON:       Thank you, sir.

                MR. PHILLIPS:       Dr. Phillips, please.

                                GLYN PHILLIPS Called

                           Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

       Q. Are you Dr. Glyn Phillips? - A. That is correct, yes.

       Q. General practitioner and a supporter of Liverpool? - A.
          That is correct, yes.

       Q. You came to Sheffield on 15th of April of this year along
                           86


                                                       G. PHILLIPS

     with your brother and two friends.   Is that so? - A. That
     is right, yes.

Q. I think you    got to the ground reasonably early and were in
   the terrace    before 20-past-2.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. At that time the terrace, how did it appear to you to be? -
   A. When we got to the centre section it was already quite
   full but it was still possible to move through the crowd
   without too much ....

Q. It was not uncomfortably full then, was it, at that time?
   - A. No, it was just short of the limit of comfort.

Q. Which pen did you go into in fact?     Was it the pen 3? - A.
   Pen 3, yes.

Q. That is right.  And I think in fact when you got in there
   decided to move towards the back.  Is that right? - A.
   Well, we decided to move away from the tunnel because it
   was so full, so we made our way to the right and ended
   up, I would say, about five yards short of the radial fence
   and above the second barrier from the front, from the
   perimeter.

Q. Yes. - A. Round about there, yes.

Q. You did not feel so uncomfortable that you wanted to go
   into the next pen? - A. I did not appreciate you could
   go into the next pen.

Q.   Did not you see the gate behind you in the radial fence?
     - A. No.  There were far too many people to see that there
     was a gate there.  I assumed the fence was complete with no
     gate.

Q. You stayed, did you, in that particular pen until kick-off
   time? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you found that it was getting more and more
   confined .... - A. Yes.

Q ..... in that pen. Do you remember the teams coming out
    on to the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you remember, were you able to see the pitch    from where
     you were? - A. Could see the pitch, yes.

Q. Did you feel any increase in the pressure at this particular
   time when the teams came out? - A. Well, as I put in my
   statement, it was a gradual increase in pressure really
   from the moment we got there but round about the time of
   kick-off I seem to remember quite an increase in pressure
   although, ais I have said, because there was no room to
                           87


                                                    G. PHILLIPS

     move there was no actual surging or movement, it was just
     all round pressure increased.

Q.   You were off to the right of the pen as we look   at it from
     the tunnel, were not you? - A. Yes.

Q. And you say you did not notice any surges which involved
   you? - A. No. I think we were because of our position
   protected from the surge that we heard about later.

Q.   Did you see any surges irinanyother part of the pen? -   A. No.

Q.   Were you able to see what was going on at the front of   the
     pen from where you were?   A. Not clearly, no.

Q.   Now, were you able to see or hear anything said about
     conditions in the pen? - A. As I have said in my statement,
     large numbers of the fans in that section were voicing_
     discomfort and derision at the conditions they were being
     subjected to.

Q. Yes.  You say also it brought no response in terms of
   action from the Police? - A. No, because it seemed to be
   getting more and more full.  I would have assumed - I would
   have hoped - that as it became more and more packed that
   people would have been diverted to the outer sections of
   terracing where it was still quite empty.

Q. Could you say whether any of this was within the hearing
   of the Police? - A. It was not only within their hearing.
   It was visually obvious, I would have thought.

Q. You were in fact dealing with the criticisms that you were
   telling us about, about the fact there were too many people
   in the pen? - A. Yes.

Q. You were at least half way up the pen, were you not? - A. Yes.

Q. And you may well have heard what was being said by those
   around you? - A. There was chanting.




                                / Q. Chanting. - A. Yes.
                                      88

                                                              G. PHILLIPS

Q.   Chanting?       A.     Yes.

Q.   Chanting what?         A.        May     I?

Q.   Vesi     A.     They were chanting                 that it was a shitty   ground.

Q.   That was coming       from this terrace,              was it?    A.     Yes.

Q.   What   time was      that coming?             A.     Before kick-off.

Q.   Be fore kick-off?           A.        Yes.

Q.   Are you sure  that was not something you,heard coming from the
     Spion Kop atthe other end after kick-off?     A.   I am
     absolutely sure.

Q.    How long did     this go on for?  A.   I can't remember clearly
     but certainly     the chant was repeated numerous times.

Q.    That is not terribly specific about what the problem was,
     though, is it?     A. Well, no, it isn't but  I think it
     d emonstrated that people were very uncomfortable.    I
     don't know what was being said at the perimeter fence
     to Policemen there.

Q.    You have no idea?   A.   I wasn't within earshot                       and there
     was too much crowd noise anyway.

Q.   So you could not help            us as to whether          the Police heard
     anything or ---?   A.              No.

Q.   You remember, I think, a tannoy announcement.     Can you say
     when that was?   A.   I vaguely remember.    I couldn't be
     clear about that but I have this vague recollection that
     there was an announcement made requesting that Liverpool
     fans move away from the tunnel to make more room for people
     coming in, and by that time we were very, very tightly
     packed and there was nowhere to go.    We were not only being
     packed forwards but also sideways towards the radial fence.
     My younger brother was pressed uncomfortably and dangerously
     against that fence.

Q.   You say the game started and you saw the start                        of the game
     anyway, did you not?    A.  Yes.

Q. Did you notice then any increase in pressure?     A.   It
   is very difficult because there were repeated and regular
   increases ■; in pressure but, no, I didn't feel any surge as
   such .

Q.   Were y o u a b l e to see the occasion when Mr.                 Beardsley      nearly
     scored a goal?        A.  No.

Q. Did you see anything happening down at the front after the
   game started?    A.   Yes.  It seemed within a short time.
   I felt that the game had lasted something like, well, I
   think I said I remember 15 or 20 seconds.    Certainly 6
   minutes seemed a long time.   I remember seeing ----  I was
                                89

                                                       G. PHILLIPS

     watching the Police at the front rather than the game as
     well as looking after myself and my brother and I specifically
     remember a Policeman by the gate, the perimeter fence gate,
     looking extremely concerned down at fans in front of him and
     he had attempted at least once or twice to yank somebody
     out and it was obviously impossible because there was nobody
     being pulled out.

Q.   The gate was open.    A.        By then,   yes.

Q. Can you give us any idea how long after the game started
   that the gate was opened?   A.   I mean, I cannot give you
   an accurate answer to that.    I assume it was within minutes.

Q.   You were conscious, though, of the game only being on for a
     few seconds before this?   A.   Yes.  The game by then was
     irrelevant.

Q.   The Police did start trying to get people           out but had some
     difficulty;  that is what you are saying,           is it not?
     A.   That was the impression I got, yes.

Q.   You did not see any sort of falling or pile of bodies              down
     at the bottom of the pen?   A.  Inside the pen?

Q.   Inside the pen.   A.  No, because of the angle of the
     terrace and the crush that we were in, it was impossible
     to make that out.

Q.   You, I think,   stayed in the pen until after         the match    stopped,
     did you not?     A.   Yes.

Q. And you then got out of the pen by going over into the next
   pen, No. 2, is that right?   A.   That's correct, we climbed
   over the radial fence.

Q.   Were you not able at that time, which was about 5%/6              minutes
     past three, were you not able to go backwards up the              terrace?
     A.   No.

Q. What was preventing you going back up the terrace?
   A.   Other fans, there was too many.

Q.   There were still other people there?   A.   Yes.  Gradually
     as more and more people climbed sideways over that radial
     fence the pressure decreased where we were.

Q.   But you still nevertheless went and climbed over the fence.
     A.  Yes, at one point.   For a short while, because the
     pressure was decreasing I thought -- I felt that the problem
     was being alleviated but somebody on the other side of
     the fence began getting very distraught and shouting at
     us to get over because people were getting squashed and
     crushed at the front.

Q.   So you did?   A.   So more and more people climbed over and
     eventually I was able to get to the fence and get over.
                               90

                                                      G. PHILLIPS

Q.   So when you got over the fence into Pen 2, how long after
     the stopping of the match was this?   A.  I have no idea.
     By then I had lost track of time but I assume within a
     couple of minutes;  it could have been longer, though.
     I certainly wasn^t watching my watch by then.

Q.   Of course, but then you went off through the pen on to the
     pitch, did you not?   A.   Yes.

Q. And you tried to put into effect your own skills as a
   doctor.   A.   Tried, yes.

Q.   You must therefore have been on the pitch one would suppose
     at the very earliest at, say, 10 past 3.   A.   I would think
     so, yes.

Q. And it may be after that.           A.    It may be,    yes.

Q.    Of course, by the time you got out       on tothe pitch    then,
     there were a good number of people        who had been brought
     out of Pen 3.     A.  That's right,       yes.

Q.    And there were a number of people who were lying about,
     some of them in a very bad condition.     A.   Yes.

Q.    Some of them already   dead.      A.   Yes.

Q.    I think you tried toihelp as much as you could, did you not,
     with one particular patient?     A.  That's right, yes.
     Virtually the first person I got to was obviously either
     severely collapsed or dead in the sense that his heart
     had stopped and in actual fact his heart had stopped
     and he was not breathing.

Q.    And you worked   on    him     for a considerable period of time?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   I think you said in your statement something of the order
     of 15 minutes.  A.   It may have been as much as that.
     It i s very di f f i cul t to be precise because of the circumstances.

Q.   While you were working on him you were surrounded by other
     people, were you not, on the pitch?    A.   Yes.   Increasingly
     as I was on my knees alongside him, it got more and more
     densely packed and I virtually couldn't see for the legs
     and bodies stood up around me.

Q.   You really could not see what was happening           only a few yards
     away from you?   A.   No.

Q.   You had the assistance,    I think,     of a male    nurse,   did you
     not?   A.   Yes.

Q.    You were doing ---  A.   He was also a fan.            He wasn't
     there on duty or anything like that.

Q.    Yes, but he was still assisting you in doing what you were
     doing?    A.   Absolutely, yes, he was doing the cardiac
                               91

                                                     G. PHILLIPS

     massage and   I was ventilating     the man's lungs.

Q. So you had let it be known fairly readily that you were
   a doctor?   A.   Yes, I had let it be known as I actually
   attempted to get on the pitch through the perimeter gate.

Q.   What was the difficulty that you saw in the situation
     that you were in?    What did you want that you did not
     have?   A.   Well, we had a man there ---     I didn't know
     how many more c asualties there were.    At that time I
     had no idea of the scale of the disaster and I thought it may
     be a handful of people, you know, up to lO-maybe, that had
     been so badly crushed and it would have been, I felt, helpful
     if I could have got my hands on somebody with a d e- fibrillator
     from the Club or from an ambulance and it would have   helped
     if I had been able to get hold of some oxygen to try and
     enrich the air thatII was breathing into his lungs.

Q. So those were the two things that you wanted?        A.   Yes.
   I asked the Policeman,      "Could you please find out if there
   is a de-fibr il la to r and get some oxygen."

Q. Do you really think that it would have been safe to use
   a de-fibr il la to r out there on the pitch with all those
   people milling about?       A.   It is obviously something that
   I have considered over and over again since then and a d e ­
   fibrillator, I agree, is a potentially dangerous piece of
   equipment and should only be used by somebody competent to
   use it.

Q.   Yes, and in good circumstances, too.              A.   Yes.   I mean,
     you have got to have a positive diagnosis.             If you use it
     on somebody who is not in cardiac arrest, you stand a good
     chance of putting them into it, so I would assume that if
     a d e- fi br i l l a t o r had arrived it most likely or should have
     come with somebody who was trained to use it, either the
     Dlub doctor or a trained           para-medic ambulanceman.

Q.    Could you use   it?      A. I think in   an   emergency,   I probably
     could have done, yes.

Q.   Have you been trained to use one?         A.     I have used d e ­
     fibrillators in the past.

Q.    Have you been trained    to use them?    A.     That is part of
     my training.

Q.   Would you think it was nevertheless a sensible idea to try
     to use a de -f ib ri ll at or out there on the pitch with so
     many other people milling about?         A.   I think if the d e ­
     fibrillator was in the charge of a competent person and
     it was being used in the correct circumstances and in the
     correct manner, it would have been safe.

Q. But are not the correct circumstances those which in fact
   allow for nobody else to be within range of it, in the
   first place?   A.   Certainly nobody else should be touching
   the body, that's right.
Vs.fW
                                         92


                                                              G. PHILLIPS

            Q. And circumstances where the person itself upon whom it is
               being used is not in contact with any metal or any liquid,
               any moisture;  that is right, is it not?   A.   That
               certainly would be preferable, yes.

            Q. And surely the last place you would use a de -f ib ri ll at or is
               out there on the pitch with so many people milling about
               having just come out of Pen 3?   A.   I don't agree with
               that.

            Q.   You do not agree with that?       Do you think a sufficiently
                 clear space   could have been c l e a r e d ? A. Yes.

            Q.   That no-one   would come into accidental contact with it?
                 A.   Whoever was operating it has the ability to see
                 whether anybody is in contact with the body.     He has got
        ^        the control button in his hand and if there is anybody
                 near, you don't press it.

                      LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   Well,   there it is.

            Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:  Oxygen.      Did you get any oxygen
                 cylinder from anyone?   A.      Yes,I was provided with
                 an oxygen bottle.

            Q. By whom?        A.   By whom, I don't know.   I was too busy
               ventilating this man.        I was told, "Here is an oxygen
               b o t t l e . It is on."

            Q.   Can you say if it was St. John's or the Fire Brigade?
                 Ambulance?   A.   I d o n Tt know for definite but I can
                 tell you what I think.      I think it most likely came from
                 the St. John's Ambulance.

            Q.   Why do you   say that?   A.    I think   really   because   of the
                 speed with   which it arrived.

            Q.   The speed with which it arrived?   You mean as soon as you asked
                 for    it, it was provided to you?  A.Not as soon     as,
                 no, but it certainly was not longer than   5 minutes.

            Q.   But that was at a time when there were, in fact,if our
                 timings are right, quite probably Firemen there as well as
                 St. John's Ambulance people.    A.  I d o n Tt think there
                 were any Firemen there by then.

            Q.   Did you notice ---    If it was a St. John's bottle, I must
                 tell you that the Divisional Commander, Mr. Wells, has been
                 asked about this and has said in evidence that certainly the
                 bottle that he had was still half full at the end of the
                 episode and was working.    What did you expect the bottle
                 to be capable of doing?    A.   I expected it to be capable
                 of delivering oxygen.

            Q.   But under presure, so as to inflate the lungs, for example,
                 or simply as a giving bottle, whichpis all it was.
                 A.   T hat wasn't the type of bottle I was given, no.
                 I was given just a simple piece of equipment.    It certainly
       ,




                                         93

                                                               G. PHILLIPS

                wasn't designed to give positive pressure ventilation to
                somebody, and this iswhat I mean when I say     I used it.
                I attempted to use it  to enrich the air with   oxygen - the
                air that I was blowing into the patient's nose.

           Q.   Are you sure that   you looked at this properly,    this bottle?
                A.   Yes.

           Q.    You were in something   of an awkward situation?        A.   Yes.

           Q.    And under a great deal of pressure,   were you   not?
                A.   C ertainly was, yes, I agree.

           Q.   Well, there it is.   A.   Could I just state, as in my
                statement, that the valve was turned on.    I had the open
                tube in my mouth;  there was nothing coming out of the
                end of it and the gauge showed a needle at the bottom of
v-'x            the red.   If that bottle wasn't empty, then the only other
                alternative is that the master tank top valve was shut,
                in which case it might well have been empty.

           Q.   I do not think I can take that any further with you.   You
                continued working on the same patient, you say, for I think
                it was about altogether 15 minutes and eventually his heart
                started again.   A.   Yes.

           Q. And it was then possible to take him away from the field
              across to the gymnasium, was it not?   A.   No, I didn't
              state that.   That is not in my statement.

           Q.   I am sorry, you are quite right.   It was then possible
                to take him away from where he was to the ambulance?
                A.   That is correct, yes.

           Q.   There was an ambulance   there on the pitch,   was there?
                A.   There was.

           Q.   Was that a St.   John's or a County ambulance?   A.   I
                believe it was   St. John's, but that is just an assumption.

           Q.   Is it fair to say that until this situation had arisen
                and until you got his heart beating again, you could not
                really have moved him?   It would not have done any good
                to move him.   A.   There didn't seem to be much point
                because in moving him you would have had to have stopped
                the attempt at resuscitation.   You had to do one or the
                other and as we were doing adequate r es uscitation it
                seemed sensible to stay where we were and continue it.

           Q.   That's right.   You got him to the ambulance.     Was there
                some problem with the ambulance getting away?     A.    Yes.
                We had taken our time to get him because he still was not
                breathing spontaneously, although he had a good heartbeat
                by then, so we had to stop every few paces and me ventilate
                him and it was then, as I have stated, that it really b e g a n
                to hit home what was going on because we were literally
                stepping over bodies.   W e got him on the ambulance and
                there were two dead bodies already in there.
M3-
                                 94

                                                      G. PHILLIPS

      Q. Dead bodies?   A.   Yes, one on the floor and one on one
         of the couches inside.   We put this person we had assisted
         on the other one and I continued trying to ventilate -- well,
         I continued ventilating, not trying.    He was by then beginning
         to make spontaneous breathing efforts.    I said to a Policeman
         and the ambulance driver that quite obviously ---    What I
         said was, "This man is dangerously ill.   He needs to be in
         a hospital now" and the ambulanceman said he could not get
         out.

      Q. Did you see that?     Did you see any obstruction    to him getting
         out?   A.   Yes.     I mean, it was clear ---

      Q.    What?  A.It was bodies and people milling all around.
           I mean, it would have been necessary for a gangway to have
           been made for the ambulance to drive off.

      Q. Did the ambulance in fact get away, though?   A.   I
         think it did eventually but by then this person had begun
         to make reasonable breathing efforts and he was on his side
         and he was breathing and I said to the Policeman, "Get him
         there as quick as you can" and because of what I had seen
         I felt, having spent so long with him, it was then time
         to go and try and help somebody else.

      Q.   Can you give us any idea of how long the delay was between
           the ambulance being ready to go and it actually going?
           A.    N o , I can 11 .

      Q.   Then I think you joined in again trying to help as much
           as you could on the field.  A.   Yes.

      Q.   But you found, I think, that people were    either slightly
           injured or dead, completely dead?   A.      That was the
           impression I got.

      Q.   There were very few people in between?    A.   Yes, they
           were the people that naturally we would  be looking for,
           the dangerously ill who needed immediate treatment and
           I think my impression was by then it was too late for
           those.   There may have been some but I could not find
           anybody in that category.

      Q.   You got rather angry, did you not, on that day, it is
           fair to say, is it not?  A.   I think that is fair to
           say, yes.

      Q.   What was it particularly that made you angry, that induced
           you to go to speak to the press on that day?    A.   Really
           the whole scenario:   the way that we had been compressed like
           sardines in a pen;   the way that this appeared to be no
           s tewarding for safety reasons to get people to distribute
           more evenly, and then the failure of equipment to arrive
           that may have been of some benefit and I stress the word
           "may" and then, having been unable to find other people
           I may have been able to help, and then being unable to find
           out where the casualties had actually been taken to.
                                95
                                                        G. PHILLIPS

Q.   You seem to have formed a view, did you not - I think you
     said it in your statement - that this was the fault of
     the Police?   A.   Well, if I draw attention to my statement
     the word I used deliberately and the tense of the word is
     deliberate is I "knew" whose fault it was, because at that
     time I was certain in my mind that it was entirely a Police
     matter but on reflection there are obviously many, many
     factors involved.

Q.   Yes, of course.         So far as that is concerned, can you say
     if there is anybody who might have been saved but was not
     as a result of what you perceived as the inadequacies of
     the equipment from your point of view?                 A.   I can only
     say that there may have been because it may well be that
     the delay in getting people out of the terrace was too
     great and by then it was probably or possibly too late for
     them and it concerns me not that people would have been
     harmed by a d e - f i b r i l l a t o r , that in actual fact maybe some
     severely brain -d am ag ed people may have been revived and
     we would now have a great number of still unconscious,
     permanently brain -d am ag ed fans.

Q.   You, of course, were very heavily taken up with the first
     casualty that you came to for that 15 minutes or so after
     you got on to the pitch?   A.   Yes.

Q.   So during that 15 minutes it is fair to say, is it not,
     Dr. Phillips, that if anybody had been in a bad condition
     or if they had been :crushed so that they could no longer
     breathe, 15 minutes later it would be too late, would it
     not?   A.    That is a distinct possibility, yes.




                                          /You have heard.
                              96

                                                    G. PHILLIPS


Q. You have heard figures of 4 minutes and 8 minutes? - A.
   Certainly, yes.  If they had not been breathing for that time
   then it was hopeless, I agree.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q.   Dr. Phillips, may I just ask you a couple questions about the
     use of the defibrillator as you appear to be familiar with it.
     It is right in addition to being certain that the patient is
     in fibrillation you have got to be certain of the type of
     fibrillation? There is a course and fine fibrillation, is not
     there? - A. Usually in cardiac arrest one of two situations
     exists.  There may be absolutely no fibrillation and it may
     actually be asystolic.

Q.   Asystolic is just astraight     line, is not it, on the machine?
     - A. That is right.

Q. Would you use a defibrillator in those circumstances? - A.
   Yes.

Q.   You would? - A. Yes.

Q.   What would that achieve? - A.It may actually achieve the
     object.  It may restore them to cyanosed rhythmn or it
     may actually put them into ventricular fibrillation, in
     which case a repeated jolt of defibrillation may put
     them into cyanosed rhythmn.

Q. Is not the better management of somebody who is in
   asystole what you did in fact, cardio pulmonary
   resuscitation? - A. That should always go on anyway.  You
   can't rely entirely on that.  That must continue between
   attempts at defibrillation.

Q. Assuming that most of the people who unfortunately were
   injured in this crush were fit and reasonably healthy, and
   suffering from hypoxia, hypoxic death, is not there a chance
   that most of would have been in asystole rather than in
   ventricular fibrillation?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am sorry, did you say anoxia or
     hypoxia?

          MR. KALLIPETIS:   Hypoxia.     Hypoxic death.    In other
     words, lack of oxygen.

          THE WITNESS:      You are suggesting they would have been in
     asystole?

Q.      MR. KALLIPETIS:   Yes.  More than likely the majority of
   them would have been? - A. I d o n ’t know I am qualified to
   answer that.  You think you would have to ask a cardiologist,
   but I think it is reasonable to assume that they may have
first of all gone into VF and then asystole.

Q. Just look at this chart, please, Dr. Phillips.         You may not be
                               97
                                                    G. PHILLIPS


        able to help us with it, but if you can please try. (Chart
        handed to witness) Do you recognise any of those? - A. These
        are all ECG tracings, I assume.

     Q. Yes.  What is the first one? - A. The first one demonstrates a
        patient in cardiac arrest most likely who is fibrillating. I
        don't really see the point of drawing a distinction between
        the types of fibrillation.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am wondering where the whole of
        this is taking us, quite frankly.

             MR. KALLIPETIS:   I can do it in two sentences, sir:

     Q. Dr. Phillips, would you have used the defibrillator in all of
        these conditions? - A. This is not a condition.  This is a
—s      piece of paper.
o    Q. I am sorry.  Short circuit.  The conditions as revealed by
        these readings? - A. This does not reveal anything.  I want to
        see what the patient looks like.  Has he got a palpable heart
        beat?

     Q. The point is this, you can see that for example the
        distinction between 4 and 5 is very fine, is not it? - A. Yes.

     Q. 4 is in fact a ventricular fibrillation and 5 is merely a
        loose lead on the machine.  You see the point? - A. These
        traces are not coming off a defibrillator.  They are coming, I
        presume, from an ECG machine.

     Q. No, no, they come from the defibrillator which prints a read­
        out.  That is what you have to monitor before you use the
        machine.  In a crowded situation that Mr. Phillips described
        to you don't you think it would be very difficult to
        distinguish between 4 and 5, for example? - A. I don't think
        you would have been attempting to use the defibrillator as a
        diagnostic method unless you had a collapsed patient who you
        were fairly certain was in cardiac arrest.

     Q. How do you know what his heart pattern is before you apply the
        paddles of the defibrillator if you don't take the reading
        first? - A. I don't see the point of that.

     Q. The point is simply this, Dr. Phillips, before you use a
        defibrillator you have got to make sure the patient is in the
        right condition for it, and that means taking a reading of his
        heart beat or the absence of it? - A. That is not entirely
        true, because there are defibrillators that don't give a read
        out, in which case you use them purely on clinical grounds.

             MR. KALLIPETIS:   Sir, I don't think I need take this
        point very much further.  With the crowded conditions on that
        pitch, you have heard the evidence from people who are trained
        to use these machines, and I think Dr. Phillips would concede
        that somebody would have to come who was trained to use i t ,
        and you have heard the evidence from those people.
                             98
                                                    Q. PHILLIPS



          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, thank you.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Just help me on this, please, Dr.
     Phillips.  The ambulance to which you took the patient on whom
     you had been working for 15 minutes, that was behind the goal
     I think, was not it? - A. That is right, yes.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q.   Dr. Phillips, you went into pen 3? - A. Yes.

Q.   And having got into pen 3 you perceived there    was quite a
     crowd of people in it? - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage if you had wanted to what was there to prevent
   you from returning and retracing your path if you did not like
   what you found? - A. There was nothing to prevent it, but I
   did not know there was any other way on to the terrace.

Q.   But you got on to the terrace, and does it follow from your
     continued path across the terrace to where you took up a
     position that was by choice? - A. Yes.

Q. The position you took up was towards the right-hand side of
   pen 3? - A . Y e s .

Q. And were you actually by the crush barrier you described?
   Were you up against the crush barrier? - A. No, we were not up
   against it.

Q.   You were to the rear of that? - A. Yes.

Q.   And some distance from the radial fence? - A. Yes.

Q.   How far were you from the fence? Can you remember? - A. A
     matter of yards.   Between 3 and 5. About 5 yards, probably.

Q. Did that put you towards the left-hand end of the barrier you
   described, or towards the fence side of the barrier? - A. I
   could not see the barrier.

Q.   You were not aware of   the barrier? - A. No, I was not.

Q.   How do you know where you were in relation to it? - A. Because
     as my statement says, I and one of the people I was with when
     we went across to the right ended up further down the terrace
     from my brother and my friend, and having looked up we saw
     where they were and we made our way up to them, and to get to
     them we had to actually crawl under that barrier.  That is how
     I knew there was a barrier there.

Q. What I want to ask you about shortly is your experience whilst
   you were in that position, and so far as you could see it what
   was happening in the crowd around you.  According to your
   statement you were not aware, being in that position, of any
   particular surge coming upon you.  Is that right? - A. Not a
                             99

                                                   G. PHILLIPS


     surge.   An increase in pressure.

Q.   A steady build up in pressure? -A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And is that really the extent of your experience whilst     you
     were on that terrace? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you witness any surge in the immediate proximity?      - A. No.

Q.   You would be generally aware of the crowd around    you? - A.
     Yes.

Q. So the evidence you would have the Inquiry accept is that from
   the time you were on that terrace in that sort of position
   there was no sudden surge which affected you or the people
   around you? - A. Yes.

Q. How long were you in that position for? - A. From reaching
   that point until climbing over?

Q. Yes? - A. I am fairly soon we got to that position by about
   2.20, at the most 2.30, and as I have said I am not sure when
   I climbed over the fence, but it could have been round about
   10-past-3.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you, doctor.

                         FERENC MORATH Called

                       Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

Q . Are you Ferenc Morath? - A . Y e s ,I a m .

Q.   Living in London but a supporter of Leeds?    - A. Yes,   that is
     right.
Q.   And Mr. Morath, you got in touch with us as a result ofhaving
     been at the 1987 Semi-Final between Coventry and Leeds.   Is
     that right? - A. That is correct.

Q.   And appreciating that there were a number of  similarities on
     that occasion with what happened this year? - A. I thought
     there were similarities.   It is subject to you to decide.

Q.   On the occasion of the 1987 Semi-Final you came from London by
     coach. Is that right? - A. Correct.

Q.    And you were one of those affected by the delays on the     Ml? -
     A . Yes.

Q. What time did you actually get off your coach in Sheffield? -
   A. I can't remember the time, actually.

Q. Do you know how long before the kick-off it was? - A. The
   reason I can't remember the specific times was because the
   game actually kicked off early.  It was played on a Sunday
   because Leeds were playing, and it was the second Cup fixture
^     ■
                                      100
                                                                 G. PHILLIPS


               on the trot which they switched to a Sunday because of the
               reputation of the Leeds supporters, and also they kicked off
               the match early.  I can't remember what time it kicked off.

          Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      12 o'clock we have been told, I
               think.

          Q.        MR. GOLDSACK:   It should have  been 12 o'clock but it was
               put back to 12.15. - A. We actually got off the coach
               something like 12 o'clock.

          Q. Did you then approach the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Which way did you come down Leppings Lane? - A. We would        come
               down the hill which I think is from the north side.

          Q. Is that over the bridge or down - did you approach with the
    k_J      entrance on your left? - A. Yes.

          Q.     Were you checked at all  for tickets? - A.We were checked
               twice, as I said in my statement.  When we got off the coach
               we had them checked.

          Q. What about in Leppings Lane itself? - A. When I got off the
             coach, and actually coming down Leppings Lane, I would
             estimate about 200 yards up Leppings Lane, and what happened
             then, some of us got checked for tickets and some did not.
             The Police seemed to be doing it at random along Leppings
             Lane.  I did actually have my ticket checked a second time
             in Leppings Lane.

          Q.    Was that just individual Police Officers coming up to you and
               saying, "Have you got a ticket?”? - A. No, they actually had a
               few of them in little groups.    It was not exactly forming a
               line across Leppings Lane, but there were little groups.    They
               seemed to be doing it reasonably systematically for the number
               of people whose tickets they wanted to check.

          Q. What did you find when you got near to the turnstiles? - A. As
             I got down to Leppings Lane to the turnstile it was literally
             no organisation at all outside the ground.  There were just
             people, a big mass of people outside the turnstiles trying to
             get in.

          Q.   Can you recall the perimeter    gates? - A. No.

          Q.    Look at our plan over there.  You see where the perimeter
               gates are, and you can see where the pavement and road merge.
               How far back was the mass ofpeople? - A. I guess from that it
               is just past the perimeter gates.  It would have been packed
               from the perimeter gates to the actual turnstiles.

          Q. Were there any Police Officers trying to bring control to the
             situation? - A. The only ones I saw were actually right by the
             turnstiles.  There were none of them as you entered or got to
             the back of the mass of people.  It was only as you started
             getting close by the turnstiles there seemed to be any sort of
                           101
                                                  F. MORATH


     control over the situation.

Q. How long did it actually take you on that occasion to get
   through the turnstiles? - A. I can't remember.  It was two
   years a g o .

Q.   Was it several minutes? -A. Yes, it was.

Q.   Did you know the ground once you got inside?   Had   you been
     there before? - A. I had.

Q.   But not to say you know it? -   A. Not to say I know it at all.

Q.   I think in fact you made your   way through the tunnel under the
     stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Why did you go through there? - A. Because that was the only
   way I thought you could get on to the terrace.

Q.   What was the state in the tunnel?      - A. That again wasjust a
     mass of people.   The bulk of them were trying to push   their
     way into the ground.   By the time I got off the coach and got
     through the turnstile the kick off had started.     Even though
     it was delayed we were still delayed further than that.     So
     there was a mass of people actually running from the turnstile
     to what they saw was the nearest entrance which was underneath
     the stand.   There was a mass of people pushing through the
     tunnel to get on to the terracing.    What I thought was
     particularly peculiar, and I mentioned in my statement, there
     was a small number of people, mainly I assume their dads with
     younger sons or daughters, who were coming in the opposite
     direction.

Q. Coming back out through the tunnel? - A. Trying to.  It was
   very difficult for them because the vast bulk of the people
   were trying to get in.

Q.   Did you get to the end of the    tunnel yourself?        -   A. Yes,I
     did.

Q. Did you then discover why some people had been trying to come
   back out? - A. Yes, if I had had a young child I would not
   have wanted to.  I would have tried to bring them out as well.

Q.   Why was that? - A. Because of the crush.

Q.   How far down into the terrace    did you go? - A.     I   near enou
     stayed at the top for most of the first half.   I managed to
     get down a few steps. As I said in my statement, Leeds nearly
     scored soon after I got through the tunnel, and I managed to
     get down a few steps.  There was a surge at that point, and
     that allowed me a few steps.   So being 6 foot odd I could see
     reasonably comfortably from the back of the terracing.

Q. Was that the position you remained in for the first half? - A.
   Ye s , it w a s .
"7   ■




                                    102

                                                          F. MORATH


         Q. Tell us physically how restrained you were? - A. It was
            extremely tightly packed in there.  It was so packed,
            particularly at the start.  It started to lessen as the end of
            the first half approached, but it was so packed you could not
            even clap your hands within that particular part I was in.

         Q. I think you were   able to see from your position that over to
            your left it was   a lot less crowded? - A. Yes.  When I said
            over to the left   I meant on the extreme left.  I could not
            actually see the   adjacent section to my left.

         Q. You mean the raised area in the left-hand corner? - A. Yes.

         Q. I think at halftime you came back out of the tunnel? - A. That
            is right.

         Q. And found out how to get to  the other terrace? - A. Yes.   I
            overheard one Leeds supporter while waiting in the queue to
            get a drink, he was telling  one of his friends that there was
            space there and how you get in there.

         Q. Once you had gone into the north-west terrace for the second
            half were you comfortable there? - A. Yes, it was
            extremely comfortable.  It was comfortable to the point there
            was so much room there even when I went in there was literally
            space all round me, even after I had moved in after halftime.

         Q. When you had gone in through the turnstiles on that occasion
            had you seen any stewards between the turnstiles and the
            entrance to the tunnel? - A. I c a n ’t remember now.

         Q.   One way or the other? - A. No.

         Q.   What about Police Officers in that area?   - A. Yes, there were
              definitely police Officers.

         Q. Were they doing anything at that stage? - A. Nothing.     They
            were just standing there.

         Q. Even at halftime when you came back out of the tunnel, did you
            find any sign which told you where else you could go to
            stand? - A. No, the only reason I knew how to get into the
            corner section was because I overhead somebody else talking
            about it.

                            Cross-Examined by MR. JACKSON:

         Q.   Mr. Morath, just one matter.  You were aLeeds supporter
              arriving at kick-off time in 1987? - A. Well, I actually
              arrived at the ground slightly late.   I missed the kick-off.

         Q. And although the kick-off had been delayed because the
            Coventry fans had been delayed on the motorway, they were
            using the Spion Kop? - A. That is correct.

         Q. So in 1987 for no reason that you know, the Leeds fans did not
            get on to the Leppings Lane terraces until after quarter-past-
                         103

                                               F. MORATH


   3 - forgive me - after quarter-past kick-off time? - A. Yes.
   The reason I said in my statement it was delayed because of
   the Coventry fans was because we were told that by the Police.
   They stopped our coach to search us for drink when we came off
   the motorway, and they actually told us that and said not to
   worry about being slightly late because the kick-off was being
   delayed because of the Coventry fans.

Q. And so the position was at kick-off time, the Semi-Final two
   years before, the Leppings Lane turnstiles were blocked from
   turnstile to perimeter gate? - A. I would not say that is
   definitely the exact place, but I guess at that approximately.

Q. Taking about 15 minutes for someone who arrived to get into
   the ground? - A. I would not so it was as long as 15,
   actually.

Q. How long would you say? - A. Between 5 and 10.




                               /Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW
SBD                                     104
XI
                                                          F. MORATH

                   Cr oss-examined by MR.     GLASGOW

      Q.   When you came out of the tunnel at half time can you
           remember whether there were any police officers standing
           at the back of the terrace in the entrance to the tunnel?
           A. No, there was not.

      Q.   Did you see any police officers at any time in or around the
           tunnel? A. No, the last ones I saw would be as you came
           through the turnstyle going into the ground, there were
           police hanging around on the other side of the turnstyle
           after you had gone in. There were none to the entrance of
           the tunnel and there were none as you actually got through
           the other side of the tunnel either.

      Q.   To be fair to you you have not been here.   We have been
            told the system about the filling the the pens which I need
            not bother you with.  The system involved a number of police
            officers coming in at the start of the game and standing
            at the back of the terrace in the entrance to the tunnel.
            Does that help you at all?  Did you ever see anything like
            that?  A. No, I did not see any police at the back of the
            tunnel when I was there.

      Q.   You probably cannot help with this but let me try.   Do you
            know how long the game had been going for when you first
            entered the terrace? A. No, I am afraid not because I was
            not even sure what time it kicked off.

      Q.   But the game was     well in progress by the time you first got
            sight of it?  A.     Again, I have no idea how long it had been
            going for when I     got in.  I just knew what the score was,
            that is the only     thing.

      Q.   Thank    you very much.

               C ross -examined      by MR.   WOO DWARD

      Q.   Mr. Morach, you were delayed on this occasion and did not get
           to Sheffield out of the coach until 12 o ’clock? A. That is
           what I have been told, yes.

      Q.   You got as quickly as you could down to Leppings Lane to the
           turnstyles? A. That is correct.

      Q.   You have spoken of seeing police officers as you went along
            When you say you were asked for your ticket or whether you
            had got a ticket was that just by an odd policeman or an
            individual policeman who was standing on the pavement as
            you went along? A. No, as I have said before there were
            actually a small group of them.  There were about three
            small groups stretched across the road.  They did not
            actually form a line across the road but they seemed to
            have some co-ordinated action of asking for tickets.
SBD
12                               105
                                                     F. MORATH

      Q.   Why do you say that, this co-ordinated action, what gave
            you that view? A. I just assumed there were approximately
            three groups of three across the road and it could not
            have been coincidence that all of them were asking people
            for tickets at that particular spot of the road.  I assumed
            it was a co-ordianted action by the police.

      Q.   In your statement you said this check was more of a token
            gesture. A. Yes, in the sense that if you did not have a
            ticket it was quite easy for you to slip through.

      Q.   It seems a rather pointless exercise, if it was an exercise.
           A. I could not understand why they did it, I can only
           comment on what actually happened.

      Q.   On your route to the ground you were in a hurry but you may
           have been stopped by a policeman, perhaps he was with another
           policeman, who asked you whether you had a ticket, and that
           really is what it comes to? A. No, because I was not the
           only one stopped.   There were a number of us.   There were
           two coach fulls   of people and there were some of us who went
           down together.    We all   got off the coach and went down the
           road together.  You could notice distinctly that some of
           us were stopped and some of us were not.

      Q.   Leppings Lane was clear enough for you to observe this
            happening? A. Yes, the actual part where I came down.

      Q.   How far down Leppings Lane was it from the entrance to
            the gate, to the ground, that this happened?
             - A. I cannot remember that after two years now.

      Q.   There were not any barriers across   the road,    were       there?
            A. No, nothing like that at all.

      Q.   What you are describing is groups of policemen talking to
            and asking people? A. Yes, that is correct.

      Q.   You were in a hurry   to get into the ground?    A.   Yes,    I was.

      Q.   When you got down to the Leppings Lane gate I think you said
            it took you about five minutes to get through the turnstyles.
            A. I estimated five to ten m i n t u e s .

      Q.   Is that the five to  ten minutes, is that a fair measure of
            the extent of the crowd? A. I could not guess, quite honestly.
            Until I saw this model today I did not even know how many
            turnstyles there were.   Secondly, I had no gauge Q f how
            many people that represents.

      Q.   Is not this just a recollection on the occasion in 1987 of
           you being late for    the game and wanti ng to get inthere
           quickly?  A. It    is not particularly because since I have
           been married I do not actually attend that many football
           matches.  I specifically went because it was the semi-final
           and because I live in London I only get to see Leeds playing
           in London nowadays. When I do go to see them, which is quite
           rarely, I do tend to have a reasonable recollection of what
SBD
X3                                   106

                                                         F. MORATH

           what happens,   because   it is quite rare.

      Q.   Did you have any difficulty in getting into the turnstyle
            doorway? A. Yes, because that is the reason the police were
            round.  There were police specifically round the turnstyles
            because they were specifically trying to stop the people
            being crushed on to the walls rather than going in through
            the turnstyles Or on to bars by the turnstyles.      What was
            happening is the police were letting some people go in and
            they were letting them go through quicker.    You were actually
            stuck with your ticket, it was not always being ripped off.
            When the two policemen took my statement they actually
            said it was quite normal practice for Hill sb oro ug h in order
            to speed passage through the turnstyles when there were too
            many people coming at once.

      Q.   Did this experience that you had o f going through the t u r n ­
           styles upset you? A. Nor particularly, no.

      Q.   Cause you any concern?    A. No,   it is not that uncommon.

      Q.   What you experienced that day was not particularly uncommon?
            A. In terms of crushing outside the turnstyles no it was
            not.

      Q.   Would it be right to say that what you experienced in 1987
           was fairly typical of your experience? A. No, I would not
           say that either.  It is not normal to have that type of
           crushing outside turnstyles but at the same time it is not
           that uncommon either.

      Q.   You went into the ground and made your way      down the tunnel?
            A. That is correct, yes.

      Q.   Were you intent on standing behind the goal?    Is that where
            you would have liked to be? A. I did not mind.

      Q.   Is that where you would have liked to go if you could?
           A. I had no preference.  X just wanted to see the game and
           it did not mean anything to me where I stood.  It does
           not bother me.

      Q.   Once you got to the end of the tunnel were you surprised by
           the extent of the crowd on the terrace? A. I was not when I
           actually arrived at the terrace.  I was surprised at the
           number of people when I first arrived at the tunnel.  I
           thought having got there late I would be able to go straight
           on to the terrace.

      Q.   Having got on to the terrace were you surprised at the
            density of the crowd there? A. No, because I was expecting
            it to be packed by the fact of having to wait in the tunnel
            for a while for people to push forwards.

      Q.   It was the sort of crowd you expected to encounter        there?
            A. I am sorry?
SBD
                                     107
X4

                                                           F. MORATH

      Q.   Was it the sort of crowd you expected to encounter,
            on the terrace? A. No, it was actually worse than I
            did expect.

      Q.   If it did not matter to you from where you watched the game
           was there anything to prevent you re-tracing your steps,
           if what you say is right? A. I had not realized there was
           any other entrance to the turnstyle.  I had assumed that
           was the only entrance to the whole terrace.

      Q.   Did it occur to you at that stage to think about it?  Did
           you give it any more thought, having got on to the terrace?
           A. I do not really know what you are asking.  I am sorry.

      Q.   If the crowd was more than you expected, denser than you
           expected, and it did not matter to you from where you
           watched the game, did it occur to you to go somewhere else?
           A. I just assumed that it was much the same wherever I
           went, given that was the only entrance I saw at that time,
           by the time I had noticed it was emptying out to the left.

      Q.   How long had you been on the terrace by the time you          observed
            that? A. I do not remember that.

      Q.   Was it within a few moments of getting there? A. No.   Certainly
            I had been at the ground for some time and had been
            wat ching the game. It was most probably when there was a
            corner in that side of the ground that I noticed.

      Q.   Did it occur to you then to move, to come out and try to
            get to the other end? A. No, because that would have meant
            that I would have had to come out of the ground and miss
            some of the game.

      Q.   Very well.   Thank you.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You did say in a letter that you wrote
           that you wrote that when the surge took place when Leeds
           nearly scored this led to crushing and minor injury.    Is
           that right? A. Yes.

      Q.   I think you have mentioned people being injured.  What
           injuries did you notice?  Did you receive any yourself?
           A. It was people who were either hitting heads or legs or
           arms on crash barriers or people getting sprained ankles
           from the surge.

      Q.   There were complaints of that near you, were there? A. There
            were complaints.  It was difficult to see what was actually
            happening.

      Q.   Have you been back to that      ground since?   A. No,   I would
           not go back any more now.

      Q.   Thank you very much.      We will break off now.      10 o'clock
           tomorrow.

                   The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a.m.
                            the following morning)
