                                                         (Ltv

                                                                A*

                                               HOME OFFICE
                                        Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                Direct line: 01-273    _
                                              Switchboard: 01-273 3000 J


Our reference:
Your reference:




   L T Barnfield Esq
   Solicitor
   West Midlands Police Authority
   Council House
   Dudley
   DY1 1HF                                    1 june 1989




                   ej&M.
   HILLSBOROUGH : POWER TO MEET COSTS

   At the meeting between the West Midlands Police Authority and Lord
   Ferrers on 25 May, I undertook to obtain legal advice on the
   suggestion that the West Midlands Police Authority had no authority
   to pay bills incurred during the police inquiries following the
   Hillsborough disaster.

  We have now consulted the Home Office Legal Adviser's Branch. They
  can understand that the West Midlands Police may be reluctant to
  incur costs which are arguably unconnected with their own policing
  function without a firm undertaking that the costs will be met by
  another body.    But that seems to be a different matter from
  claiming that they have no power to meet such costs; particularly
  when the costs have alreadybeen incurred.    Certainly it would be
  no defence to a claim brought by a Sheffield hotelier in respect of
  accommodation booked by the West Midlands Police that that force
  had no power to pay.

  The Home Office Legal Adviser's Branch can see no distinction
  between accommodation costs and other costs arising out of the
  investigation, all    of which can be recovered from the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority.

  We are of course     looking   into the other matters which the
  deputation raised with Lord Ferrers and will be in touch in due
  course.   This letter meets Lord Ferrers' undertaking to write as
  soon as possible about the bills.    It seems to us that the best
  course would be for your Authority to pay these and to recover the
  costs from the South Yorkshire Police Authority.
E.R.
    I am sending copies of this letter to the Clerk to the West
    Midlands Police Authority, the Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police
    Authority and to Mr Dear.



                                                              \




                                             M J ADDISON




*
