Mr Hoplev




HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO POLICING OF FOOTBALL
HOOLIGANISM:  GOVERNMENT RESPONSE


Thank you for your note of 10 April with a copy of the draft
response.  I have a few small points.

2.   In paragraph 3 of the introduction and in response to
recommendation 39, the draft describes the Government's amendments
to the Football (Offences) Bill as 'strengthening' the Bill.   One
of the amendments was to prevent the Bill widening courts' power
to impose attendance centre orders.  I imagine that the Bill's
sponsors felt that that this provision of the Bill would
strengthen courts' ability to deal with football offenders.  It
does seem rather odd, therefore, to suggest that this amendment
had this effect.

3.   In the second paragraph of the response to recommendation 44,
in the second line 'sentence' should be 'sentencing', and in the
fourth line 'remind' should be 'reminds', or perhaps 'reminded'.

4.      In recommendation 24,   'law-abiding'   is missing a letter.




                                                    G SUTTON
                                                    15 April 1991


C1 Division




DS364
'




    4 - 4 .AH



    From:         K Hopley                cc   Mr Boys Smith
                  F8 Division                  Mr Goddard
                  Ext. 2367                    Mr Hale
                                               Miss Pugh
                  10 April 1991                Mr Dent
                                               Mr George (GMP/ACPO)

    Mr Bolton
    Mrs Catto
    Mr Grant
    Mr Hickson
    Mr Jordan
    Mr Storr
    Dr P Young
    Mr Kornicki
    Mr G Sutton
    Mr Butler (CPS)
    Mr Baden (DES SARD)
    Mr McPherson (Scottish Office)
    Mr Walker (H M T )



    HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE INQUIRY INTO POLICING OF FOOTBALL
    HOOLIGANISM: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE

    I am most grateful to everyone for responding to John
    Goddard's minute of 15 February seeking contributions to the
    Government's response to the Report of the Home Affairs
    Committee on policing football hooliganism.


    2.      I now attach a consolidated draft response.   I should be
    grateful if you would check the appropriate sections to the
    ensure that, in trying to cohere a common and fluent style, I
    have not inadvertently rejected anything of substance or
    interpreted incorrectly your observations.      In particular, I
    should be grateful i f :


            (i)   Mr McPherson could advise as to whether there has
                  been any progress on the appointment of an officer
                  from a Scottish force to the NFIU (Recommendation
                  23);
      (ii)   Mr Kornicki would look at my editing of the response
             to Recommendation 33, where I might have
             misinterpreted the current position; and


     (iii)   Mr Bolton would advise whether my contraction of
             G 2 1s draft response to Recommendation 51 has left
             the sense in tact.


3.     I should be grateful for responses by noon on 19 A p r i l .
Nil returns may be telephoned to Mrs Henry on Ext.        3031.
Assuming that there are no major difficulties, we will put up
the draft response to Ministers here the following week.          We
intend to invite our Ministers to clear the draft with the
Minister for Sport but not to seek Ministerial clearance more
widely.      If, however, others believe that their Ministers
would wish to be involved, perhaps they would be kind enough
to advise me.




                                            KEIR HOPLEY
1-4.AH



RESPONSE BY THE GOVERNMENT TO THE SECOND REPORT FROM THE HOME
AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (SESSION 1990-91): POLICING FOOTBALL
HOOLIGANISM


1.   This Memorandum gives the Government's response to the
Home Affairs Committee’s Report on Policing Football
Hooliganism.


2.   The Government is grateful to the Committee for
undertaking such a thorough investigation into this subject
and welcomes its Report.   Football hooliganism has been a
major problem over the last few years.    Whilst the
difficulties it still causes should not be underestimated,
action taken by the Government is reducing the scale of the
problem.   The Committee's contribution to the thinking about
policing football hooliganism is an important one which will
be reflected in the debates and measures being taken over the
coming months.   The football clubs and authorities will also
find much meat in the Committee's Report.


3.   On publication of their Report,   the Committee took the
unusual step of introducing,   in the name of its chairman,   a
Private Member's Bill,   the Football (Offences) Bill, to give
effect to three of the four offences recommended for creation
by Lord Justice Taylor in the Final Report of his Inquiry into
the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (Command 962).       The
Government welcomed that Bill, provided strengthening
amendments which were accepted by the Standing Committee
considering the Bill, and supports its passage into law, which
should be in time for the new football season.     The Government
intends to bring forward legislation to outlaw ticket touting
at football matches,   the fourth offence recommended by Lord
Justice Taylor, as soon as Parliamentary time permits.


4.   The Government welcomes particularly the Committee's
recognition of the valuable work being undertaken by the
National Football Intelligence Unit.   It too regards the Unit
as a "fine example of police work", one which has had major
impact on reducing the scale of the problem of football
hooliganism.


5.   The Government is already taking action in many of the
areas covered by the Report and will do so on others shortly.
A detailed response to each of the recommendations follows.
HAC RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   We believe that the press ought to exercise much greater
responsibility when reporting football hooliganism.


The Government deplores irresponsible reporting of hooligan
behaviour and hopes the industry will respond to the Committee's
recommendation, which the Government endorses.


2.   We recommend a determined effort by all football clubs to
make a much higher standard of facilities available to fans.


The Government welcomes this recommendation, which is in tune with
Lord Justice Taylor's view that improved facilities will enhance
safety and encourage better behaviour.     In recognition of the
importance which it attaches to the improvement of facilities for
spectators,    the Government has made substantial financial
assistance available to football through the reduction of Pool
Betting Duty from 42 1/2% to 40%.     This is on the understanding
that the full amount saved is used on capital expenditure to
improve the safety and comfort of spectators at English,       Scottish
and Welsh football league grounds and at the three national stadia
in accordance with the recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's
Report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


3.   We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority pay
particular attention to ensuring that home and away fans receive
equal treatment at every ground.


The Government supports the aim of this recommendation.        However,
it hopes that clubs will respond in the first instance,    and that
the football authorities will ensure that their instructions are
carried out.     The FLA should only be needed to deal with failure
to comply as a means of last resort.


4.   We recommend that the compulsory seating proposals be re­
examined in the case of the smaller clubs.


The Government is not at present convinced that any re-examination
of its proposals on all seated accommodation is necessary.        Lord
Justice Taylor recommended the progressive removal of standing
accommodation at all sports grounds designated under the Safety at
Sports Ground Act 1975.   The Government has indicated that it
proposes to apply this recommendation by means of the Football
Licensing Scheme only to the national stadia,   to grounds used for
UEFA high risk matches and to those used by football clubs
belonging to the four Divisions of the Football League (all but
one of which has a theoretical capacity in excess of 10,000).
There is no need for league clubs with small attendances to
provide more seats than the number of spectators which they expect
or hope to accommodate, even by 1999.   We shall be inviting the
FLA and the Football Trust to discuss with us the practical
application of these proposals with a view to issuing clearer
guidance to clubs on an issue which has appeared to be capable of
misunderstanding.


5.   We believe that it should be a priority of clubs to provide
the police and other organisations such as St John Ambulance with
the facilities which they need to discharge their duties
efficiently.


This recommendation is aimed primarily at clubs and is supported
by the Government.   Guidance on the provision of first-aid
facilities is given in the Home Departments' Green Guide.     The
Football League has also recently accepted and commended to all
Football League Clubs a detailed and comprehensive Report on
first-aid provisions and training prepared by a Medical Working
Party set up by the Football League in response to Lord Justice
Taylor's Final Report.


6.   We recommend that the Government keep under review the rate
of Pool Betting Duty, and, if necessary, decrease the rate to make
more money available for ground improvements.


The Government will take an early decision on whether the cut in
pool betting duty should be extended for a second five-year
period.   In coming to a decision, however, we will take into
consideration the plans the Football League and the individual
clubs have made to finance out of their own resources the cost of
necessary ground improvements.   The earlier the commitment is
clear,   the sooner we will be able to decide on the second five-
year term.


7.   We add   our    voice to   all those who have called for an
imaginative   and    vigorous   campaign by the football authorities to
ensure that   the    money is   raised and the facilities at all grounds
improved to   the    level of   the best.


This recommendation, which is aimed at the football authorities,
is welcomed by the Government.



8.   We recommend that the football authorities and the police
consult one another on match scheduling and heed one another's
professional expertise.


The Government agrees with the Committee that consultation on
match scheduling between the football authorities and the police
is essential.       Scheduling is now subject to police advice.     Much
is done at local level and, on the whole, relations between the
police and football clubs are good.


9.   We do not see any need for any further powers to prevent
matches taking place.


The Government agrees with the Committee that no extra powers are
required and will not seek any.


10. We recommend that the police remain alive to the fact that
football matches are intended as entertainment for the enjoyment
of the maximum number of law-biding fans.  There must be a good
reason for altering the day, venue or time of a game.


The Government accepts that football is an entertainment and that
most football supporters are wholly law-abiding.         However, changes
to the timing of matches,        for example, are an important element in
reducing the likelihood of disorder and it is therefore important
that police advice is heeded by the football authorities.          The
Government does not believe that the police seek to change the
arrangements other than on reasonable grounds.
11.  We recommend that all names and descriptions of hooligans
against whom high grade intelligence is possessed are passed to
clubs concerned by the National Football Intelligence Unit via the
local police force's football liaison officer.


The Government believes that, subject to proper safeguards
including the Data Protection Act       1984, the pooling of
intelligence where appropriate is       of benefit both to thepolice
and to football clubs.        The National Football Intelligence Unit
will therefore consider what more       might be done.


12. We believe it would be quite wrong for the police to use
tactics against away supporters which had the intention of
extending the Luton experiment [of banning away supporters] by the
back door.


The Government agrees that it would be wrong to attempt to
discourage away supporters by making conditions deliberately
unpleasant for them and does not believe that this is being done
as a matter of policy.


13.  We recommend that clubs whose teams are engaged in European
competitions organise attractive, good value and well-stewarded
package deals for travelling supporters, and that match tickets
are available only through these arrangements.


The Government endorses this recommendation.         It has encouraged
the football authorities and individual clubs involved in matches
abroad to organise travel clubs and to provide tickets only to
members of those c l u bs .    Such arrangements encourage supporters to
travel with tickets and accommodation obtained in advance,        assist
in the monitoring of their travel plans, and facilitate policing.
The genuine supporter therefore benefits and those without tickets
and accommodation booked in advance are thus deterred from
travelling to games.


14. We recommend that all league clubs establish community
programmes.
The Government endorses this recommendation.     It believes that
such schemes can have long term benefits in combatting football
hooliganism in that the greater the involvement of the local
community with its football club the less likely members of that
community will do anything to harm its reputation.     There can also
be benefits for the local community through the involvement of
particularly the young and those from disadvantaged groups and
ethnic minorities in sports activities provided under the schemes.
The Government therefore welcomes the agreement between the
Football League,    the Football Association and the Professional
Football Association to provide,    through the Footballers Further
Education and Vocational Training Society, a programme of
community development in every area of the country including at
each Football League club.    Government funding for trainees
employed on Football in the Community Schemes has been provided by
the Training Enterprise and Education Directorate (formerly the
Training Agency).


15. We recommend that the football authorities and individual
clubs should establish regular liaison and dialogue with the
supporters' organisations.


The Government supports this recommendation and believes that
closer relations between clubs and their supporters can only be of
mutual benefit.


16.  We recommend that gradual but steady progress towards
desegregation should be the aim of police and clubs.


The Government agrees with the Committee that,    in principle,   it is
right that gradual and steady progress should be made towards
desegregation.     But that can only be done when practicable and the
timing and extent of such moves are largely for the police and
clubs themselves to agree in the light of local circumstances.


17. We urge ACPO to come forward speedily with the new arrest
procedures which Taylor recommended a year ago.
The Government will consider with interest the proposals from ACPO
which are expected shortly.


18.  We recommend that the Home Office should continue to monitor
developments in video technology, and the Football Trust continue
to make money available for state-of-the-art equipment to be
installed.


The Home Office has made full use of video technology in recent
years and will continue to do so as appropriate in order to
enhance both public safety at football grounds and the ability to
deter and apprehend hooligans.


19.  The Committee is convinced that the intensive gathering and
sifting of intelligence is the most effective means of dealing
with the menace of gang hooliganism and recommends that each force
appoints a full-time football intelligence officer for each League
club in its area.


The Government agrees that intelligence is the key to dealing with
the menace of gang hooliganism.   Indeed,   for some clubs, given the
quantity of information to be processed, more than one full time
intelligence officer is required - and employed.     However,   at
other clubs there would not be sufficient to occupy an officer
full time.   The decision as to the level of resources to allocate
is for the police in each individual case.

20.  We believe that the National Football Intelligence Unit is
fine example of police work sensibly co-ordinated on a national
basis.


The Government agrees and is pleased that the Committee has
recognised the excellent work which is being done by the National
Football Intelligence Unit.   It has a significant impact on the
fight against football hooliganism.


21.  We recommend that ACPO, ACPO (Scotland), the Home Office and
Scottish Office monitor the performance of all police forces in
the dealings with NFIU and ensure that, where there are lapses,
they are vigorously brought to the attention of the Chief
Constable concerned, since this effective relationship bears
directly upon the proper use of police resources.
The Government recognises the importance of good relationships
between the NFIU and police forces.     In England and Wales,
monitoring is carried out through a Steering Committee comprising
senior Home Office and police representatives.


22. We recommend that the Government meet all reasonable demands
made by the NFIU for resources.


The Government has committed more than £600,000 to the NFIU since
its establishment at the end of 1989.    Requests for additional and
appropriate resources are always considered sympathetically
against the background of normal Government expenditure
constraints.


23. We recommend that consideration should be given to the
appointment of a Scottish officer to the NFIU.


The Government agrees that a Scottish officer should be appointed
to the NFIU.    The practical arrangements are [currently being
investigated]   [well in hand and an appointment will be made soon ] .


24.  It is important for police officers as for the general public
to appreciate that the overwhelming majority of fans, home and
away, are law-jbiding and have a right to be treated with respect
and dignity by the police.


The Government agrees with the Committee and recognises the
importance of the police's establishing the right balance between
firm policing to ensure public safety and public order and the
rights of individuals to pursue their lawful activities.


25. We recommend that ACPO and ACPO (Scotland) initiate
discussions between the police, supporters' organisations and the
Football Licensing Authority with the aim of preparing a national
statement of good practice for police to follow when dealing with
supporters.  We further recommend that individual chief offices
should ensure that individual grounds are policed on different
occasions so far as possible in the same way.


This recommendation is directed at ACPO and ACPO(S).     The
Government will consider any representations those bodies wish to
make.   Details of policing particular grounds are operational
matters for the appropriate chief officer;   it will not always be
right to police a ground in the same way as such factors as the
importance of the particular game and the following of the
visiting team will need to be taken into consideration.


26. We endorse the need for continued constructive dialogue
between ACPO and the NFIU and the national football authorities,
and between each individual club and the local ground commander.


The Government agrees that such dialogue is helpful and
understands that liaison at national level and in most local cases
is increasingly seen as useful by all those concerned.


27. We recommend that all chief officers ensure that there is a
regular system of liaison between supporters' organisations and
local ground commanders.


It is for each chief officer to establish arrangements for
consultation with supporters' organisations in his force area.
The Government endorses the Committee's recommendation.

28. We expect this momentum [to develop police training] to
continue in the future.


In response to Lord Justice Taylor's report, a working party was
set up by the ACPO Personnel and Training Committee to produce a
training package for Ground Commanders.   During 1990, courses took
place at training centres in the West Midlands, Manchester, Hendon
and Kent.    These courses were attended by Ground Commanders from
all forces in England and Wales.   In addition,   the Police Staff
College held a seminar last summer for all Ground Commanders.


During 1991, the Central Planning and Training Unit will assess
these courses for compatibility and the results of the assessments
will be taken into account when planning future training courses.


29. We recommend no change in current arrangements for paying for
football-related policing outside and away from football grounds.
The Government agrees with the Committee that clubs should not be
required to pay for football-related policing outside and away
from football grounds as this is a normal policing function.


30. We endorse the proposal for a consistent national charging
policy [for policing inside grounds].


The Government is grateful for the Committee's endorsement of its
view that there should be a consistent national charging policy
for policing inside football grounds.     It does not believe,
however,    that the Committee's own proposals would constitute such
a policy.


31.  A town cannot be deprived of its soccer club because the bill
for policing bankrupts it.  It would hardly be conducive to good
police/community relations for this to happen since the police
would be blamed for the closure.


The Government has some sympathy with this recommendation and
believes that its proposal to phase in full charges will go some
way to solving any problems which might occur.     Nevertheless,
football clubs, like other places of entertainment, must meet the
conditions of the health and safety regulations.     The Government
sees no reason why football clubs should be treated more
favourably than other providers of entertainment in respect of the
costs of ensuring safety for the events they stage.


32.  We consider that it would be inappropriate to charge clubs
the full cost of policing when that cost can ultimately be
determined by one party to the bargain alone.  We therefore
recommend that the cost of policing a football match should be
assessed on the marginal costs of doing so.


The Government rejects this recommendation.     Charges are paid to
the police authority, not directly to the force; chief officers
therefore have no financial interest in deploying more men than is
necessary to secure the orderly and lawful behaviour of
spectators.     The responsibility for maintaining order rests on
their shoulders,    though, and it is right that their professional
judgement about the risks should outweigh a club's financial
concerns.     A club is free to reduce its policing costs by
improving the standard of stewarding as Lord Justice Taylor
intended.


Charges based on marginal costs only would lead to considerable
variations depending on the amount of overtime involved and the
extent to which unpaid special constables were used.        More
significantly,   though, charges based on marginal costs would not
meet Lord Justice Taylor's requirement that they should be
"realistic and businesslike".    If a club hired stewards from the
private security industry,   it would be charged full costs
(including overheads);   if a club requires a police presence, other
than to carry out normal police functions,     the Government believes
there is no good reason why the club should not meet the full
costs (including all overheads) of having a trained officer
available to deploy.


Full costs are already charged by the police in a number of other
areas and it would be inconsistent if football were exempted from
these arrangements.    For example,   full salary costs are paid by
Prison Department for police officers who would not normally be
involved in the management of prisoners.      The Channel Tunnel Act
1987 requires Eurotunnel to pay Kent Police Authority such sums as
are agreed for policing the tunnel.     For police patrols provided
to improve security on the Underground,     salaries,   incidental
expenses and administration charges were paid by London
Underground Ltd.


Full cost charging is already made for policing football matches
within the Metropolitan Police area: charges are based on salary
and allowances plus 31% for overheads (ie the cost of supporting
operational officers such as training,     accommodation,   transport,
communications and administration).


33.  We recommend that the Home Office withdraw its current draft
circular, and produce new proposals for charging sports clubs for
policing on the basis of varying percentages of the gate takings.


This recommendation is also rejected.     The Government believes
that charges based on percentages would bear little relation to
the actual costs of policing,   the levels of which do not depend
solely on the number of spectators attending: rather, police
presence will reflect the particular teams involved,   the
importance of the match and the likely presence of any known
troublemakers.


The basing of charges on percentages would also fail the
"realistic and business like" test: the Audit Commission estimate
the unsubsidised costs of policing to be around £5.5 million as
against receipts of £3.5 million.    A 20% increase in receipts, as
proposed would be worth £0.7 million, giving a total of £4.2
million - still leaving £1.3 million subsidy.


34.  We recommend that the Home Office consider whether section 15
of the Police Act 1964 should be amended to reflect more clearly
the desirability of charging differential costs for policing
private events depending on the value to the public of the event.


The Government believes that it would be very difficult to make
logical or rational judgements as to the "value to the public" of
particular events and rejects the recommendation.


35.  Higher profile stewarding supported by low profile policing
is the way forward.


The Government agrees with the Committee that a greater reliance
on stewards would be preferable, on grounds of cost and otherwise.
But a prior condition is that stewards are fit and well-trained.
ACPO is working with the football authorities to improve the
quality and competence of stewarding.


36.  We recommend that the Football Licensing Authority monitor
carefully the way in which the stewarding provisions of the Green
Guide are followed, and not hesitate to use their powers against a
club which does not meet the requisite standard.

The need for effective stewarding arrangements was emphasised by
Lord Justice Taylor, and detailed principles have been outlined in
the Green Guide.   Clubs must satisfy the local authorities
responsible for safety certificates that their arrangements are
adequate,   and the police will take into account the quality of
stewarding in deciding the level of police deployment.      It is
therefore in the clubs' best interests to improve stewarding
arrangements.    It will be for the FLA to determine the extent to
which it should have regard to stewarding arrangements in
exercising its statutory powers.


37.   We recommend that the Government reconsider the need for the
catch-all offence of disorderly conduct at sports grounds.


An offence of disorderly conduct at a sports ground was
recommended by Mr Justice Popplewell in the Report of his
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds.   However,   the Government agrees not with that
recommendation but with those of Lord Justice Taylor in his Report
on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster that specific offences should
be created to cover defined acts of undesirable conduct.     The
Government is supporting legislation broadly along the lines
recommended by Lord Justice Taylor and does not intend to create a
catch-all offence of disorderly conduct at sports grounds.



38.  We believe that there should be no delay in bringing the
Taylor offences [throwing a missile, chanting obscene or racialist
abuse, going on to a pitch without reasonable cause and ticket
touting] on to the statute book.

39.  We recommend that the House pass the Football (Offences) Bill
without delay.


The Government supported the aim of the Football    (Offences) Bill
and is supporting its passage into law (with strengthening
amendments).    The Government hopes to introduce legislation
against ticket touting at football match in the next session.


40.  We recommend that the law be amended so that breach of an
exclusion order may be punished by the imposition of a consecutive
exclusion order.


The Government believes that the courts already have powers under
Part IV of the Public Order Act 1986 to make a further exclusion
order as part of the penalty for a breach of an existing one and
that no amendment to the law is therefore necessary.


41.  We recommend that the Home Office again issue a circular to
magistrates and clerks to justices drawing attention to the
availability, efficacy and appropriate use of the exclusion order.


The Home Office issued a circular to the Courts on exclusion
orders in August 1990.    It will now be exploring with the Crown
Prosecution Service and other interested parties what further
advice and guidance might be given to encourage the Courts to make
full and efficient use of the exclusion order scheme.


42.  We recommend that in the case of serious football-related
offences, the police ensure that the Crown Prosecution Service are
aware of the accused's likelihood to travel to football matches
outside England and Wales, and that where there are grounds for
imposing a restriction order, the CPS draw the court's attention
to its powers to do so.


The Government sees merit in the Committee's recommendation and
the Home Office and Crown Prosecution Service are exploring how
best to give it effect.


43.  We recommend that British Ministers and officials continue to
apply pressure in TREVI to encourage countries with different
criminal justice systems to see the value for themselves and other
countries of securing conviction of British football hooligans.


The Government's strategy has been to seek to persuade other
countries of the value of securing convictions against British
football hooligans and welcomes the Committee's endorsement of
this approach.   Pressure will be maintained both in TREVI and the
Council of Europe.   Moreover,   the Government is proposing to
establish more agreements to enable those convicted of football-
related offences abroad to be made subject to restriction orders
under British jurisdiction.

44.  We recommend that the Government reconsider the Taylor
recommendations to extend the scope of attendance centre orders;
that more of these facilities be made available in areas of the
country which do not at present have them, and that alternative
methods of staffing them be explored.
The Government has reconsidered the Taylor report recommendation
for extending the scope of attendance centre orders in the light
of the Committee's comments but remains of the view that the
practical difficulties are such as to preclude the extension of
the arrangements as proposed in the Repo rt .


The Government believes that attendance centre orders continue to
have an important place in the range of sentenc'^ d i s p o s a l s for
young offenders under 21.  Home Office Circular 69/1990 about
                                dtf d
football exclusion orders remind?courts and others that attendance
centre orders might often be the right sentence to accompany
exclusion orders.    The Government keeps the size of the attendance
centre network under review.      In considering the case for
establishing new centres,    the Government has to have regard to
their viability bearing in mind the use that is likely to be made
of them by the local courts.      The number of young offenders
convicted by the courts has sharply declined in recent years, and
the Government does not believe that an expansion of the network
is justified.


45. We recommend that research be undertaken to assess any
differences in the level of drunkenness at grounds where (i)
alcohol is not available (ii) low-strength beer is available (iii)
ordinary beer is sold.



The Government will consider research into the consumption of
alcohol at football grounds as part of its ongoing interest in
public disorder and the safety of crowds at matches.


46. We recommend that local authorities, in consultation with
local police commanders, make full use of new power [under by­
laws] where appropriate to cut down on public drinking in the
streets near football matches.



The Government's decision to make more widely available the byelaw
prohibiting the drinking of alcohol in designated public places
recognised the success of its experimental use by a number of
local authorities.    Most of these experiments involved the use of
the byelaw to tackle public drinking in shopping centres or town
centres.   But, as the Committee states in its Report,        the local
council decided to designate the streets near to Scarborough
Football Club as areas where the byelaw applied.          There would be
nothing in principle to prevent other local authorities using the
byelaw in the area surrounding football g r o u n d s .


As the Committee recognises,     it is for local authorities to decide
whether the problems which they have with public drinking would be
helped by the byelaw.     The Home Office issued guidance to district
and borough councils in England and Wales on 29 October 1990 on
how to apply for the byelaw.      This guidance emphasised the need
for consultation with local agencies,      including the police,     in
deciding whether or not to apply the byelaw.        In the case of
football grounds,    the operational judgement of the police on the
value of the byelaw will be particularly important.          Where local
authorities and police consider that the byelaw would help in the
overall strategy for the policing of football matches,         the Home
Office will be happy to consider applications.


47. We recommend that the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
Etc) Act 1985 be amended so that all public service vehicles as
defined in European law are covered by the Act.


The Government believes that existing legislation already meets
the Committee's concerns about the carriage of alcohol on
minibuses to football matches.      The Sporting Events (Control of
Alcohol etc) Act 1985, as amended by section 40 of the Public
Order Act 1986, prohibits the carriage of alcohol on minibuses
which are not public service vehicles but which are capable of
carrying more than eight passengers.


48. We recommend that the network of football correspondents
[under the TREVI organisation] be extended to all European states
which wish to participate.  We further recommend that primary
responsibility for the European convention on Spectator Violence
and Misbehaviour should pass from the Department of Education and
Science to the Home Office.
The Government,     like the Committee,   can see advantage in extending
the network of football correspondents wider than at present and
will consider what might practically be achieved.


The Government agrees that it would now be appropriate for primary
responsibility for the European Convention on Spectator Violence
and Misbehaviour to pass from the Department of Education and
Science to the Home Office and will act accordingly.


49.  We recommend that the United Kingdom Government should
propose at the next meeting of the Standing Committee established
under the European Convention on Spectator Violence and
Misbehaviour (a) the establishment of a European register of
football hooligans and (b) an effective means of preventing
hooligans from travelling abroad.


(a)   The Government believes that the exchange of intelligence on
      football hooligans is crucial to preventing and tackling
      disorder at international matches.       The way to achieve this
      is through closer co-operation between the police forces of
      different countries so that each other's problems are fully
      understood.    At present, the Government is not convinced of
      the value of a central register of football hooligans as it
      might well duplicate some of this effort and discourage some
      countries from establishing closer bilateral links.       But we
      will give further thought to the suggestion in consultation
      with our colleagues in the Standing Committee.


(b)   The restriction orders scheme prevents convicted football
      hooligans from travelling to matches abroad.       Thus far,
      relatively few orders have been made, but the Government is
      doing all that it can to encourage the UK courts to make full
      use of the scheme and, where agreements exist,      to invite
      overseas jurisdictions to ensure that appropriate details are
      forwarded to the UK.     We are also striving to negotiate more
      bilateral agreements so as to extend the scope of the scheme.
        Restriction orders apart,   it is for overseas authorities to
        determine whom they will or will not admit on the basis of
        intelligence received.

50. We recommend that ACPO carefully consider in future whether
intelligence co-operation with foreign forces should be
complemented by visible and friendly policing [of English fans
abroad].


This is a matter for ACPO to consider, but the responsibility for
policing football abroad lies with the foreign government and
police forces.     Their wishes will have a large bearing on any
British police presence and role abroad.


51. We recommend that the Home Office set a swift timetable for
bringing into force all the sections of the Football Spectators
Act which relate to the Football Licensing Authority (except those
dealing with the national membership scheme), and that the
financial and manpower resources necessary for the job are
provided to the FLA.


Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 will be brought
into force as soon as the FLA has indicated to the Government that
its inspectors have completed training;      this is expected to happen
during the summer.


The timetable for introducing Section 9 is more difficult to
determine at this stage.     The inspection of grounds and related
work, which will be necessary before licences can be issued,       is
bound to take time and it is this preparatory process which will
enable the Authority to determine the terms and conditions of
licences for individual grounds, which is the critical part of the
work.     The issuing of the licences themselves will only signal the
end of that process.     The Authority considers that each ground
will have to be inspected at least twice: once when a match is
being played and once when the ground is not in.use.       Further re­
inspection may be necessary in individual cases,      including some on
match days.     Inspection proper of grounds in use will start
effectively at the beginning of the 1991-92 season, once
inspectors are fully trained and have gained familiarity with the
grounds and licensing procedures.       Each region will have about 35
football league grounds to inspect and possibly some others and
the season lasts about 38 weeks.    The Authority considers it
unrealistic to expect that inspection of all grounds at which
designated matches are played can be completed before the end of
the 1991-92 season, and has said that it is unlikely to ask for
the introduction of Section 9 (making it an offence to hold a
designated match without a licence) before the beginning of the
1992-93 season.


The Home Secretary is satisfied that the Authority is as anxious
as he is that the Football Licensing Scheme should become
effective as soon as possible.     But he is also conscious of the
very large amount of work which has to be undertaken by the
Authority and its staff before that can happen.


52.  We recommend that the FLA and Home Office endeavour to fill
one of the remaining vacancies on the Authority with a person
acknowledged by the supporters' organisations to understand the
needs of ordinary football spectators.


It is not proposed that the two outstanding vacancies on the
Authority should be filled until the Authority has had more time
to establish itself, and both the Government and the Authority
have learned from experience what additional qualities or
expertise might most usefully be added.     The views expressed by
the Committee will be borne in mind in filling those vacancies in
due course.


53. We recommend that, when section 13 of the Football Spectators
Act is brought into force, the FLA promote consistency and high
standards of safety at grounds.


The Government supports this recommendation.    This is one of the
main reasons why the FLA was created, and its policies will have
this as one of their foremost objectives.


54. One of our principal conclusions from this inquiry is that
football badly needs an honest broker between the competing
interests of clubs, police, local authorities and Government.  We
are confident that the FLA, under its present Chairman, and with
adequate financial backing from the Government can play this role.
We recommend that the Government realise the inherent potential in
the FLA to improve the future of the game.


The responsibilities of the FLA are defined by the Football
Spectators Act 1989.    In the exercise of those statutory
responsibilities,   it is likely that the FLA will be able to exert
significant influence in respect of many aspects of football
ground safety and spectator management, but the Government does
not see it as an arbitrator; the Authority has yet to prove itself
and it is too early to envisage any formal widening of its role.


Neither the Government nor the Authority itself had any reason to
believe that the financial resources so far allocated to the
Authority are inadequate to enable it to establish itself fully
and properly discharge its statutory functions.    Funding provision
for the Authority will, however, be reviewed regularly under the
established arrangements applying to all Government expenditure.
