MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:    10 December 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




MEETING WITH THE HOME SECRETARY

Your appointment with the Home Secretary is tomorrow (2.35 - brought forward by 10
minutes from its original time). The meeting is scheduled (in Mr Straw’s diary) to last half
an hour. This note provides some briefing.

2.     We sought this meeting so that you could discuss with Mr Straw the publication of the
evidence which you have considered over the last few months. As well as this the Home
Secretary may want to talk about

                when you will submit your report;
                possible publicity surrounding that;
                the content of your report;
                whether people criticised in the report will get a chance to see it in draft in line
                with Salmon; and
                the police statements issue (which the Home Secretary’s advisers - for instance
                Paul Pugh - have already heard about).


Publishing the evidence

3.      The Home Secretary told you in July that he planned to publish the 'documentary
evidence that you have considered'. This points to him publishing the written submissions,
and addenda thereto, that you have had from the Family Support Group and others. He may
do that by placing them in the Library of the House of Commons. He also asked you to tell
him whether there was any material which should not be disclosed, because of its potential
impact on any proceedings or for other reasons.

4.     The Home Secretary also agreed with you in July that the transcripts of the meetings
you have been having would not be published but that they would be summarised, as far as
need be, in your report. We have been sending these people copies of the transcripts of their
meetings with you and they can make these public or not as they wish.


G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\039.DOC
5.     That covers the'fresh evidence' which you have been looking at. Then there is the
question of the old evidence which you have had to re-examine. A lot of that is in the public
domain now (Taylor transcripts, Coroners transcripts). But some of it isn't - and the
problem which the Home Secretary will have about that is that

        a) this is the stuff which the families particularly want to see; and

        b) it is not his to dispose of.

6.      It falls into two broad groups. First, there are the BBC Match of the Day videos.
These belong to the BBC. They have the copyright. It is up to them to say who sees them.
The Home Secretary might feel inclined to use some muscle to persuade the BBC to be a
bit more relaxed about them. But there is some grim stuff on them and it could be asking for
trouble for the Home Secretary to browbeat the BBC into 'publishing' them. There might be
some possibility of the BBC showing them privately to those who have or think they have a
good reason to want to see them. But that's what they seem to have been doing anyway (viz
the Church family). The Home Office have nevertheless written to the BBC asking them
about the position on these videos.

7.      Second, there is the archive held by South Yorkshire police (on behalf of the
Coroner). The Home Secretary is aware from recent correspondence that the families believe
that the police are deliberately holding up material from the archive in order to frustrate them
putting evidence to you. We do not think that is so. But its release is not a matter for you.

8.      I suggest that your line might be

        You will be suggesting that the Home Secretary publish the Family Support
        Group submissions, and the others you have received, along with your report;

        You will advise him if any of the evidence you have looked at should not be
        published;

        It is not in his power to publish much of the evidence which the families actually
        want to see - it belongs to the BBC (videotapes) or to the Coroner (police
        archive);

        But arguments about publishing the BBC videos or families’ access to the South
        Yorkshire archive are not a matter for you and you will not be making any
        recommendations about them.


Timetable

9.      The Home Secretary (or at least his advisers) will know that Mr Hicks is concerned
about the so-called ‘deadline’ which we set. But you have to complete the report at some
point. We cannot go on for ever. Mr Hicks is trying to turn the exercise on its head - the
Home Secretary set up the scrutiny because he had been told that the families already had
important new evidence. That is what you have been assessing over the last few months and

G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\039.DOC
you are now almost ready to report.

10.    I would suggest that you say that

       you have drafted the report and are currently refining it - we also await
       responses to letters we have sent to various people asking for information. You
       expect to be able to let Mr Straw have your report in mid-January;

        but you have not set an absolute deadline for new information - you have made it
        clear that if important new material comes in you will consider it - even if that
        means delaying the report.


Publicity

11.     May not be raised at all. The Home Office may want to make an announcement
when you give the report to the Home Secretary (and this could be to our advantage since it
will take pressure from the Support Group etc. off the scrutiny and put it onto the Home
Office). But I see no point in having any kind of media ‘event’ then. You would not be able
to say anything about your report because the Home Secretary would not have published it.
When he does publish the report, it will be for him to talk about it. There will be nothing
you can say beyond what the report itself says.

12.     Lord Taylor gave a press conference when his interim report came out in August
1989. He mainly confined himself to telling journalists that if they wanted to know what his
report said they should read it.

13.     I suggest you might say

        you see no point in your being involved in any media event either when you hand
        over your report to the Home Secretary or when he publishes it, and you are
        reluctant to be so involved. There would be nothing you could say which you
        had not said in the report. If the media want ‘library footage’ of you they
        already have it.


Content o f the report

14.     The Home Secretary may ask. If he does you will want to stress that whatever you
say is provisional for now.


Salmon Principles

15.    See note attached. If the Home Secretary raises this the focus is likely to be on
whether you will be alerting people whom you criticise in your report in advance and giving
them a chance to comment on what you say.




G:\HiLLS8QR\S-S\039. DOC
Changes to police statements

16.     The Home Secretary’s advisers know we have been looking at this issue. He may
suggest that we look at all the police statements to ensure that they accord with the original
‘recollections’ - an enormous task.

17.    If so I suggest that you say

       You have traced the source of the changes (i.e. Metcalfe’s letters) and we are
       chasing them up from there. This will bring in all the statements which were
       changed - no reason to believe that others were changed (and we have confirmed
       this by random checks).




C F BONE




G:\HiLLS8QR\S-S\039.DOC
THE SALMON PRINCIPLES

The Salmon principles were set out in the Report of the Royal Commission on
Tribunals of Inquiry, under the chairmanship of Lord Justice Salmon (1966).
They are

           Principle 1: Before any person becomes involved in an inquiry, the inquiry
           team should be satisfied that there are circumstances which affect him and
           which the inquiry proposes to investigate.

           Principle 2: Before any person who is involved in an inquiry is called as a
           witness he should be informed of any allegations which are made against him
           and the substance of the evidence against him.

           Principle 3:

                    (a) He should be given an adequate opportunity of preparing his case
                    and of being assisted by legal advisers.

                    (b)    His legal expenses should normally be met out of public funds.

           Principle 4 : He should have the opportunity of being examined by his own
           solicitor or counsel and of stating his case in public at the inquiry.

           Principle 5: Any material witness he wishes called at the inquiry should, if
           reasonably practicable, be heard.

            Principle 6: He should have the opportunity of testing by cross-examination
            conducted by his own solicitor or counsel any evidence which may affect him.


Maxwell letters and Salmon letters

2.      These six principles do not include anything about letting people who are
criticised in the inquiry report see what is said about them before the report is
published. But there are also precedents for allowing inquiry witnesses an

             ‘opportunity to see and if they wish comment on critical sections o f the draft
            report which concern them or from which they might be identified, and to see
            and perhaps comment on any redraft’.

 3.    This is known as a ‘Maxwell letter’ after a DTI investigation into Robert
 Maxwell which was challenged for not including this process. There are also
 ‘Salmon letters’ giving advance notice to witnesses at an Inquiry of the issues or the
 nature and substance of allegations made against them.




 «•   \fiiiispoR\mmsfiLnoti206
The Scrutiny

4.      A recent Home Office guidance paper on the setting up and conduct of
Inquiries says that the Salmon principles

         ‘were recommendations, not rules o f law. They were concerned with tribunals
         o f inquiry under the Tribunals o f Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921, not inquiries
         more generally. They remain an important reference point on issues o f
        fairness, but the extent to which they are applied to any individual inquiry....
         will be a matter o f judgement in each case depending, in part, on the subject
         o f the inquiry and the maters on which witnesses are likely to be called to give
         evidence ’.

5.      It is up to each inquiry to decide its own rules of engagement in the light of the
Salmon recommendations. All inquiries have their own individual features, but our
exercise is unique. It is not a tribunal under the 1921 Act or a public inquiry of any
other sort. The Home Secretary has asked you to give him independent advice upon
the evidence about the Hillsborough disaster to see whether it justifies any further
action by him or other public authorities. The scrutiny is essentially a private,
behind the scenes exercise, albeit that the Home Secretary has said that he will publish
your report.

6.     We have adhered to the Salmon principles in as far as they apply to what we
are doing. We have applied principles 1 and 2 and have sent what are in effect
‘Salmon letters’ (for example, to Dr Bull and to the police officers whom we have
seen). We have also applied 3 and 4 in far as they can be to an exercise conducted
behind closed doors - we have given adequate notice to the people we have asked to
see (they have fixed their own appointments) and they have been allowed to bring
whoever they want along with them. 5 and 6 are irrelevant.

7.       The remaining question is whether we send ‘Maxwell letters’ to those who are
criticised in your report. The Home Secretary may well raise this with you - it
plainly has implications for the timing of the handover, and hence publication, of
your report.

8.      The answer may depend upon

         (a)     whether any identifiable people are criticised in your report (Debra
         Martin? David Frost? Peter Metcalfe?) and, if so, in what terms - for
         example, there could be a big difference between concluding that the truth of
         what somebody says cannot be proven because it conflicts with somebody else
         and it is a long time after the event and simply saying that they are an
         unreliable witness; and

         (b)      whether, if we do criticise anybody in round terms, there is a
         possibility that they might be able to say anything worthwhile in response to
         that criticism. Again Ms Martin springs to mind.




 Q:\l1ILLSPOR\rWIN\MlSIOH306
