                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT

                                              Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference: FEp/90 35/48/89                  7 February 1990
Your reference:



   To:   The Chief Executive:

               County Councils
               Metropolitan District Councils
               London Borough Councils
               Common Council of the City of London




   Dear Sir/Madam

   HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 11/1990
   FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

   Introduction

   The Final Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
   following the disaster at the Hillsborough football ground was
   published on 29 January. A copy of the Report is attached.

   2.   The purpose of this circular is first, to apprise recipients
   of the Report1s recommendations and the Government's response to
   them; and second to give guidance to local authorities with
   safety certification responsibilities on compliance with the
   recommendations.

   The Report

   3.   The Report contains 76 recommendations, 43 of which are
   repeated in substance (see also paragraph 6     below) from the
   Interim Report circulated with HOC 68/1989. Attached at Annex A
   is a copy of the Home Secretary's oral statement to the House
   of Commons on 29 January responding to the final Report.     At
   Annex B is a copy of the schedule referred to in the statement
   setting out the Government's initial response to the individual
   recommendations in the report.

   4.   Local authorities may wish to note, in      particular, the
   response to recommendations 1-4 (all seated accommodation) and
   recommendation 6 (National Review Body). The intention is to
   bring into force the relevant sections of Part I of the Football
   Spectators Act 1989 in order to implement these recommendations
as regards football grounds as soon as ^practicable.          Safety
certificates should not be amended for this purpose.

Scope
5.   Paragraphs 238-239 of the Report indicate that in directing
the recommendations "essentially" to sports grounds designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 the flexibility of
approach referred to in paragraph 5 of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) should apply. Paragraph 14 of
the Report makes clear that its emphasis is on football, with its
special problems such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which
are not experienced to -the same extent elsewhere.     The Report
states that "crowd problems are directly related to the nature
of the event and the numbers attending it". It would therefore
be consistent with the Report's findings for local authorities
to    take proper accountof these factors when applying the
recommendations to individual grounds:     for example a careful
appraisal of the value of such matters as the installation of
sophisticated communications systems and CCTV may be necessary
where spectator attendances are numbered in hundreds rather than
thousands and where the police presence at the ground is minimal.

Interim Report Recommendations Adjusted

6.     The attention   of local    authorities   is drawn    to
recommendations 8, 11, 12(b), 19, 20, 31, 33, 58, 66 and 67 all
of   which were contained in the Interim Report but have been
modified as follows:
        recommendation 8 -   revised maximum figure

        recommendation 11 - "agreement" between club and police is
                            replaced by "statement of intent"

        recommendation 12 - qualification introduced by 12(b)

        recommendation 19 - discretion as regards opening of pitch
                            perimeter gates

        recommendation 20 - manning by police or steward

        recommendation 31 - revised   composition   of   the Advisory
                            Group

        recommendation 33 - reference to 1975 Act provision

        recommendation 58 - hand-signals not recommended

        recommendation 66 - recommended threshold figure of 2000

        recommendation 67 - ambulance may be approved         by   the
                            ambulance authorities.
ew safety Recommendations

7.   New recommendations are summarised below and         local
authorities are urged to take the action indicated        where
appropriate.

    Turnstiles (recommendation 10) - to note the revised
    maximum flow-rate to be used in place of the figure of
    750 quoted in the Green Guide which will be amended as
    soon as possible;

    Gangways (recommendation 13) - to include appropriate
    conditions in safety certificates;

    Perimeter Fences (recommendations 14, 15, 17) - to
    secure action by clubs to        comply with these
    recommendations and to amend safety certificates, as
    necessary;

    Safety Certificates (recommendations 24, 25, 26) - to
    consider   any   necessary   adjustment   to   safety
    certificates and note Home Office intention to
    implement recommendation 24;

    Duties of Clubs (recommendations 39, 40, 42, 43) - to
    consider appropriate amendment to safety certificates,
    as necessary;

    Police Planning (recommendations 47, 48, 50, 52, 53),
    Communications (55) and Co-ordination (61) - to note
    the recommendations and the Government's response;

    First Aid (recommendation 69) and Offences/Penalties
    (recommendations 70-73)   - to note Government's
    response;

    Green Guide (recommendations 74-76 and Appendix 3) -
    to note the Government response and to adopt the
    revised criteria/requirements which will be included
    in a revised guide as soon as possible.

Resource Implications

8.   Action to consider, revise and enforce the provisions of
safety certificates in the light of the Report may have short
term resource implications but is not expected to give rise to
significant long-term resource implications above existing
commitments.

Other

9.    Copies of this circular, annexes and enclosures are sent
to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities, Police Authorities,
Regional Managers Health Authorities, Chief Officers of Police,
Chief    Fire  Officers  and   Chief  Ambulance   Officers   for
information. Copies have also been sent to all football league
clubs and the representative organisations on the attached list.
E.R.
   10. Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should^
   be addressed to Mr A Brown (01-273-2765).
                                         Yours faithfully




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
E.R.



       Association of County Councils

       Association of Metropolitan Authorities

       London Boroughs Association

       Association of London Authorities

       Association of District Councils

       Welsh Counties Association

       Association of Chief Police Officers

       Clerks to Police Authorities

       Regional Managers, Health Authorities

       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers* Association

       National Association of Fire Officers

       Fire Brigades Union

       Police Federation

       Police Superintendents* Association

       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers

       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales

       Football League

       Football Trust

       Football Grounds Improvement Trust

       Rugby Football Union

       Welsh Rugby Football Union

       Rugby Football League

       Speedway Control Board

       Cricket Council

       Jockey Club

       National Greyhound Racing Club
E.R.
                                                          «
       Lawn Tennis Association

       All England Tennis and Croquet Club

       Royal and Ancient Golf Club

       RAC Motor Sports Association

       British Board of Amateur Athletics

       Hockey Association

       British Show Jumping Association
       National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

       Football Supporters Association

       St Johns Ambulance

       Sports Councils for England and Wales

       Central Council for Physical Recreation
                                                                                                                              ANNEX A
                   Uillshu'rough Stadium Disaster    29 JA N U A R Y 1990              HiUshurough Stadium D m sier                     20


    F^£^borough Stadium Disaster (Taylor                              L ord Justicc T a y lo r d oes n o t spare th o s e w h o ru n the
                                                                 industry. H e says, indeed, th a t the p ro v isio n they m a k e i'or
                  Report)                                        their cu sto m e rs is often n o t merely basic b u t squalid: an d
                                                                 th a t squalid c o n d itio n s can h a v e a n im p a c t o n safety an d
  3.32 pm
                                                                 that, in his view, they also lead to low er s ta n d a rd s o f
     Mr. Speaker: Statement. Mr. Secretary Waddington.           behaviour.
                                                                   Lord Justice Taylor says that the Football Association
                                                               and Football League have not seen it as any part o f their
                                                               duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety matters, and he
                                                               questions whether the directors of many clubs are
                                                               genuinely interested in the welfare o f their supporters or
                                                               their good behaviour. Players, too, are criticised, with
                                                                Lord Justice Taylor pointing out that incitement from the
                                                               pitch or bad behaviour by players, which is not confined to
                                                               soccer, has a major influence on the crowd.
                                                                   I acknowledge that some clubs have made an effort to
                                                               improve standards, but Lord Justice Taylor’s clear
                                                               conclusion was that the majority had not and that the
                                                               game has a future only if the directors and the players can
                                                               change their priorities and give a leadership which is
                                                               plainly lacking at present.
                                                                   He agrees with the Government that there must be a
                                                               move towards all-seater stadia and points out that section
                                                               11 o f the Football Spectators Act 1989 specifically
                                                               provides the machinery for that. T he change will improve
                                                               safety and behaviour, and we intend to bring it about.
                                                                   Lord Justice Taylor makes clear that the bulk of the
                                                               finances for ground improvements will have to be raised by
                                                               the clubs themselves. He says there are ways o f raising the
                                                               money if the clubs' management is enterprising and
                                                               resourceful, and he points to the opportunities presented
                                                               by sponsorship. He also points to the revenue that flows to
                                                               the football authorities from television rights and says that
                                                               the football authorities should ensure that this valuable
                                                               source o f revenue is directed tow ards improving stadia. He
                                                               canvasses the possibility o f a levy on transfer fees which he
                                                               says have reached a level which many regard as grotesque.
                                                                   There is a whole series o f detailed recommendations set
                                                               out in chapters 3. 4 and 5 on m atters relating to spectator
                                                               safety such as gates and gangways. Indeed, of the 76
                                                               recommendations, 43 in substance appear in the interim
                                                               report. The Government accept these proposals, some of
                                                               which can be implemented immediately: some will need
                                                               further work. For convenience. I have placed in the Vote
                                                               Office a schedule setting out the G overnm ent's response to
                                                               each.
                                                                   Hon. Members will recall that section 13 o f the
                                                               Football Spectators Act provides for the Football
                                                               Licensing Authority to supervise the safety responsibilities
                                                               o f local authorities in respcct o f designated football
                                                               grounds. We intend to implement that provision. Lord
                                                               Justice Taylor welcomes the establishment o f the Football
   M r. Waddington:                                            Licensing A uthority but would like us to go further and
   I      am most grateful to Lord Justice Taylor for the extend its remit to cover other than football grounds. This
report, which sets out clearly why we have had so many         would require primary legislation, and we will have to
m ajor tragedies at football grounds over the years and why    consider whether it is justified.
we have had disorder and hooliganism.                              Part III of the report contains a num ber o f proposals
   As the House familiarises itself with the report, it will   relating to crowd control and hooliganism. It
become clear th at it is addressed as much to the football     acknowledges the crucial role o f the police in crowd
industry as it is to the G overnm ent. Lord Justice Taylor     control. Lord Justice Taylor rightly reminds us that,
explains how, in his interim report, he concentrated on        without the work o f the police, m any sporting events
overcrowding because th at was the cause o f the               would be chaotic and could not be perm itted to take place.
Hillsborough disaster, but now he goes on to talk o f a        Something like 5.000 police officers are engaged on
game, the image o f which has been much tarnished, and o f     football duties each Saturday during the season, largely at
a blight over the game due to old grounds, p o o r facilities, the expense o f the taxpayer and the ratepayer. He pays
hooliganism, excessive drinking and poor leadership.           tribute to them for their service, and I w ant to add my
  St COT! I J..h C-l
21                                                                                  Hillsborough Stadium Disaster         7?
             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster           29 JA N U A R Y 1990


thanks to the police for the way that they carry out the           better atmosphere by improving the now often s q u a i i o ^ ^
difficult, thankless and often unthanked tasks that are            conditions to which they subject their supporters—squalid
thrust upon them.                                                  conditions that can encourage squalid behaviour.
     The report recognises the advances made in the last               Those clubs that have not faced up to their
couple o f years in the effectiveness o f the policing of          responsibility now have a final opportunity to do so; and
football, particularly inside grounds, and to the major            if thev do not now act, the public will not torgive them.
impact o f closed circuit television on the hooligan
problem. It also mentions other measures taken by the
Government, such as the restriction on the sale of alcohol
and the power given to the courts to make orders
excluding convicted hooligans from grounds.
     Lord Justice Taylor also recognises the great potential
value o f the police national football intelligence unit in
dealing with football-related crime and with hooligans
travelling to matches abroad.
     As I have said. Lord Justice Taylor takes the view that
better facilities and better treatm ent o f fans will bring
better behaviour. Beyond that, the report recommends the
creation of three new specific offences to apply at
designated sports grounds— throwing a missile; chanting
obscene or racialist abuse; and going on to the pitch
without reasonable excuse. It also asks for consideration
to be given to extending the courts' powers to impose
attendance centre orders and for the use o f electronic
tagging in the case o f offenders* convicted of football-
related offences. The specific new offences suggested seem,
to some extent, to duplicate offences which are already
available in the Public O rder Act 1986. but 1 shall look
carefully and quickly at all these suggestions.
     I now come to the proposed football membership
scheme. Lord Justice Taylor examined the invitation to
tender for a scheme which was issued by the consultants
employed by the football authorities. He came to the
conclusion that he could n ot support a scheme o f that kind
because he could not believe th a t the technology would
work well enough to avoid the danger o f congestion and
disorder. He was also concerned about the call on police
resources. Instead, he proposes the measures to which I
have referred.
     In the light o f this advice, the G overnm ent have decided
not to proceed with the establishment o f a football
membership authority, but p art I o f the Act will remain on
 the statute book. W ork will continue to see how the
shortcomings identified by Lord Justice Taylor could be
 overcome in case we have to return to the m atter again,
 should the problem o f hooliganism not be defeated by the
 alternative strategy proposed in the report.
      Let no one imagine th at this m eans th at there will be
 any let-up in the fight against hooliganism. Those who.
 unlike the Government, have for so long shrugged off their
 responsibilities will now have to face up to them.
      The Government intend to proceed as quickly as
 possible to the establishment o f a football licensing
 authority and, subject to consultation, section 11 o f the
  Football Spectators Act will be used to direct the Football
  Licensing Authority to require all-seater stadium s—with
 standing being reduced by stages and entirely eliminated in
  first and second division grounds by August 1994 and in all
  Football League grounds by 1999.
      The necessary steps will be taken to ensure improved
 arrangements for crowd control and better training for
  police and stewards. There will be urgent consideration o f
  the case for new offences and for new powers to deal with
  those excluded from grounds by the courts. T he clubs will
  be compelled to get rid o f the terraces. But Lord Justice
 Taylor indicates how much more they can do to create a

     :i     joh   m
                                                          ANNEX B




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY


Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final report of Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.


In his statement on 29 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
Government’s initial response to the recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor’s final report. The schedule is annexed.




29 January 1990
Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)

1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

2.   To apply to all UEFA "high risk” matches from Autumn 1993.

3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
          Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
          Scottish football league. Premier Division
          National stadia.

4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
     other matches played at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.


The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.



ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.




NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

     (a)   The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
           review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

     (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
           sports and other sports venues.

The Government     supports  the recommendation     that   safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a
voluntary basis.
MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)

7.     Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
       in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).
8.     Calculations of crowd density:    revised figures (interim
       recommendation 2, revised).
9.     Arrangements to prevent further access to pens      (interim
       recommendation 3).

10.    Turnstile flow rates.
The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates to reflect reductions in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures m
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities1
attention. The next edition of the 'Green Guide' will reflect
the new figures.
FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)

11.    statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.

 12.   stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each; and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.       The
relaxation in recommendation 12 (b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.

 GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)
 Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
 terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.

 FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)

 14.    Removal of spikes.

 15.    Reduction in height.
 16.    Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).
17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.
18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).

19.   Gates normally to be kept open during matches            (interim
      recommendation 8/ revised).

20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates     (replaces      interim
      recommendation 9).

21.   cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).

The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17 and to note recommendation 19 which varies interim
recommendation 8.   The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)

22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).

23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).

These are repeated from the Interim Report.        They have already
been commended to local authorities.

SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)

24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.

25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.

26.   Terms of safety certificates.

27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).

28.Issue of certificates     to    grounds    without   them   (interim
recommendation 14).

29.   Annual   review  of   certificates;  annual         renewal    of
      certificates (interim recommendation 15).

30.   Review of arrangements for issuing certificates (interim
      recommendation 16).

31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability of a properly constituted team approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.
Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.

DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)

32.   Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).

33.   Correlation of turnstile      flow   and    capacity   (interim
      recommendation 19).
34.   Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).

35.   Closed circuit   television   (interim     recommendation   21,
      extended).

36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).

37.   Information on tickets (interim recommendation 23).

38.   Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).

39.   Computer records of ticket sales.

40.   Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.

41.   Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).

42.   Recruitment of stewards.

43.   Police control rooms.
These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.

POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)
44.   Nomination of a Chief      Officer    for    liaison   (interim
      recommendation 26).
45.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 27) o

46o   operational orders (interim recommendation 28).

47.   Police action on ticketless fans.
48.   Review of arrest procedures.

49.   Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).

50.   Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.

51.   Control room facilities.

52.   Training of senior officers.

53.   Charges for police services.

These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior   officer training    and the     objective    to  improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches.     The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.

COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)

54.   Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).

55.   Provision of a command channel.

56.   Land lines (interim recommendation 32).

57.   Public address (interim recommendation 33).

58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:   advice
      on hand signals withdrawn).

These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
to implement. Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)

59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).

60.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).

61.   Communication with emergency services.

62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).

63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).

These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recommendation devised to ensure^
immediate summons of emergency services.

FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   64-69)

64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).

65.   First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).
66.   Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised).

67.   Ambulances (interim recommendation 42, revised).

68.   Ambulances, larger matches (interim recommendation 43).

69.   Major incident vehicles.

The Government will draw attention to variations from the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES (Recommendations 70-73)

70.   Selling tickets.

71.   Other specific offences.

72.   Attendance centres.

73.   Electronic tagging.
The Government will look carefully and quickly at all these
suggestions.

GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)

74.   Revision of the Green Guide.

75.   Crush barrier tests.

76.   Inspections for corrosion.
The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
