POLICE INVESTIGATION


Line to take


Hillsborough tragedy shocking for everybody - terrible loss
for the bereaved, who all have our deepest sympathy.


All questions of blame must be very carefully investigated -
that I am afraid takes time and must be completed before any
comment can be made.


I gather that Mr Sharp visited you (Mr Hicks) and Mr Devonside
and Mr Hammond within the last week to explain his conclusions
in relation to a complaint against Mr Wright.   I do hope this
was helpful, and that it indicated the care and thoroughness
with which all this must be examined.


Background note


The main police inquiry centres on any possible criminal
actions by the police, Sheffield Wednesday football club,
Sheffield city council or their advisors, or disciplinary
matters in relation to the police.   While each element is
being examined in its own right, all aspects are inter-related
and there is close co-operation between the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire (who asked for the investigation), the
Director of Public Prosecutions, and the Police Complaints
Authority.


The initial (very detailed) assessment of evidence is nearing
completion and interviews with those directly involved on 15
April 1989 will shortly begin.   No conclusions on criminal or
disciplinary matters are likely for some time - perhaps three
months or more.
Separate police inquiries are being pursued by Mr Sharp. Chief
Constable of Cumbria, concerning the involvement of senior
police officers of ACPO rank (Assistant Chief Constable and
above) - ie Mr Jackson, the then ACC (operations) and the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Mr Wright.   Consideration
of Mr Jackson's actions may be on a similar timescale to the
main inquiry.


Mr Sharp has however recently completed his investigations
into alleged remarks bv Mr Wright which were reported in the
press as being critical of supporters, eg for being drunk.
This has cleared Mr Wright of any impropriety in this matter:
essentially because the press reports were exaggerated from
the more cautious words spoken by Mr Wright - a tape recording
of the interview, by the journalist concerned, was crucial in
establishing this.


Although entirely outside his obligations, Mr Sharp decided
(with the agreement of the Police Complaints Authority) to
visit Mr Hicks. Mr Devonside and Mr Hammond who had made the
complaint against Mr Wright - all three are from the
Hillsborough Family Support Group - to explain why Mr Wright
had been exonerated.   These visits took place in the last few
days.   A bland statement in writing alone might well have been
painful to the complainants and hard to understand.


The suggestion for the visits was compassionate and touching,
and Mr Hicks greatly appreciated this initiative (Mr Sharp
visited him on Monday 30 April).   He agrees that no blame for
the press reports lies with Mr Wright.   Indeed, he commented
that this was the first time he had been "treated like a human
being" (by officialdom).   This may therefore be an opportunity
for Lord Ferrers to emphasize that those investigating the
case are very sympathetic to the bereaved, but are also
tightly constrained in what they can say until their work is
complete.
