                                                 23k
INQUIRY    INTO       THE          HILLSBOROUGH

       STADIUM                 DISASTER




                      Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                        and

                PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                        At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on
            Friday,   16th     June,   1989.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                         (MORNING SESSION)




                                                  Page


ALAN KEITH SEAMAN Recalled

   Examined by MR. COLLINS                          1
   Cross-Examined by MR.            HYTNER         17
   Cross-Examined by MR.            MAXWELL        24
   Cross-Examined by MR.            GIBSON-WATT    34
   Cross-Examined by MR.            KALLIPETIS     35
   Cross-Examined by MR.            GLASGOW        38
   Cross-Examined by MR.            WOODWARD       44
   Cross-Examined by MR.            MULLER         56
   Re -e xa mi ne d   by MR.   COLLINS             66
                             1



                TWENTY-THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   FRIDAY.   16th JUNE. 1989

                      (MORNING   SESSION)


          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think it might be helpful
     if I indicate now - I have had representations from
     Counsel - and what we are going to do is to break at
     mid-day today.  That should give Counsel a lon$ weekend
     to digest the documents and I understand that it is
     preferred that we should have the whole of Monday free
     to do that, so after adjourning today we will resume
     at 10 o'clock on Tuesday morning.

                  ALAN KEITH SEAMAN Recalled

                   Examined by   MR. COLLINS:

Q. Mr. Seaman, we had been looking, I think, at pa§e 24,
   23/24, of your statement when we adjourned dealing with
   the meeting in relation to the new turnstile arrangements
   and the new arrangements on the terrace? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think you had actually dealt with the matters that
   were covered on page 24 of your proof.  Can I go over
   then to page 25? You deal there with the width of
   the gates.  That is the point that you have already
   been dealing with and already made.  That is the width
   of the outside gates, is not it? -A. They were dealing
   with the flows off the terrace and also through the gates
   to the outside of the ground from each area.

Q.   That is right.   But the figures Mr. Grimshaw wrote on
     the plan relate, as we have all seen, to the outside
     gates?- A. The actual widths required for the gates to
     take the anticipated flow that they were anticipating
     from each section.

Q. Now, signing.  Were you as the Fire Brigade concerned
   with signing of exit routes or of ingress routes or of
   both?- A. We considered that we were concerned with
   signing of exit routes, sir.

Q.   There are in fact, I think I am right in saying, no
     exit signs although - they were not planned, any way?
       A. Not at that part of the ground, no.

Q. Not at that part of the ground.  Was that something
   that concerned the Fire Brigade at all? - A. The exit
   signs had never been required because the terrace was
   in the open air, it was a relatively shallow terrace
   and it was felt that the normal ways on and off the
                                             A.K.   SEAMAN

terrace which would be the ways which would be used to
leave the terrace were self-evident and people would
normally leave by the way that they came in by.

And for the reasons, I suppose, that you gave yesterday
there was not any point in having any signs on the gates
at the rear end of the radial fences? -A. No, sir, because
we would only want them to use that in an emergency, if
the emergency evacuation procedure was activated.

Normally, am 1 not right, in public buildings the whole
point of signing is that you do indicate where emergency
exits are? -A. I think we drew a distinction between
this particular terrace in the open air and what we
would have required within a building which, had a fire
occurred, could be filled with smoke, but we had required
exit signs within the stands, seated stands, because
they were buildings but not off the terraces.

1 follow that to a degree but 1 do not at the moment
follow why the mere fact it is open air makes any
difference to the need to indicate where the emergency
exits are in case anyone needs to get out from a
particular area? - A. We felt in that situation that if we
had an emergency exit sign over the radial fence gates
that people may well attempt to try to use them under
normal conditions which we would not want because they
would be walking against the normal flow of exit at
the end of a game, for example.

Well, it would only, would it not, be an emergency exit
for those in the centre pen or centre pens as they
became? -A. It could conceivably be used in the opposite
direction.  It could be a two way thing.

You would only sign it so it was visible, surely, from
the middle pens? You would have the lettering that way,
if it was to be signed at all? -A. Again, it would depend
on what the circumstance was that arose.  What we wanted
to try and maintain was an ability to move in a lateral
direction should £he need arise for whatever reason
from whichever side of the fence it might be.

Was it ever thought sensible or possible that there
should be not only a gate at the rear but a gate at
the front of the radial fences to cater for those
who wanted to move laterally or might want to move
laterally at the front? - A. No, sir, I do not believe
it was.

At one stage there was a suggestion which I think emanated
from the Police that there should be two gates, one front
and one back? - A. Yes.  I think that was in the early
85 proposal.

Indeed. - A. Did not go ahead.
                   3
                                             A.K.   SEAMAN

It was not in fact carried into effect? - A. No.

Was that a matter which the Fire Brigade considered?
- A. The Fire Brigade only considered they needed a
gate at the rear at that time.  The other gate on the
stand was wanted by the Police for their access purposes.




                          / Q. It certainly ...
                     4
                                  a .k   .   seaman



It certainly^-S Police requirement, as I understand it for
the purpose of getting people out of the pen, that is quite
right, but when you think about it, surely if you have a
lot of people and there is a need to empty that pen, isn t
it more sensible and quicker that you have some means
of getting across at the front rather than to have everyone
go up to the back in order to get out of the back? - A.
Well I think the whole concept sir was that on a properly
packed terrace and not an overcrowded terrace, on a properly
packed terrace, the crush barriers and the whole of the
structure would contain within safe limits, because that
was what the design was supposed to do, any pressures and
allow a controlled egress from the rear of the terrace.
You would not want a rushed egress, the actual barriers
would control the rate on to the gate and from that aspect
we considered that a gate at the rear where people would
not be under pressure if something untoward had happened,
 could move more easily.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Where you do have signs saying
"Emergency Exit" which you say is usually in a building,
do you only do that where that exit is used only in an
emergencies and not used at all otherwise? - A. It is
normal - it depends on the type of building - but it is
normal to mark those exits which are not normally^used.

So inasmuch as these gates in the radial fence at the back
are intended so we are told to even out in the ordinary
way, flow between the pens and keep them of an even
distribution they would be in use in the ordinary way or
would you in those circumstances want to put "Emergency
Exit" over the top or not? - A. No, I don't believe we
would sir. If I could say, in certain designs of buildings,
there are certain designs of building that only have a
single staircase, a single way out and properly protected
they are acceptable under various codes, so we are talking
about a similar type of situation related to this terrace.

       MR. COLLINS: Make it clear, I was not suggesting
 that it should be. I was simply testing whether it was a
 matter that had been considered and whether it was worthy
 of consideration? - A. Yes.
 If I may summarise your answer a moment ago, what you are
 really saying is that the view was taken that the key to
 this was to ensure that those pens never got overcrowded?
 - A. Certainly sir. There were many factors that were
 taken into consideration in maintaining a safe package.
 The installation of the radial fences we understood^would
 create a situation more easy to control to prevent the
 reoccurrence of the 1981 situation.

, indeed and that was one of the purposes, as y o u understood
  it, to ensure that there could not be crushing because
  there would be greater control over the numbers in each
  of the pens? - A. Yes.
                                 A.K. SEAMAN


I think that covers all the   matters in relation to gates and
so on.  Can I ask you to go   on to page 32 please.

      We now come to the period after the take over by the
City Council when there are requests for comments into the
drafting of the new Safety Certificate? - A. Correct.

At the bottom of the page you refer to - 3.7 - you refer
to a draft letter from the City Council being received.
There is an indication that the Fire Service were going
to make some comments.  The reason I refer to this is
that these are documents which are not in our full bundle
and I thought therefore we ought to look at them.

      Can we look first of all at Exhibit 69 which is a
letter or copy letter to the Club from the City Council
dated the 19th March 1987 saying:

      "In November 1986 I asked both the Police and
      Fire Service to comment on the condition of
      your stadium having regard  to the provisions
      of the 1975 Act.  I have also asked the Building
      Surveyor ...

      The Police have indicated that they are quite
      satisfied ...

      The Fire Service have, however, made a number
      of comments and I attach for your information
      a copy of their letter to me of the 18th
      February."

Now that letter, the Fire Service letter of the 18th of
February is in our bundle and it is at page 374.  I d o n ’t
ask you to turn it up because it is effectively summarised
so far as the important part is concerned, comments are
made in respect of final exit gates; concern about the
sliding gates and it is indicated they must be replaced
without them opening doors and a drawing for securing
the bolting and so on.

      In fact it is right, isn't it, that the Green Guide
- I forget the paragraph number, it matters not - the
Green Guide suggests that sliding doors are not a good
idea at exits because of the possibility of them jamming?
- A. Yes sir, that is right.

Can I ask you, talking about doors, one thing perhaps I
ought to ask you about is this: you know that there are
doors at the end of the tunnel? - A. Yes sir.

And we know that those doors in fact open the wrong way?
- A. Yes.

That is something which never seems to have been spotted,
or at least it certainly has not been referred to in any
of the documentation that we have seen? - A. No sir, I
don't believe it has.
                                  A.K. SEAMAN


Can you help us at all about that or not? - A. Only to the
extent that I would expect that those doors would be locked
back whilst the terrace was in use.

So for that reason it may be it was   thought the fact that
they open the wrong way was immaterial because provided they
are kept open at all times if there are people on the terraces?
- A. There are situations where there are gates of      that type
and the requirement is to keep them   locked back so    thatthey
would not form an obstruction.

The only reason I raise it is of course that it would have
been one way to have shut off the tunnel so as to avoid
people coming down, but of course because they open the
wrong way that is a dangerous thing to do, isn't it? - A.
Do you mean to prevent people coming down off the terrace?

No, I mean to prevent people coming in from the concourse
outside.  You appreciate what happened here was that when
Gate C was opened everyone went down that tunnel which was
straight ahead? - A. I think properly stewarded or policed
it would have been possible to close those gates anyway,
or to put some other form of barrier across the entrance,
providing it was done in a controlled way.

I would imagine you would accept the point, would you,
that to shut those doors is not on the face of it a very
good thing because if there had been a need for people to
come out, it would have meant that they were opening the
wrong way? - A. Yes, I would accept that but again much
would depend on the situation and how it was hand&ed.

Of course.  What you are saying is if there had been proper
stewarding then it might have been possible even to have
shut at least one of those doors say? - A. I believe it
would because if there had been a need for a rapid
evacuation of that terrace, providing there was somebody
on the gate to ensure it was opened, as the emergency
evacuation procedure required of all gates, then it could
have been catered for.

Can I ask you now going back to your bundle to look at
Exhibit 70 which is another copy of the letter at 69 with
some comments upon it. Those are the draft comments I
think of Mr. Grimshaw.  Is that right? - A. That is right
sir, yes.

Then of course the date of that letter is the 19th of
March.  It was in July I think that we have the final
comments, am I right, at our 394. No that seems to
have related to another matter? - A. It is, I think.  The
final paragraph deals with it though sir. We asked there
if a reminder could be given to both Sheffield United
and Sheffield Wednesday about the letters that we had
sent because we had had not response back at that stage.
                      7
                                            A. K. SEAMAN


     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   That was where we got our
pagination in the wrong order, is it not?
      Mr. COLLINS: That is right. Can I go on to 409?
It is your exhibit 75, Mr. Seaman. I am sorry about the
muddle. I have fallen into the same trap again. Those
are the specific comments on the draft safety certificate.
What I was getting at is that if we go back to your
exhibit 70, Mr. Seaman, and the matters upon that in
manuscript, I think that was dealt with, was it not, at
a meeting rather than being put into writing in the
 form of a letter to the City Council?  A. If I can just
explain what happened, we received a request, I think
in NOVembver 1986, from the Sheffield City Council
asking us whether we felt there were any outstanding
matters at both Sheffield United and Sheffield Wednesday.
We were conscious that it was intended to amend the
Sheffield Wednesday safety certificate as soon as the
Sheffield City Council had done their amended conditions.
So it was thought opportune to have a good look at the
ground because things might get missed, you know, over
the years, have a really good look at it, see if there
were any outstanding matters - and we understood that
the other disciplines had been asked to report as well -
with the intention of going to a joint officer working
meeting where each of the disciplines present could
discuss what they had come up with; and I would then
have wanted to see that amalgamated into one letter which
would be sent to the Club. We did our letter, and it
seems that the Police had said that they were happy,
and I don't think the building surveyors had commented
at all. So a meeting took place and really what happened
was that we discussed the content of the Fire Service's
 letter.    It was agreed --
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: That is this           letter at 409,
is it?    A. That is the letter of the           18th --

Sorry, your 75, is it?   A. It's a letter of the 18th
February, 1987, sir.   It's our exhibit 68.
     Mr. COLLINS: It is not exhibited in ours, is it?
I should have referred to that.
     Mr.   MULLER:   It is 374, I think.
     Mr. COLLINS:     374, is   it?   Yes, you    are quite right,
I am sorry - 374.
Those were your comments to the City Council following
their request and following your inspection, effectively,
is that right?   A. That's right, sir.
And what you are saying isthat you had understood  that
the other disciplines were going to make their own
comments but you ascertained?, as appears from the
correspondence that we have been looking at,from the
City Council, that the Police had no observations
                     8
                                           A. K. SEAMAN

effectively arid tft&t the building surveyor had not
reported, and so you thought that what should happen
should be a meeting at which all your matters and
their matters could be discussed - is that right? A. I
think that is how we understood it would be dealt
with by Mr. Bownes once he had got comments in from
each discipline.
And then put to the Club in the form of a letter from the
City Council incorporating all the input from all the
various disciplines?   A. That would have been my
preferred option.
But what in fact happened? A. In fact, a meeting took
place and because there were no comments from the Police
and the building surveyor had not commented, there was
only the Fire Service letter to comment upon, and I think
that is probably why the letter from the Fire Service
was sent.
And hence, as you say, the letter that we have been
looking at at exhibit 69, which is the letter from the
City Council to the Club enclosing the Fire Service
letter of the 18th February?   A. Yes. The letter of
the 19th March was, I believe, a draft letter that Mr.
Bownes sent to us for comment before he sent the actual
letter.

That is right. A. And then the comments that are on
exhibit 70 are what he and Mr. Grimshaw discussed over
the telephone.
I see.   A. I believe things had already been dealt with.

     Mr. MULLER:    I think the letter that was eventually
sent was 72.

     Mr. COLLINS:   Yes, you are quite right.

     Mr. MULLER:   Account had not been taken of various
things that had been discussed at the meeting.

     Mr. COLLINS: The letter which was eventually sent
to the Club, as Mr. Muller points out, was dated 22nd
April, 1987, and appears at your Tab 72, our page 383.
I am sorry to have been a bit laborious about that. Can
I finally refer to your exhibit 71 which is again a
document which is not in our bundle, which is a record
of a meeting of the police at the ground, an inspection
by the police, prior to the semi-final in 1987? A. Yes,
sir.
Dealing with the Fire Service input, which effectively
is concerned with what one would expect from the Fire
Service - extinguishers and so on?   A. That's correct,
                          9
                                               A. K. SEAMAN

Q.   Can I, I think finally so far as your statement is concerned,
     ask you to look at page 36 --

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just before we leave all that,
     409 in our bundle - 75 in yours - is the comments of the
     Fire Service on the revised safety certificate conditions?
     A. Yes, sir.

Q.   And the second matter there, section 10(a), is the one
     which says that you consider it is difficult to imagine
     how the stewards can control the terraces - is that
     ri^ht?   A. Yes, sir.

Q. I am not querying that. All I was wanting to ask you was
    this: In these various discussions that took place, for
    example when you had a discussion with the Police and
    others which you say was a meeting on the 10th March, when
    you say that stewarding and the securing of gates was
   discussed, was this point discussed?     A. I don't know,
    sir, because I didn't attend that meeting. It's not
    something that I could answer straight off.

Q. Was there ever, so far as you know, any Police response
    to that point?   A. Not as far as I am aware. If I
    could explain, sir, I think what was meant was that whilst
    there might be situations on some parts of some grounds
   where it is quite possible for stewards to be able to ’
    perform a particular function, in other areas of the
    ground, you know, if there were particularly unruly fans,
    for example, it might well be that it's not something
   that they could adequately do, §ind that there would need
   to be some agreement between the Club and the Police
   Force on those occasions as to who was going to do it.

Q.   Quite. That is what we are looking at particularly.
     But you cannot help any further about any discussions
     concerning that at the time?   A. No, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Very well, thank you.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS: Can I just, as I ought to have done,
     follow up Lord Justice Taylor's question? The comment
     is made, as has been pointed out, that it is difficult
     to imagine how the crowds could be controlled by stewards.
     Why was it thought impossible for it to be done by
     stewards?   A. I think I have already --

Q.   I am not saying that it is possible. I am just wondering
     what the thinking behind that was?   A. I think I have
     already said that if it was a carte blanche statement
     that in all circumstances that would be done by stewards,
     I think we could imagine a situation that could arise
     where they might not be able to.

Q.   With respect, it seems to go further than that, does it
     not, because as I read that letter - and I think this is
     the ordinary reading of it - this is a task which as a
     general rule could not be expected to be done by stewards.
                   10                    A. K. SEAMAN

It is not limited to exceptional circumstances where
stewards might not cope. It is put in the form of a
general proposition, is it not? A. If you read it in
that way, yes, I would agree that it is.
Well, it is not a question of reading it in any way.
That is what it says, is it not? That is the natural
meaning of it, is it not, and when you couple that with
the comment made on the draft safety certificate, it
leads to the same effect, does it not? A. I think we
also have got to bear in mind that the Green Guide
itself uses a very similar form of wording.
I know.   A. You know, it's drawing a distinction between
the two.    We felt that there were occasions, I believe,
where it might not be the case that stewards would be
adequately able to perform that particular task.




                        /Q. Well, if I may say so
                                        A.   K.   SEAMAN


Well, if I may say so, I follow that but that is not what
is being said, is it?    It is being put far more generally
and widely.    All I am asking you is that clearly, or at
least I assume, this must have been talked about, talked
through and c onsidered by Mr. Grimshaw.   It was Mr.
Grimshaw, was it not?    A.  It was Mr. Grimshaw and I
think partly based on his experience as a keen football
supporter.

Was it simply the case that Mr. Grimshaw knew that it was
not dealt with by stewards?   A.   Not as far as I am aware.
Again, I think just his observations at football matches
that he has attended on occasions.

We have heard some evidence about it but, anyway, you cannot
take it further than that?   A.    I am sorry, no, sir.

Very well.    Can I then go on to 36, the bottom of the page,
and again this is simply a question of referring to some
of your exhibits which are not in our bundle.          A minor
matter, first of all.    You recall your Exhibit 80, our
435, there was a lengthy letter from E as twoods to the City
Council dealing with various matters that had been raised
and ending with a c riticism of the Fire Service - this
is the last page of the letter - to the effect that whenever
there was a new Fire Officer on the Working Party the g o a l ­
posts were moved.    A.   Yes.         I mean, if I could explain
that?    Really, I think it stemmed from our desire to have
a really good look at the stadium to see if there were
any things which were o utstanding and it might well be,
and it did in fact turn out to be, that many of the things
which were queried were, in fact, easily resolved but
there were doubts in the O f f i c e r ’s mind when he did the
inspection, so he recorded them, and that perhaps made it
look as if a lot more things were being asked for than
in actual fact there were but it was n ecessary to be sure.

E xhibit 81 in your bundle, not in ours, is in fact the
response of the Fire Service to those criticisms and
you point; out that Station Officer Woodhouse has attended
meetings since November, 1985;    for 2 years prior to that
Station Officer Allc oc k was the r esponsible officer and
the only time another officer may have been involved was
in the absence of Mr. W oodhouse for 13 weeks during 1986,
and the last paragraph:

     "It would appear, therefore, that the Club's           /
     remarks are a little exaggerated and every
     endeavour is made by this Authority for
     cont in ui ty of fire prec aytion standards."

A.   That's right,   sir,   yes.

Going back to page 36 of your statement, Paragraph 3.20,
you refer to an i nspection at the 1988 SemiSFinal and a
note of findings and that is to be found in your Tab 83,
which perhaps we had just better look at quickly.    It
                             12

                                               A.   K.    SEAMAN


     says, "Inspection carried out by D . O . G .        "?        A.     D.O.G.
     Pearson, it is.

Q."And Station Officer Grayson.      Mr. Mackrel  contacted and
   a r ra ngements approved for the inspection."   That is the
   Joint Performance, presumably, inspection.      "Contact at
   ground, Mr. Locke.     Arrived 1.45, contacted Mr. Locke
   at Control Centre.     Toured the ground, all final exits
   checked, stewards and police in position.     Emergency
   lighting, fire fighting equipment all appeared satisfactory.
   P.A. system was also audible throughout the ground."
   And then you have a note of defects.      "A small number of
   stewards were without any i de ntification" and there was no
   log book.      What log book is that that is being referred
   to?      A.   I think they expected that there would be a
   record of tests, etc., which would have been available for
   them to look at.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is this an inspection pre the
     1988 match or post?    A.   It is immediately before the
     kick-off, sir, in the lead up to it, while the ground is
     filling, and they went round to make sure that from the
     Fire Service point of view, etc., that e verything seemed
     to be in order.

Q. Was   that done again    in 1989?    A.   No,    it was not,          sir.

Q.   Why is that?     A.     Partly, I suppose, because the 1988
     i ns pection had gen er al ly found things to be s at is factory
     and we do not inspect on every occasion.        You know, it
     is s o mething that is done occasionally.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:     So far as the log book is concerned,
     you say that, as you u nderstand it, refers to the records
     that should have been kept by the Club;    is that right?
     A.   Yes, sir.    I think, in fact, records were kept;
     it is just that t h ^ occasion I do not think they laid
     their hands on them.

Q.   It was not a question    of there being none?            A.        No,   I
     don't think it was.

Q.   It was simply that they could not find them at the relevant
     time or the wrong person was asked or whatever.   A.   That's
     right.

Q.   Because, of course, as we can see if we look at the Safety
     Ce rtificate, by Paragraph 28.4 there is a requirement that
     there should be kept records and further that they should be
     available for i nspection at all reasonable times to an
     a uthorised person.   A.   Right, sir.

Q. And, of course, the Fire Service come within that category.
   Then there is a record of the attendances.      Two i ndependent
   m atters that I want to ask you; a bout, Mr. Seaman.    We know
   that the tunnel, the central tunnel, slopes quite steeply
   at the end nearest the terracing.      A.   Yes, sir.
                              13

                                                          A.K.   SEAMAN


Q.   Of course, as a matter of egress that would involve going
     up rather than gjing down, of course.   A.   Yes, it would.

Q. Was that c o ns id er ed satisfactory, the slope?          A.    Yes,
   because it was on the inward journey, if you like, and
   we expected that that would be t u r n s t i l e- co nt ro ll ed and
   so the actual flow down that tunnels- would be relatively
   uncrowded and on the egress side one of the things with
   egress from terraces is that it does not want to be too
   quickly;       it wants to be a controlled flow, and so that
   first few metres of rise would actually tend to c o n t r o l
   the speed of movement off the terrace.            Had the thing
   been the other way round, had he been looking at an exit
   s ituation with a mass crowd of people coming and hitting
   that same situation, then it would have been totally
   u nac ce pt ab le but in the situation of it being the other
   way round, then I feel that is why it was accepted.

Q.   Of course, the problem is that if, for any reason, a
     number of people do decide to cone down that tunnel at the
     same time - maybe because they have congregated in
     the concourse, even though they have gone through the
     t u rnstiles in a cont ro ll ed fashion, then it is a potential
     danger, is it not?      A.     Well, I would say, sir, that I
     think it must have been like that since at least 1966 when
     the West Stand was built and I have no evidence that anyone
     was ever injured because of the slope.        We never had any
     intimation that that was the case.

Q.   But if s om ething is potent ia ll y dangerous, the fact that it
     has not caused any accident for a number of years is
     really nothing to      the point, is it? A.I still think
     that you have to make a judgment on such matters on the basis
     of turnstile control in and no indication of problems,
     that that would be enough on which to make a judgment.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   The Green Guide does            not
     specify in or out, does it?

          MR.   COLLINS:     It does not,   no.

Q. But I think it is   fair that you make the point that the Fire
   Brigade, as I think you said yesterday, were more concerned
   with egress than with access.    A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   The other thing is this:  we have heard some evidence that
     there were problems of access of the tender because it
     could not get along the road that runs from Leppings Lane
     alongside the river, the private road, because of the
     overhang of the South Stand.

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:    That was    the one appliance.

          MR.   COLLINS:     One appliance.

Q.   It is at the Spion Kop end,      I think.      A.   From    Penistone
     Road.
                            14

                                                  A.   K.   SEAMAN


          MR. COLLINS:     I think it was behind the South      Stand,
     was it not?   Have   I got that wrong?

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I think it was.   It could get
     so far along, as I understand it, but then it ---

Q.        MR. COLLINS:     And then it got stuck and had to reverse
     back to Penistone Road and p resumably if it did not get
     through from the Penistone Road end, it equally could not have
     got through from the Leppings Lane end either.      What I
     am gett in g at is that there is no possibility, a pparently
     of some of your a ppliances being able to get up the South
     Stand and behind the South Stand and go from one end to
     the other.     A.   Well, you can come from either side.

Q.   I follow that but I just wondered whether that was a
     p otential problem.     A.    It wasn't regarded as a prbblem.
     Really, access to the perimeter part of the ground which
     is all that was being required was quite good and we could
     get to most of the buildings in that ground and the fact
     that that overhang stopped an appliance going through,
     if you had said, "Well, you can't do that" or "You have got
     to build it higher because the Fire appliance would not
     be able to go under if there were a fire" I think that
     would have been unr ea so na bl e because I think if we could
     have got to either side of where that building is with
     an a p p l i ance we could have tackled a fire.

Q.   It does suggest, though, that it is important, or might be
     important, to know which end of the ground to send the
     appl ia nc es in certain circumstances.    A.  C er tainly as
     far as the Fire Service is concerned on any incident that it
     attends, it is dependent on the accuracy of the message
     and the i nformation that you get.      It is vitally important.

Q.   The point being that if they were to arrive at the Leppings
     Lane end, then valuable time could be lost because of this
     p roblem of access, could it not, if, in fact, it was
     n ecessary to come in from the other end, or the other
     way round?    A.   A ga in,it would depend what part of the
     ground the fire was in.      If it were in the South §tand,
     then if they could get access to the point of the bridge
     over, then they could probabJy gain access to tackle that
     fire from either side.

Q.   Incidentally, I suppose I ought to ask you about location
     because we have heard some evidence earlier this week
     about the Fire Service computer and the way in which
     the ground at H i l l sb or ou gh is fed into the computer, if
     I can put it ih that way.          A.   Yes.

Q.   One can fully unde rs ta nd it is necessary for you to have
     some sort of a system in order to establish precisely
     where a parti cu la r place is and, as I u nderstand it, you
     normally do that by reference to a road in which the
     site is situated;     is that right?   A.    Well, it could
     be a road or it could be a district.       I mean, a road can
     be 5 m iles long.
                                           A.   K.    SEAMAN


That is the point.      A.   You have got to know ---

Obviously, if you give the number in a road, that should
be able to tell you, should it not, if the place has a
n umber?      A.   It is possible.   I can say that I am not
part ic ul ar ly familiar with the computer and how it works
b ecause it is not my ---

In that case it would not be fair to ask you about it
and I shall not.       Finally, Mr. Seaman, the front of
your bundle, there are a number of p hotographs behind -
in mine, anyway - a pink cover.        These p ho to graphs
at the very front.        I think they probably speak for
t hemselves and they contain an index.       This was an exercise
that was carried out helpfully by the Fire Service for
the purpo se s of t h i s Inquiry;   that is right, is it not?
A.    That is right, sir, yes.

Were   you concerned   in taking part in it?     A.       Yes,   I was.

You are one of those in the pen, are you?            A.    No,   I am
not in the pen.   I am just out of shot.

What ef fe ct iv el y you have done, as we can see, is form
three pens, one 10 sq.m., one 7% sq.m. and one of 5 sq.m.,
taken 54 people on the basis of 54/10 sq.m. being the
maximum on terraces for packing purposes.        A.   Yes.




                                    /And seen how you can....
                         16

                                                   A.K.   SEAMAN

Q. And seen how you can fit them in to those size pens?
   - A. Yes.

Q. And just taking this through very quickly, the photo­
   graphs.  1 shows the three empty pens.  2 is a view of
   the 10 square metres full. 3 is where people have gone
   back, is it, to a state where they are comfortable but
   as close as possible together remaining comfortable?
   - A. Yes, they were comfortable.  We asked them to put
   their hands in the air, you know, can you put your hands
   in your pockets, this sort of thing, and they still
   could.

Q. And it shows the space that is left assuming everyone
   does pack up together in the area of 10 square metres.
   - A. Yes.

Q. The next two photographs, 4 and 5, are aerial views
   of the same thing.  Photograph 6 is an aerial view
   of the 7% square metre pen.  Is that right?- A. That
   is right, sir, yes.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Again with 54 in? - A. Yes.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   Finally, 7 and 8 deal with the
     5 square metre pen.  This time not with 54 in but
     with 49 because five could not get in.  Is that right?
     -A. Well, we believe we could have got them in but we
     got quite a few ladies there and we did not want to
     make them uncomfortable.

Q. Was this the situation, they could not have got in
   without causing at the very least discomfort to those
   already in? -A. Yes. I think you could say that that
   area was just about full at that.

Q. And of course, as we can see, we have a pen at, or a
   barrier really, at a height of - what - about, I
   suppose, a metre or so?- A. Yes.

Q. And everyone therefore is able to spread out over that
   a little bit? - A. Yes.

Q. What I am getting at is if you had a pen which went up
   like a perimeter fence then there would not have been
   quite so much room available.  Is that fair? - A. I
   think it is fair to say that but even in that location
   we asked them if they could put their hands in the air
   which shows that they had got an ability to move so if
   we had them inside the constraints you are suggesting
   I think that they could have moved inside it.

Q. Yes.  What I am getting at is they are able to ....
   - A. Yes.

Q         spill out a little bit over the barriers at the
                         17

                                                  A.K.   SEAMAN

     edge.  It gives perhaps a slightly, or may give a
     slightly false impression in the sense that it would
     be worse where you have a barrier going right up?
     - A. I think the intention   only was to give some idea.

Q. Oh, yes, of course, and it is very helpful, but I just
   wanted to explore exactly how far it went.  Yes, thank
   you.  As a matter of interest, Mr. Seaman, when you got
   your 49 in the five square metres was anyone in any sort
   of discomfort?- A. No, no-one at all was in any discomfort
   whatsoever.

Q. But of course I imagine they were not in there for very
   long? -A. A few minutfes, but if anyone had shown any sign
   of discomfort we had someone at the front on that last
   stage ready to release the barrier straightaway.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Because they are all on the
     same level, are not they? -A. Yes, sir, they are stood
     on the flat.

          MR. COLLINS:   Yes, thank you.

                Cross-examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. Can I just deal with the tunnel first, Mr. Seaman?
   So far as the Fire Brigade are concerned is this
   the position, that if there had been stewards or
   Policemen on the tunnel entrance with the doors shut
   although the doors were opened in the wrong direction
   you would not see any problem because if there was an
   emergency on the terraces it would take longer for the
   crowd to come down the length of the tunnel than it
   would for the Policemen or stewards to open the gates?
   - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Because if thereis somebody actually on the gates it is
     only a matter of a second or two to open them up before
     the flood actually reaches the doors to prevent them
     being opened? -A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Alternative ways of doing it would be to open one door
     and have a barrier across the open space or, indeed,
     have barriers across the whole lot? - A. I think
     there would have been a number of ways in which it
     could have been achieved.

Q. Can I now deal with the meeting on the 18th of April,
   1985, because what we have is your account which
   presumably comes from Mr. Grimshaw and we also have
   at page 211 in the core bundle the notes of the working
   party.  We do not know, I think, who actually drafted
   that minute but, you see, the minute makes no reference
   to the matters that you talk of and I would like to ask
V i
                             18

                                                       A.K.   SEAMAN

         you about it.  The first thing is this, that Mr.
         Grimshaw - by the way, what is his rank? How senior
         is he? -A. Mr. Grimshaw is a Divisional Officer.

      Q. That is fairly senior?- A. Yes.

      Q. Yes.  Now, he spotted immediately apparently according
         to your proof that under the new system there would
         have to be some control of the number of people entering
         the pens to prevent overcrowding? -A. Yes.

      Q. Without disrespect to Mr. Grimshaw who appears to have
         seen something that the club and the Police do not appear
         to have seen, it is a pretty obvious point, is not it,
         that if you can control the total numbers going on to
         a terrace by mechanical means and you then cut that
         terrace up into pens with separate capacities you have
         then lost the control of the numbers going into each
         individual pen? - A. Can I just ask if you would - I
         am not quite sure if I caught what you were meaning
         there.  If you could repeat it, please.

      Q. Yes.  If you have a terrace, an entire terrace, and it
         has a capacity and that capacity is controlled through
         the turnstiles with a computer you have control over the
         total numbers on the terrace? - A. Yes.

      Q. There is then a separate problem which arises more on
         a large terrace than a small one that even though: you
         have got the right density in the terrace as a whole
         that may be unevenly spread and you may have too dense
         a crowd in one spot with plenty of space in another?
         - A. Yes, it would be necessary to try and achieve even
         packing.

      Q. You have actually illustrated that beautifully on your
         photographs because on photograph No. 3 we see a
         properly packed pen, pen with the right numbers in it,
         but too dense in one part and empty in another? - A.
         H*m.

      Q. So the second problem of crowd density, having controlled
         your entire capacity, is to ensure that the crowd is
         evenly spread? - A. Yes, as far as is possible.

      Q. As far as is possible. I will come back to that in a
         moment.  If you cut up the terrace into separate pens
         all of whom come through the same turnstiles and each
         pen is given a separate safety capacity you have now
         lost, as Mr. Grimshaw spotted, the ability to control
         the capacity in each pen? - A. I think that is why he
         was making the point.

      Q. Yes.  All I am saying to yt>u is, without disrespect to
         him, it is a pretty obviSjtos point? is not it? -   That
52*
                             19
                                                      A.K.   SEAMAN

        may be.   It is nonetheless a point.

      Q. Oh, yes.  Now, have you any idea at all, going on to your
         page 24, what it was that the Police were saying was
         their arrangement with the club, first of all, to control
         the overall capacity of each pen? -A. The understanding
         was  that the reason for doing this was to give better
         control of segregation.

      Q. I am sorry.   We understand that.  Mr. Grimshaw asked for
         some assurance on this point for which he gets full marks.
         What you go on to say is the Police stated that arrangements
         that they had    with the club were satisfactory.   That is
         as far as correct density packing was concerned.    Now,
         have you any idea at all from the documents or from your
         conversations and discussions with Mr. Grimshaw what it
         was that the Police indicated they had as an arrangement
         with the club? -A. Not specifically.   I do not tftiiak I
         could answer that question adequately on the information
         that I have got except to say that it was understood
         that between the Police and the club there would be
         control over those aspects but I cannot be more specific
         than that.

      Q. The second aspect of overcrowding is of course the even
         spread in a terrace which has reached its safety capacity.
         That can only be done by observation of the various
         sections or the various parts of each section to see
         whether people look uncomfortable or whether they seem
         to be packed like sardines, whether there is space in
         other parts.  Is that right? - A. Yes, I think you have
         got to keep an observation.

      Q. Yes.  So what it comes to is this, is it, Mr. Seaman?
         When people talk loosely of crowd control and crowd
         control problems and who is responsible for crowd
         control there are three  quite separate and distinct
         aspects.  The first is the problem of controlling
         behaviour among unruly spectactors? - A. Yes, that is
         one aspect..

      Q. Was it the view of the Fire Service that that was a task
         which really could not be adequately performed by stewards?
         -A. I would feel that unruly behaviour would be a law and
         order thing which would be a matter for the Police.

      Q. It may be of course that stewards with particular accents
         and from a particular town might have a role to play in
         keeping people calm generally but unruly behaviour is
         clearly a matter for the Police?  That is right, is not
         it? - A. Yes, I would think so, if it amounts to dis­
         order, that is ....

      Q. Controlling the numbers going into a particular section
         so as to ensure that no more go into that section than
                       20

                                                 A.K.   SEAMAN

   the safe capacity can really only be satisfactorily
   performed by mechanical means.   Is not that right?
   -A. I would certainly say that mechanical means is a
   better way of<d M p g it. I do not necessarily say that
   it cannot be done in any other way.

Q. By visual observation it is a matter of somebody's
   judgment as to how many people? how many heads, they
   can count in a particular section.   That is not a
   very satisfactory method, is it?-A. It is not but I
   am not aware that widespread different methods have
   been used inrfclfcher areas.

Q. What other method other than mechanical methods do you
   think could be used to ensure that normore than 10,000
   people go on to a terrace whose safe capacity is 10,000?
   -A. I think that you have to have a count and you have
   to keep control but I think on the terrace, if we came
   back to the terrace before any radial barriers were on
   it, people probably then - I mean, in the 1981 semi-final
   they did not pack evenly.  You know, the whole understanding
   of the barriers was to try and effect better control, I
   think to try and get more even packing.

Q. Oh, certainly. -A. To improve what otherwise would have been.

Q. Mr. Seaman, may I make it clear I am not criticising at
   this moment the concept of the pens.  What I am getting
   at is once you put the pen in you have to do something
   extra and divide the turnstiles? -A. Yes, I think the
   April, 1985, proposal was a good one.

Q. Provided they had also added to the proposal separate
   turnstiles for each pen to ensure that the safety
   capacity of each pen was not exceeded? - A. I think
   the understanding was that aspect, if they wanted to
   keep one pen full and the other pen empty, depending
   on how it was decided to use it for a particular match,
   that that would be controlled by the gate by having
   someone there to make sure that they used only the side
   that they wanted to.

Q. Which gate are you talking about now? -A. If you are
   talking now about the central radial fence ....

Q. I am. - A       which had gates controlling access
   into each of those pens, they had a gate and they could
   close one gate off and direct people into whichever side
   they had decided.

Q. As we now know the central pens - I am sorry to take
   this time up but there seems to be some confusion -
   as you come down the tunnel there is no means of
   blocking somebody from going into pen 3 or pen 4?
Si
                         21
                                                  A.K.   SEAMAN

     - A. My understanding is that there is a gate that was
     in the locked back position on each pen.




                               / Q. Unless I have ....
                       22
                                  A.K. SEAMAN


      MR. HYTNER: Unless I have made a horrible mistake
myself, that is not the situation.
      MR. COLLINS: No, it was originally proposed by
the Police that there should be a central divide of what
are now Pens 3 and 4 with gates at the top. Those gates,
as I understand it, were never put in. The oftly gates
that I think the witness is referring to are the gates
between 2 and 3 and 4 and 5.
      MR. HYTNER: These are doors at the end of the
tunnel that you can close one off and then divert people
into Pen 3, close the other off ...» A. I think they
are metal gates.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR* If you look at Photograph 21
 they are the same gates as at the other end of the
 tunnel, aren't they?
       MR. HYTNER:   That is what I thought.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: But I am not quite sure from
 this whether if you close one of them you bring it hard
 up against that fence or whether it is simply a way of
 shutting the tunnel.
       MR. HYTNER: Sir, that seems to be the evidence of
 the witness and I had not appreciated and I think I was
 not alone in that.
       MR. COLLINS: Yes, I think that must be so because
 looking at 21 there appears to be a catch on the central
 divide into which the catch on the door goes in.
       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   22 shows it quite clearly.

       MR. COLLINS: Yes indeed. It is my fault entirely.
 I had not not I am afraid taken that on-board.
       MR. HYTNER: But again it does not alter the funda­
 mental point that unless you have a mechanical means of
 counting or unless somebody is going to s&|tnd there and
 count him or herself, there is no means of controlling
 precisely how many people go into each separate section?
 - A. There certainly was an ability to control into which
 pen people went.
. Yes, that is not my point, it is a matter of how many?
  A. I think the matter of how many, exactly how many into
  an area, unless you had specific counting and those people
  could not go anywhere else ©nee they got through the
  turnstile, then the only other way it could be done to
  be accurate is if people were counted.
. I am sorry it has taken such a long time to get there, but
  that is the position, isn't it? - A. If that i s t h e w a y
  the thing was going to be monitored that would be the
  position.
                        23
                                   A.K. SEAMAN


Q. And you yourself from your own investigations have no know­
   ledge of what the Police meant when they said that they
   had satisfactory arrangements with the Club? - A. I think
   I said earlier that really I could not expand further on
   tbat. My understanding is that it would have been
   effectively policed or stewarded. The point I made earlier
   is I think it would be a matter for decision between the
   Club and the Police as to whether a Policeman or a Steward
   was needed in a particular location.
Q. Now going to the third aspect. We have dealt with unruly
   behaviour; we have dealt with the safety capacity, now
   coming to the problem of crowd spread, that is you have
   got your safe number in a pen or on a terrace, how can
   you ensure that there is not too much packing in one
   section and too much space in another? There is no earthly
   reason, is there, when you come to think about it, why a
   Steward should not be just as capable of patrolling a
   perimeter fence and looking into a crowd or why a Head
   Steward should not be looking at a CC TV monitor, or why
   Stewards in a Stand should not be looking down to check
   whether the crowd is evenly spread? - A. I think that is
   something, yes, that a Steward could do.
Q. So there is a role for Stewards? - A. I don't think we
   ever suggested that there was not a role for Stewards.

Q. Obviously they can show people to their seats. They can
   stand on a gate, but I am talking about helping in the
   spread of a crowd to ensure even distribution of a crowd
   an a terrace. That is not beyond the capacity of Stewards
   and indeed might be more appropriate for Stewards to do
   than Police Officers? - A. I think it is the physical
   side of things rather than the actual observance side
   is the difference.
Q. Going on to the physical side. For this purpose you don't
   need either Stewards or Policemen within a terrace, do you?
   - A. I am sorry, I don't think I follow what you mean?

Q. For the purpose of observing whether a terrace has uneven
   distribution of fans, you don't require a Steward or a
   Policeman within the terrace. They are better off looking
   from outside? - A. Providing they have got a good point
   from which to see.
Q. Yes. Now let's deal with the situation when the Steward
   or Policeman observing from outside sees that a particular
   corner is densely packed but there is room somewhere else.
   You can't physically move people from one part of a pen
   to another, can you? - A. I think when you say you "can't
   physically move" them, I think you have got to try and
   give them some information that makes them move.

 Q. Of course, but you don't envisage that somebody will be
    in the pen saying: "You shove over there" and moving
                     24
                                 A.K. SEAMAN


him physically along? - A. I would have thought a better
way of doing it would have been to try to announce to
people what you want them to do.

Exactly, you are one step ahead of ise, Mr. Seaman. The
way you ensure crowd distribution when you have got your
safe capacity within a terrace or a pen, is to observe and
see in one part there is dense packing and in another
there is space and you then either by shouting from the
perimeter fence or by making an announcement over the
Tannoy, that people for their own safety and comfort should
move along. That is what you do, isn't it? - A. Yes.

You don't need Policemen or Stewards within a terrace for
that purpose either, do you?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: I think "within a terrace"
Counsel means actually standing inside with the fans? -
A. It might well be that that is not necessary, sir, but
I would point out that I am not experienced in crowd
control measures of this nature.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs I must say Mr. Hytner, if you
don't mind my saying so, we have been going some weeks.
These issues have been explored with those from the Police
and also some of the Stewards.

      MR. HYTNER: I am not sure this specific point has
actually been explored in this way and certainly it is
here on the document and I wanted to know how far it had
gone with the Fire Service.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: It looks from this as though
the Police, according to this stat&nent, gave an assurance
that all gates would be manned and that they got an
arrangement with the Club about density of packing, but
beyond that I doubt whether this witness can take it.

      MR. HYTNER: Since he knows    something of    Mr. Grimshaw'
activities and since it is not in   the Minutes,   I thoughtit
was best explored.

               Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Mr. Seaman, I may have missed it yesterday. You give
evidence for the Fire Service and do it perfectly well.
Is Mr. Grimshaw still available? - A. Yes.

And fit? - A. Yes, he is.

You  told Lord Justice Taylor your understanding of       the
matter was on the basis of discussions you had with
Mr. Grimshaw? - A. Yes sir.
                      25
                                A.K. SEAMAN


Mr. Grimshaw was involved from 1981, wasn't he? - A. I think
he was only involved in one meeting in 1981.
And then again from 1985 onwards? - A. He was involved in
the April 1985 meeting. I don't think he was involved in
the July one.
I want to ask you some questions first of all about crowd
capacity so far as the Fire Service are concerned.
      The Fire Service became involved well before the
grant of the certificate. They were involved in the
lengthy discussions, weren't they? - A. Yes sir and that
included the Building Surveyors of the Sheffield City
Council and the South Yorkshire Police.
And they had to consider the crowd capacity that was suggested
by Dr. Eastwood of 7,200 for the West Terrace? - A. That is
right.
That was approved by the Fire Service as a figure, wasn't
it? - A. It was approved by the Officer Working Party as
a joint figure.
Let me refer you to a document that came from the Fire
Service which is at page 84 of the core bundle. This is
the end of a memorandum supplied by Mr. Hibbert, page 81,
the South Yorkshire Council, Fire Service, 16th May 1979
and at page 84:
      "The following numbers are considered to be
      satisfactory to the Fire Authority providing
      that the recommended work as detailed above
      is carried out."

A. Yes.
One of the figures mentioned there is 7,200? - A. Yes.

Are you able to assist by explaining what the basis was
for approving that figure? - A. Yes, from the point of
view of the Fire Service calculation the capacity of
7,200 could be evacuated by the three exits off that
terrace in something round about I think it was 6 minutes,
or something ,
             ’of that order, but that was the basis of
the evacuation time, that the terrace could be evacuated
for that number of people.
You said then, given that this is the figure, they can
be evacuated within the eight minute period? - A. Yes.

 In 1981 the pens were created? - A. Yes sir.
 And the effect of that was to make areas which on occasion
 would be self-contained so as to allow for segregation of
 the fans? - A. Yes.
                     26
                                A.K. SEAMAN


And that might involve creating a neutral or sterile area?
- A. Yes.
Now that would be an area to which access would be prevented
to one or other of the groups of fans? - A. Can I just
check on that? In 1981 I am not aware that it was the
intention to create a neutral or sterile area at that time.

I think you have to pick that up, this is in the core bundle,
I cannot give you a reference to your documents. It is
the letter from Dr. Eastwood, page 145 of the core bundle,
letter 2nd September 1981. Dr. Eastwood there describes
the proposals and says:
      "It is intended that these fences are so
      positioned that they divide this section of
      the terrace into approximately three ©qual
      areas, each served by its own entrance.

      By dividing the terrace more control over
      supporters should result. A visiting team
      with only a few followers will be allocated
      one section, with the other two sections
      retained by the home supporters.
      Larger contingents of visiting spectators
      could be accommodated in two or all three
      areas as their numbers dictate."

Did you understand from your discussions with whoever was
involved in 1981, that there was an intention to create
a sterile or neutral area? - A. Not at that time.
I will pick it up again inl985, but at that time it was
certainly intended that the pens should be capable of
being self-contained to allow for segregation of the fans?
- A. Yes, that is one of the things that they were looking
at.
 It would be necessary then, wouldn't it, to consider
 evacuation from each of the self-contained areas? - A. Yes.




                     /Q. In order to consider
                           27

                                                 A. K. SEAMAN

    Q.   In order to consider evacuation from a self-contained
         area, you need a starting figure, do you not? A. You
         need something on which to work.

    Q    Yes. These pens were given Fire Service approval?
         A. They were given approval by the officer working
         party.
    Q.   And the Fire Service was a member of that officer working
         partyf? A. Yes, it was.
    Q.   And the Fire Service   did not gainsay the proposal to put
         in these pens?   A.    The Fire Service at that time
         requested additional   time in order to check the means
         of escape facilities   which were going to be provided.

    Q.   Very well. How did you calculate a starting figure, a
         base figure, on which to make any calculations of

•        evacuation time?   A. The calculation would be based
         on the normal exit which we would expect to be used
         from each area.

    Q.   Yes, but you need to know, do you not, how many persons
         could or might be held in a pen?   A. If I could
         explain, sir - I said this yesterday - what is needed
         are two separate figures: one is the capacity based on
         the exits available and the time which is allowed for
         evacuation which can, depending on the fire risk, for
         example, be between two and a half or eight minutes;
         and the other one on the holding capacity of the
         particular area. The figure which would produce the
         lower of the two figures would normally be the figure
         which would be adopted.

    Q.   But how did the Fire Service come to approve the pens
         so far as evacuation times are concerned? What figures
         did you work on?    A. I believe that what happened was
         that the routes which were still off the terraee, the
         tunnel and the two entrances at either side, were looked
         at to see what amount of people they ‘would be capable of
         taking, and then the new sub-division on the proposed
         turnstiles and gates to work out how wide those gates
         should be. My own feeling is that that was a preliminary
         proposal which was approved by that working party and
         it was subject to more detailed proposals coming from
         Dr. Eastwood. What happened, in fact, was that they
         changed the proposal completely with the July submission.

    Q.   I think you have got into 1985 there. In 1981 --
         A. I'm sorry, I thought you had taken me through to
         that.
    Q.   In 1981, the pens were created and what I am putting to
         you, in essence, is this: the Fire Service would need
         to know the capacity for a pen in order to be able to
         say whether the evacuation time was acceptable? A. The
         fact of the matter at that end of the ground was that
         there was an over-capacity on exits. We could evacuate
         the terrace in six minutes. There was an over-capacity.
                    28
                                       A. K. SEAMAN

It was not done, was it, on the basis that because you
could evacuate the terraces in six minutes, therefore
you had to be able to evacuate each pen in an acceptable
time? A. I think I ought to correct what I said. When
I talked about calculation in the flows on to gates, I
was talking about 1985. In 1981, I can't be specific
about what considerations were taken.
Well, let’s go to 1985 then and consider it in that
context. Will you go please to page 237? I am sorry,
you do not have a core bundle, do you?   A. No, I haven't.

237 is a plan. It is plan 6705/2 and it is the plan on
which the Fire Service marked the widths of certain gates.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: It may be 125 in your bundle,
if we go that far. No, we do not.
     Mr. MAXWELL:   Is it 64?
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do you have the corresponding
number?
     Mr. MAXWELL:   Mr. Seaman has got the document.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He has got it.    I am sorry.

     Mr. MAXWELL:   It is page 237.   Plan 6705/2.    A. Yes.

The segregation that is now proposed by the Club extends
on to the concourse, does it not?   A. When you say
"the concourse", sorry ...?
The area behind the West Stand and going as far as the
Leppings Lane gates?   A. Yes.
But clearly segregation is still intended on the terrace
itself? If you look please at the way it is described
there as being "Visiting Supporters' Terrace, Mutual
Area or Visiting Supporters' Terrace, and Home Supporters'
Terrace"? A. Yes.
And, as you have told Lord Justice* Taylor, the Fire
Service wanted some time to consider the evacuation
aspect of this proposal? A. Yes.
In order to consider the evacuation time, you would need,
would you not, a starting figure? A. I think there
alreadfw was a starting figure.

What is the starting figure for the pens that are referred
to there, or the starting figures? A. What I would say
would happen on there is that the capacity of the tunnel
wqald be calculated and that before an accurate figure
could"be made, what we would say is that if you can feed
the flow down that tunnel and out at the gate at the
bottom, out of the ground, you have mat&taftdeyour
capacity. Whatever goes on that terrace will not over­
pack it in numbers.
                                      A. K. SEAMAN

But that would not, would it     I am sorry, I am
interrupting you, Mr. Seaman. A. What I was wanting
to say was that this was a possible modification.
After this meeting and after they had checked that it
had been done on the potentiality of thesiReans of
escape, it was anticipated that more detailed submission
would come in from Eastwood & Partners on behalf of
the Club, and because they changed the whole scheme,
I don't think that ever happened. So I don't think
the officer working party ever sat down at that point
with detailed drawings. This (indicating plan) is not
a scaled drawing; it's not to scale. You would need
a scale drawing in order to be able to put forward a
proposal and in my view what should have happened is
that there should have been a proper proposal from the
Club and there wasn't.

I am only concerned to find out on what basis the Fire
Service thought that these proposals were acceptable in
terms of evacuation times and to see whether the Fire
Service were aware of the sub-divided capacities that
have been spoken of - 2,200, for example, in the centre
pen? A. The only thing I can say on that is that I
don't think that our people were aware of the capacities
of the centre pen that was proposed at that time.

It is conceivable, is it not, that of the 7,200, 4,000
or 5,000 might have been in one of these terraces, in
one of these pens? A. No, I don't think it would be.

Well, they might have all been in the visiting supporters'
pens, as shown on plan 6705/2?    A. Not once the
capacity had been agreed.
You see, what I am putting to you really amounts to this:
If the Fire Service approved the safety evacuation
procedure, it is rather as thought they said "I know
the answer but what is the question?" because you have
to start with a figure for each pen, do you not?
A. Whilst I might agree in principle with what you are
saying, I stress it was a possible modification. At
the same time, any barrier that went on there would
change the potential standing area of each section, and
that would require an additional calculation. That
calculation would not be one that would be performed
by the Fire Service. I stress that the lower of the
two figures which would be produced wouidri bethe figure
which would operate.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Does it come to this: You
knew you could evacuate the whole terrace from previous
experience?   A. Yes, sir.

When they proposed to put in the radial fences, you saw
no objection in principle to it because you wquld have
a final say when the numbers for each pen were decided
upon --   A. Determined.
                     30
                                       A. K. SEAMAN

    to say whether, doing the calculation then, that had
affected your ability to get them out, and you could
 then have said "You can't have more than so many in each
pen" - is that right?   A. That's right, sir. I think
eventually we would have anticipated a more detailed
specification coming through on which those capacities
could be accurately worked out.
Was that ever done?   A. Eastwood & Partners then changed
the scheme and came up with a completely different scheme
in July of the same year.
We know that it has been in operation. What I am asking
is, since it has been in operation have the Fire Service
ishteetetedfr whether the pens as laid out now permit the
evacuation at the rate which was required? A. Certainly
the means of escape provided from the pens was in excess
of the 2,200 figure. From each of those pens, the tunnel
would evacuate 1,400 people in the eight minutes allowed.
So it was well in excess, as it was to the right and to
the left of the eight minute evacuation figure. So there
was no problem in that aspect.
     Mr. MAXWELL: Mr. Seaman, you are able to say that
now, but was it ever considered by anybody in the Fire
Service before you, just now, had to consdier it? A. Yes.
the people who dealt with it at the time are adamant that
they calculated and as far as they could tell at that
time, it would be all right.
And   the person at the time was Mr. Grimshaw. Heasked
for   time to consider it, did he not?  A. Yes.
And he went away and did the calculation,did he? A. I
don't believe that the calculation was carried out by
Mr. Grimshaw. It was another officer.

Somebody did the calculation?    A. Yes.

Can I turn to another aspect, please, the question of
access for emergency vehicles?   A. Yes.
This was required by the safety certificate, was it not?
A. Yes, it was.
It is at Condition 18(1) and (2). Its terms were so
framed because of the Fire Servi ce's requirement that
they made prior to certification. It is that same
memorandum where you approved the 7,200 and it is at
page 84 of the core bundle. It is dated 16th May, 1979.

      Mr. COLLINS:   It is our 21.
     Mr. MAXWELL:  I am obliged.     It is dated the 16th
May, 1979?   A. Yes, sir.
"Adequate roads should be provided to ensure that speedy
and direct access can be obtained by emergency vehicles
to all exterior parts of the stadium. Ensure that parked
                                       A. K. SEAMAN

vehicles will not obstruct emergency vehicles on these
access roads". I think when the Club did some
redevelopment in 1985 of the Kop end, there was an
offer made by the Club through Dr. Eastwood to widen
the access available for emergency vehicles. Do you
recall that?   A. I recall seeing the letter, yes.
And the response of the Fire Service was that it was
not essential to do this but it would be helpful?
A. Yes, I believe that was it.
And you are satisfied, are you, that the access for
emergency vehicles is still adequate?   A. Yes.

Can I turn now to the perimeter gates, the gates in the
perimeter fence? They are narrower than the recommenda­
tions in the Green Guide?   Are you aware of that?
A. The Green Guide which was in operation at the time
of those gates made no specification about their minimum
width.
Thank you very much. The 1976 Green Guide makes no
mention of a specific width of the perimeter fence
gates?   A. Only if it is going to be used for evacuation
purposes.

But it is right, is it not, that at the officer working
party meetings, and later the advisory group that
advises the City Council, the Green Guide has been
looked at as a document to be applied flexibly? A. Yes,
it has.




                          /Q.   And that has been the
                                 32

                                                      A.   K.   SEAMAN


Q.   And that has been the result, has it not, partly of the
     terms of the Green Guide and partly as a result of other
     official guidance.   A.   Yes.

Q.   Can I pick up the references with you?                The 1976 Green
     Guide at Par agraph 1.4 and 1.5.

          MR. COLLINS:   That is Tab 3 in the Fire bundle;
     we have not got it in the core bundle.

Q.          MR. MAXWELL:       You have got a copy of the original,
     have    you not?    A.      Yes, I have, sir.

Q.   At 1.4:

            " Deviations from individual gu idelines are
            possib le without necessa ri ly detracting
            from the overall safety of the ground.       A
            flexible approach should be maintained to
            take account of the partic ul ar cir cum stances."

            LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:   The 1976 one you want.

Q.        MR. MAXWELL:    Page 2, sir, and at the top of the
     page I have just co mpleted reading 1.4.   I am going on to
     1.5:

            "Although new work or re co ns t r u c t i on at football
            grounds should not be to a standard lower than
            that set out in the guidelines, it should be
            borne in mind when using the guide to assess
            whether exi sting situations provide adequately
            for the safety of specta to rs that the criterion
            is that of a reasonable degree of safety.            It
            would be unreasonable, even if it were practicable,
            to seek the abs olute safety of everyone at tending
            a ground."

     That is, I think, the first reference although it echoes
     a ref erence in a circular from I think the Home Office
     which is at page 8 and page 14 of the core bundle.    You
     have got a core bundle there, have you?    A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   If you go to page 14, this is a        page in some informa ti on
     produced by the Home Office and        ev idently sent out from
     the Fire Dep ar t me nt of the Home    Office.    Do you see that
     at the bottom of page 14 on the        left-hand corner?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   And it has just desc ri be d various   am endments that have
     been made to the revised Green Guide and at Paragraph 5
     it is again e mp ha si sed that the recommendations, guidelines,
     flexibility, aim of securing a re asonable degree of
     safety should be kept uppermost in mind, and re peating
     what we have just read.       And in the same document,
     going back to page 6 of the core ---

            LORD JUSTIC E     TAYLOR:   I am sorry,    where are we going
                                              A.   K.   SEAMAN


now?     Are we going back     to the 1976 version?

     MR. MAXWELL;   I am sorry, sir, page 6 of the core.
It is the same document.   It is an earlier reference
in similar or perhaps more forceful terms.   Page 6,
Paragraph 3, about half way through:

       "In this c on ne ct io n local authorities are
       reminded, as was pointed out in Paragraph 6
       of the annexe to Circular 150/75 --- "

     LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:      It is the same passage,        in
effect.

     MR. MAXWELL:       It is the next sentence, sir, that I
refer to, "the maxim um flexibility should be mainta in ed
to take acc ou nt .. ." and I think at an early Officer Wo rking
Party of March, 1979, the as sistance of the Home Office
was sought.     It is at pag^ 65 of the core bundle and
it was de scribed yesterday as being, "the usual helpful
advice" but it contains again that reference to Paragraph
3(a), "The maximu m flexibility has to be maintained."

     LORD JUSITCE    TAYLOR:      This sounds like submissi ons
and comments, Mr.    Maxwell.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I am only drawing the references
together, sir, because I thought it might be helpful to
you to know what they are at this stage because yesterday,
sir, you will be aware that ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am just wonde rin g how the
witness can help us on this.

     MR. MAXWELL:      He has done very well to help        us on so
many other matters.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Well, he has sat there interested
as you have been doing this.    Anyway, do bear in mind we
are looking for a questio n of the witness.

     MR. MAXWELL:      The 1986 Green Guide is in similar
terms and was a cc om pa ni ed - can I put this document before
you, sir?   I am sure I could make a question of it ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I have no doubt ingenuity               can
make a que sti on out of anything but ---

     MR. MAXWELL:     It is the circular     from the Home        Office,
I think just prec edi ng ---

     LOR D JUSTICE TAYLOR:     What I am saying rpally is, if
you think it would be helpful to me to have a little summary
of these things, put it on a bit of paper and we will have
it   but, I mean, we are not getting anywhere with   the witness
on   it;   that is what I was ve nturing to suggest.
                                                            A.    K.   SEAMAN


     MR. COLLINS:   Sir, this document                 is already      Tab 66
of the Fire Brigade bundle.

     MR. MAXWELL:        I am indebted for thatevassistance.
Sir, the point I am making through an earlier answer is
that this flexible approach is one which was adopted
by those adv isi ng the local au thority and that they had
some cause for a d o p t i n g ^ that approach as can be seen in
these documents.

       LORD JUSTICE      TAYLORi          Right.

     MR. MAXWELL:    Can I turn now to the tunnel?  The
tunnel has got a gradient leading down on to the terraces
but that gr adient leads on to what is more or less a
level area;   it ias got a shallow gradient but it is more
or less a level area leading immediately on to the terraces;
is that not right?    A.   I believe that is right, sir,
yes.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                 We have got it in the little
bundle in profile.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, yes.   I think somewhere amid
what is in front of me I will have the same - not immediately
to hand.

But that area on the ground side of the gradient which is
said not to comply with the Green Guide acts more or less
as a landing area, does it not?         You come down the gradient
and then ef fe c ti ve l y on to a landing area before going out
on to the terraces.         A.   Yes, I think you could describe
it as that.

                Cr o s s- e xa mi ne d   by MR.    GIBSON-WATT:

One point, Mr.          Seaman.    You have told us, I think,        that
the view of the Fire Service           th± e va cua ti on did not take
a ccount of the gates in the pe rimeter fence was based on
the fact that admis si on to the terraces would be turnstile-
controlled;        is that right?       A.    I w o u l d n ’t say it was
based on the fact that admission to the terraces would
be t ur ns ti l e -c on tro ll ed.   It was taking into account
the general co n d i t io n on the terrace, the open air aspect
of it, the lack of any fire risk that might have made
you need to take a decision to evacuate forwards.

Alright.        Turn to page 26 of your statement,           would     you
please?           A.Yes.

That is at (d) which is, in fact, dealing with the 1985
propo sals but you put it in fairly general terms:      "It
was never con si de re d that the gates in the perimeter fence
would be used for the e va cua ti on of each section because
( i) the risk of fire on the West Stand and the terrace was
low."    You have told us about that.      A.   Yes.

And   (ii)   "It was c on sid er ed      that the height and strength
                                35

                                                            A.   K.    SEAMAN


     of walls and gates outside the Leppings Lane end were such
     that the risk of a door being forced or a wall scaled and
     fans thereby entering in large numbers was remote.          At
     no time was there any sugges ti on to the contrary."        So
     in (ii) from that c o ns id er at io n was actually given to the
     h eight and strength of the walls and gates on the outside?
     A.    Yes.

Q. And that was in con sid era ti on of whether an un co ntrolled
   entry could be obtained, not tur nst ile-controlled.
   A.    The Green Guide contained a passage, in the old
   G reen Guide, as to the potential danger if people were
   able to get on to a terrace in an uncon tro lle d way and
   that is why that sort of aspect would be looked at.

Q.   Quite so, and because of that Mr. Grimshaw presumably,
     because he actuall y asked for a little time at the Working
     Party Meeting on 18th April to consider means of escape
     aspects, Mr. Gri mshaw or at any rate somebody from the
     Fire Service actually co nsidered the e ff ect iv ene ss of
     the walls and gates outside.    A.   Yes.

Q. And actuall y c ons id er ed and dismissed the risk of a door
   being forced, if you look at the statement.         A.   It is,
   you know, one of the broad areas that would be looked at
   in a general app li ca ti on of whether somet hin g was adequate.

Q. What I was after was this - was co ns i d e r a t i on given to
   the risk that in an emergency the Police might have to
   open a gate as opposed to it being forced by the fans?
   A.    It was never suggested that there had been a
   sit uation that made it likely that that would ever arise.

Q.   So, again, that - if it was ever considered - could be
     dismissed as ex tremely unlikely?  A.   Yes.

                   C r o s s - e x am in ed by MR.   KALLIPETIS:

Q. Mr. Seaman, still on page 26, please.         At the end of
   sub -p ar a gr ap h (d) you refer to the fact that the gates in
   the radial fences will be used as directed by the Police
   with the as sis ta n ce of the public address system.
   A.   I beg your pardon?

Q.   Page   26 of your statement.          A.        Yes.

Q.   You refer to the use of the public address                       system.
     A.  Yes, I have got that.

Q.   It is an essen tia l part of the plan that the public address
     system would be used for emergency evacuation.     A.   The
     public address system formed part of the emergency
     ev acu ati on procedure.

Q.   It follows, does it not, that thatpu bl ic address system
     would have to be effec tiv e in opera tin g conditions, that
     is during a match?   A.     Ihat was the intention, yes.
                                        A.   K.   SEAMAN


At page 36 of your statement you refer to testing of the
tannoy system at the S®mi-Final in 1988.   A.   Yes.

In order to be sat isfied that the P.A. system was audible,
may I take it thfetygpou tested it against a backg ro und of
crowd noise such as would be experienced at a heavily
attended match like a Cup Semi-Final?     A.   I believe
that at the time the public address was listened to at
that point would be prior to kick-off, so whatever the
noise level might have been, and obviously the Officers
thems elv es would not go on to each terrace.

It seems point les s testing it, if you will forgive me, Mr.
Seaman.       Wbuid not be the point of testing it to make
sure that it was audible in pr ecisely the c on dit io ns when
it would be needed?         A.   I take the point, sir, but
the public address system had been checked out at other
times pr ev i ou si t o that and really a during pe rf ormance
in sp ect io n is not an in-depth examinat ion of the system;
it is more of an outline check to see that it seems to be
working properly.         If I could give a point in case?
If you did an annual visit to, say, a cinema or a theatre
there would be a test of the duration of the eme rgency lighting
system, for example - how long it lasted if the power failed.
But if an Officer went round whilst there was a pe rf or ma nc e
on, he would confine hi mse lf to making sure that all the
lights that should be lit were lit.




                               /But that is chalk and cheese...
S fM % -
1   )
                                  37

                                                            A.K.   SEAMAN

           Q.That is chalk and cheese, Mr. Seaman.   How long the
              emergency lighting lasts you can test without having
              to have people in a cinema because they do not affect
              it.  But the effectiveness or otherwise of the public
              address system must depend, surely, upon the noise
              with which it has got to compete, namely, croiird
              noise? - A. Yes, I think the wording in the codes
              is that it has got to   be possible to hear it under
              reasonable conditions. I do not think it is more
              specific than that.  All I can say is so far as
              we were aware from all the reports that we had had
              there had been no indication in recent times that the
              public address system was not adequate.

           Q. That is all I wanted to see, so far as the Fire Sfervice
              were concerned, the public address system was audible
              even in a crowd situation? - A. Our Officers that did
              that inspection said they could hear the public address
              system.

           Q. Did the Fire Service at all consider access to the pitch
              for emergency vehicles? -A. In the original issue of the
              certificate, no, they   did not.  They considered that the
              ability to get to the   outside of the buildings with fire
              appliances was adequate.

           Q. What about in the revised safety certificate discussions?
              -A.The matter had not got to that stage. I think basically
              what we are saying is that if we were not happy with
              the situation we would not wait for the revised certi­
              ficate to be produced.   We would say something earlier.

           Q. Would you consider access to the pitch as being some­
              thing you would be concerned about? -A. For fire fighting
              purposes?

           Q. Yes.  A fire tender going on to the pitch.  Would you
              consider that? -A. If it was possible to get one on in
              a certain situation, yes.  If it was something that could
              not easily be provided then I think that what was provided
              at the ground was reasonable.

           Q. Yes.  Mr. Seaman, please do not think I am in any way
              criticising.  I am just looking for information.  I
              want to know whether the Fire Service at all considered
              a fire tender going on to the pitch and, if so, what
              manner of access it had? - A. I think that there was
              a suggestion between the North Stand and the Spion Kop
              corner that it would have been possible to make access
              available for fire appliances at that point.

           Q. When was that, suggestion made? - A. Coming back to the
              point that the other gentleman raised with me, there
              was a letter that had come from Eastwood & Partners.
                                              A.K.   SEAMAN

I am not quite sure of the date of the letter.  It was
considered by Divisional Officer Binnington at the time.

Binnington? - A. Yes. I understood he said it would be
nice tothaire if it could be provided but not absolutely
essential.   In other words, it would not be something
he would insist upon.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  In what situation could you
envisage the need for an appliance on the pitch? -A.
Well, really, only would be, that I could see if we
had to fight a fire from the front of the stands and
for the majority of the stands we have got there
that would not be a real problem because the Spion
Kop, the North Stand and West Stand and terrace were
not much of a fire risk.  The South Stand was the one
where if we had had a .fire risk we would have expected
it to be.  It was always considered we could have dealt
with anything quite well without the need to insist on
access to the pitch, sir.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:   Would the Fire Service consider
also the access for ambulances on to the pitch?- A. I
do not think the Fire Service would necessarily.  I am
sure the Ambulance Service would.


Even though it is in the safety certificate and in the
Green Guide, not, I make it clear, in the Green Guide
making reference to ambulances on the pitch. - A. Yes.

The Fire Service did not consider it? I am only asking
for information to see .... -A. I cannot say we did,
sir, no, but I do know there has always been strong
liaison between all three emergency services and
things of that nature are often discussed.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:   Indeed.   Thank you.

           Cross-examined by MR. GLASGOW:

Mr. Seaman, whenever a dangerous incident occurs there
is a risk if not a probability that attention will be
focused on that particular danger and other things may
tend to be disregarded or go by default.  Would that be
true as a general statement? -A. It is true that if a
particular thing happens it focuses attention.

Yes.  And one of the benefits of having a multi-disciplined
working party is that with all the disciplines acting as
a check on each other things ought to be kept in pro­
portion? That is one of the reasons for having the
different services represented,is not it?-A. Yes, one
would hope so.

Could we just look at two examples of that which may
ii
                             39
                                                     A.K.   SEAMAN

       help us? After the Bradford tragic fire almost
       everyone's attention in this field that we are talking
       about was concentrated on the need for access - for exit
       to be improved? -A. Yes.

     Q. Almost overnight pretty well every sports ground in the
        country and a great many theatres and other places of
        public entertainment dealt with problems of fire risk
        and getting people out in time? - A. Yes.

     Q. And an example of that would be that there were many
        visits to the ground by people walking round and checking
        that the exit signs and the exit routes out of this
        particular club were adequately signed and adequately
        sized? -A. Yes, I think the general interpretation of the
        visits that were carried out at the time was that they
        were looking for fire risk.  You mentioned the point,
        did something that happened focus the attention.
        Certainly when the Bradford City fire occurred then
        there were a number of visits to grounds throughout
        South Yorkshire including Sheffield Wednesday.

     Q. Yes. And when one is going round concentrating, for
        example, on exit signs at that particular time in the wake
        of Bradford it would have been quite easy, even for fire
        officers, to fail to spot maybe the entrance signs were
        not as good as they ought to be? -A. I really do not think
        that that is something they were looking for at that
        point.

     Q. Well, to be fair to you, it is not something that would
        concern the Fire Service in its fire fighting role but
        it is something which pugjht to be of concern to the
        Working Party generally? Would that be fair? - A. Yes,
        and the club.

     Q. And the club of course.  And all I askiypm tot accept is
        perhaps when concentrating on one particular danger
        there is always a risk that others will sometimes for a
        long time get out of proportion and be overlooked? - A.
        That is always a possibility.

     Q. And when the 1981 incident occurred at the ground and
        the Working Party had to look at the ground in the light
        of that incident  it is right to say that the Police saw
        the solution in trying to get better control over the
        spectators on the terrace? - A. Yes, I believe so.

     Q. And the whole object of putting the pen system in at
        the suggestion of the Police was that that would give
        them or the club better control over the fans at that
        end of the ground? - A. Yes.

     Q. And in doing that and in achieving a means for getting
w
                            40

                                                    A.K.   SEAMAN

       better control it is quite obvious now, is it not, that
       new dangers of a different kind were in fact created?
       - A. I am not quite sure because I think what happened
       on this occasion might be akin to something that
       happened in 1981, overcrowding of a part of a terrace.

    Q. I wanted your help, Mr. Seaman, because is it not fair
       may I say for both of us to accept that one of the
       problems with those pens is that although they may
       have seemed to be and have been a very good idea for
       the purpose for which they were designed to deal, they
       did in fact create a problem which was not spotted by
       anybody at the time and which has contributed to this
       tragedy?  Is not that fair and is not it obvious? - A.
       I do not know what you are referring to.

    Q. You really do not accept that the installation of those
       radial fences and the creation of those pens created
       in part the problem which we are dealing with at the
       moment? -A. I am trying to address my mind, sir, to
       what the situation would have been like if that
       terrace had been totally packed without any radial
       fences and people had come down that tunnel.  I am not
       entirely convinced the result would have been much
       different.

    Q. But forgive me, I thought you had accepted in the
       helpful questions  that were asked you by Mr. Hytner
       who sits on my right that your Officers had spotted
       what was a very obvious - the word was adopted by you -
       a very obvious problem when the point was picked up
       in 1985? -A. There was clearly a need to control things,
       yes.

    Q. But you say so at page 23 of your proof, do not you,
       at (b), whether the numbers of spectators being allowed
       into each section of the terr&ce could be controlled was
       one of the problems that was expressly picked up? - A. H'm.

    Q. And however obvioks it may be to us all with hindsight
       the fact remains that even given the skilled and careful
       attention of your Working Party it was not actually
       picked up for four years after the pens were put in?
       -A. On all the reports and knowledge that the Fire
       Service had got at that time the new arrangements were
       working quite adequately, we had no problems with them.

    Q. But is not that the danger, Mr. Seaman, that if every­
       thing is working properly problems or potential dangers
       which others may fairly describe later as being obvious
       are sometimes not picked up even by working parties
       with the skill and the multi-discipline that yours had?
       - A. With respect,sir, I think - the Fire Service does
       not attend matches and I would have been dependent upon
                                              A.K.   SEAMAN

information from elsewhere if there were problems perceived
with the way in which the pens were working.

But, Mr. Seaman, that is simply not right, is it, because
after the problem had been by ones6 f your senior officers
your^ifficers made an inspection of the ground during a
match.  You went in 1988, Tab 83 of your bundle? - A* Yes.

They went along to inspect how things were working?
- A. I do not think that at that inspection, sir, they
did an in depth look at terraces.

Well, maybe not an in depth look but surely to goodness
they looked at the very problem that they h,ad raised
with the working party? -A. I think they would have had
to have had some reason to suspect that there was concern
and there had never been any voiced.

But they had raised concern themselves. You have told us.
Mr.Grimshaw had raised it.   It is written in your proof?
- A. With respect, Mr. Grimshaw was raising that with
regard to whether the system proposed could be adequately
controlled.  After that had been done the reports that
came back were that the system was working well and so
from the point of view of the Fire Service we had nothing
to react to. Why should we suspect ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     You mean Mr.Grimshaw was
given   the assurances mentioned on page 24 and says in
the light of those assurances the Fire Service saw no
objection in principle.    Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

And you heard nothing adverse after that? - A. That is
right and unless we are - we would have no reason to
raise an issue on something.

     MR. GLASGOW:   Well, moving then from the particular
to the more general, Mr. Seaman, when a problem like that
or a potential problem was picked up by a member of the
working party and raised for discussion was it not
thought sensible to pass on any concern to the club
so that they might have an input? -A. The findings of the
working party were passed on in full to the club as far
as I am aware.

Mr. Seaman, no-one ever told the club about that point
that had been spotted, did they? - A. The club are coming
forward with proposals.

When Mr. Grimshaw spotted what has been described as
being the obvious potential danger, that there would
have to be control of the numbers going into the pens,
and you actually discussed that at your meeting and
                   42

                                               A.K.   SEAMAN

got an assurance from the Police about it nobody said a
word to the club about that concern? - A. As far as 1
am aware a full report of the findings of the officer
working party went to the club.




                          / Q. Well, help us
                         43          A.K. SEAMAN


Q. Well help us all that you can, but if you can find anywhere
   in the literally thousands of documents that we have worked
   through, that any member of your Working Party or any Fire
   Officer told the Club that th4s point had been spotted,
   I think it will come as news to at least Mr. Collins and
   myself. Do you actually know? - A. I can't help you any
   further on that, sir. All I can tell you is the Minutes
   of the Meetings of the Officer Working Party were reported
   by letter by the South Yorkshire County Council to the
   Club or its representatives after each meeting.

Q. Let's look at another example. Go back to page 16 of Y°ur
   proof, would you, 2.7. You record the fact in the middle
   of the page, the second sub-paragraph of 2.7: that concern
   was expressed at modifications being made at Sheffield
   Wednesday Club at the request of Police without knowledge
   of the Officer Working Party. Again perfectly proper and
   I am sure just the right thing to say and you wrote to
   the Police ....
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Sorry, I think the witness
     is still looking. Which document is it?

Q.         MR. GLASGOW:  It is the core bundle. It is your
     proof that I was working on. Page 16 and your tab is
     35 if you want to refer to it.
           We don't need to plough right through it, Mr. Seaman
     unless you want to. It is the letter which courteously
     and properly was being written to the Chief Constable to
     warn him about, asking the Club to make alterations without
     getting clearance from the Working Party. Do you remember
     that? - A. Yes.
Q. Again it is exactly the same point. It would have been
   sensible, would it not, to write and tell the Club that?
   _ A . can I say in April/May 1985 submissions, these were
   submissions that were put forward after quite extensive
   discussions between the Police and the Club.

 Q. No, no, I think we are dealing with something else,
    Mr. Seaman.
          When you picked up a problem on the Working Party
    and we have looked at two examples, one was the Police
    asking for work to be done, however sensibly, which had
    not been authorised by the Working Party and we see that
    at Tab 35? - A. Yes.
 Q. And one was the question of the building of the radial
    fences creating the problem unless they were properly
    controlled. Is it not fair on reflection that it would
    have been a very good idea if those points had been put
    to the Club as well as being raised with the particular
    Officer who was dealing with them? - A. That is possibly
    so, but I feel that the satisfactory assurances were
    giv&n within the meeting.
                      44
                                  A.K. SEAMAN


There is one other matter I think, Mr. Seaman, if you can
help   When you were talking about the assurances that the
SSiic. had got an arrangement for dealing with the crowds
in the pens, did anybody mention or thinkof the
which Chief Inspector Creaser told us about of the difft
culties of letting people in and out once they had arrived?
- A. That is not something I am aware of sir.

Could we look at it very shortly together. The difficulty
of having people in the ground for may be two hours ©r
at least one hour before a game as distinct from a sea e
area where they have, one hopes, a numbered seat in a row
to return to, once they are on the terraces if they have
been shepherded or directed or controlled by a turnstile
or otherwise to a particular pen, you have got to make
sure that they return to that pen if they want to leave for
t r e a s o n , haven't you? - A. I think that is a reasonable
assumption, yes.
And therefore it is not quite as simple is it as simply
saying: "Put a turnstile on each of the pens because that
assumes that you have the right or the Physical P ? ™ * ^
control those fans within that pen for the entirety of the
duration of the time that they are there and          *5*“
out? - A. I think the only way that that could be doine
is if entirely separate facilities were provided for
pen.
 Have each pen as a self-contained unit within the ground
 with all its own facilities? - A. That would be the only
 way I would see you could do it in those circumstances.

 Because it is not a problem is it in your experience of
 ones and twos of people who would want to come in andout,
 but large groups of fans may want to go and stand together
 or loin their friends and on the face of it have a perfect
 right to do so? - A. I don’t know. I would have to say
 I don't think I am sufficiently experienced about how
 people pack on terraces to answer.
       MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you very much, Mr. Seaman.
 Thank you sir.

               Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD?

 Mr Seaman, you did not take part yourself in any of
 the discussions or negotiations that led to th® g^ ting
 of the Certificate in 1979, did you? - A. No sir not
 directly. I had some very peripheral involvement at that
 time. I think I went to the ground on one occasion to
 look at the position of a stairway.
 You were putting in advice to the Fire Service as it were
 but not having direct consultation with any of the other
                          45
                                      A.K. SEAMAN



    Authorities? - A. I beg your pardon?

.The Fire Service was using your expertise in part among
  the other people it called upon to make its input into
  the granting of the Certificate? - A. Do you mean in 1979?

. Yes? - A. No, not directly. The only involvement I can
  recall having, I attended one meeting I think shortly before
  the Certificate was issued and I also went on one other
  occasion I think with a Building Control Officer when a
  new staircase was being provided at the rear of the Spion
  Kop to agfee the location of it.
>. But apart from that have you had any other input in the
   years that then followed concerning the Safety Certificate,
   its application and observance at Hillsborough? - A. I
   had some involvement with the Spion Kop d®velopment        v
   latter part of 1986 and prior to that I think in the ®^rly
   days, I am not quite sure whether it was before the Certificat
   was issued or after, I went to one match with a colle®g^e ,,. . ,
   where we sat in the South Stand and it was an
   Wednesday Cup tie game I believe, and we observed the discharge
   from the seated Stands at the end of the game to have a
   practical test as to how fast people fed out.
q. But apart from that have you been to the ground before the
     Hillsborough incident in 1989 in connection with your Fire
     Service duties? - A. I have visited the South Stand when
     they were discussing the South Stand.
Q. Had you ever been on the terraces before 1989? - A. Not
   at that end of the ground sir, no.
o. Of course one of the tasks that the Authorities concerned
   with the Certificate had was one of inspection, wasn t
   - A. Yes.
Q. There was the Annual Inspection? - A. Yes.

Q. And then a during performance lnsPef l ? "
   place? - A. That was what was agreed after Sheffield tooic
   over, yes.
0 If we look at your statement, I think it is at page 7, and
Q ' toe looSSent that relates to that Is at page   i; ^ r
    bundle at Document 11. It Is a letter dated the 14th
    May 1987. Do you see that? - A. I have got that s ,

n     on the second page of that it says: "Perhaps during
    ' performance inspections could be
      Authority carries out such inspections independenti.y
      w i t h a degree of central co-ordination to prevent two
      inspections taking place simultaneously.      - A. Yes.
                     46
                                  A.K. SEAMAN


In other words you were going   to turn up at the ground and
just see how things go. That    was the idea, wasn't it?
- A. Yes, I think when we did   them our Brigade policy
was that we would liaise with   the Police first.
But you would not necessarily let the Club know you were
coming because the whole point would be to find out how
it was done in the real situation? *■ A. -That is right.

And not something to be laid on for your benefit. The
situations you were aware of, or the Fire Service were
aware of concerning the use of the terraces involved
the terraces being used for segregated observers, fans
of different persuasions and also the situation of the
terraces being available for fans of all one loyalty? —
A. I believe that there was the intention that that could
be used in that way, yes.
And one of the matters if what you are saying is correct
you would have been interested in, the Fire Service would
have been interested in, would have been the mannings of
gates? - A. Yes sir.
You have said in your evidence that it was expected that
the Police would man the radial gates? - A. Yes sir.




                          /Q. That is to put it
                                   A. K. SEAMAN

That is to put it in shorthand. The occasion when there
was an inspection of the ground by the Fire Service, as
we understand your evidence, was the 1988 semi-final?
A. Yes.

And one of the things you would have been interested in
would have been the manning of those radial gates to
see if it was done?    A. Yes, sir.

Was it   checked?   A. I don't believe it was.

Any reason? A. I think that the officers who went on
that occasion concerned themselves more with making
      that the external exit gates were available in case
of a need to evacuate from a section of the ground and
therefore concerned themselves mainly with that and
 checking that the emergency lighting system and the
public address, etc., were in order. To have gone on
to the terraces and checked might not have been that
easy for them to do, but the short answer is I don't
think they did check, no.

Your reasons for the detail of the checking seem to
relate to the presence of gates and something to do
with emergency lighting - is that right? Is that all
that was checked?   A.   I beg your pardon?

I asked you why the radial gates on the terraces were not
checked, do you follow?   A. Yes.

And you gave an answer which related to the presence of
external gates and something to do with the emergency
lighting? A. No, I said that I think that the primary
function that they carried out on that occasion was to
check the exterior gates rather than any other gates.

What, do you mean to see if they were there? A. To make
sure that there were stewards manning them in case of
need to open them,and that the gates weren'tlocked.

But the manning of those external gates would be the
same whatever kind o£ match it was and whatever use the
terrace was being put to , would it not?   A. That does
not mean that we shouldn't check it.

So what was the value of going to this large match, this
particular match in 1988?    A. I don't think that they
anticipated that the gates on the radial fences would
not be manned.

But the whole point was to go and check, was it not,
to have a look and   see?A. Yes. I don't think   with a
ground the size of Hillsborough it would have been
possible to look at every little detail in that ground.

May it be that in fact you were not expecting those gates
to be manned by the Police and that was the reason why
nobody bothered to look? A. I think that we have said
consistently throughout that the understanding we had
m ki
                                 48
                                                    A. K. SEAMAN

            was that the gates would be manned.

       Q.   You see, the word that was put into the documentation was
            "Under the control of the police", was it not?   A. That's
            in the Minutes of the meeting.

       Q.   Yes, and there is no disucssion in the Minute concerning
             fcbfessconstant manning of the §ates? A. I can only say
            what the understanding of the officers was from our
             Service that attended those meetings.

       Q.   It would have been a simple thing to say, would it not,
            "manned"?   A. Very often the phrase that is used in the
            written word does not adequately describe what people
            understand it to be.

       Q.   And if£lyoaaiafeeadid:t&t;?thatfatittei 1981 that they should
            be manned, it could have been perfectly simply so stated?
            A. Yes, but we didn't produce the Minute of the meeting.

       Q.   You knew from this certificate that the reason that the
             police would be at the ground would be to secure orderly
             and lawful behaviour?   A. Yes.

       Q. The prevention of disorder and crime?       A. Yes. ,

       Q    Not the manning of gates?    A. I think that this was a
             peculiar circumstance in that the barrier fence, the
             radial fences had been recommended by the Police to
             overcome a particular problem.

       Q.   Yes, and you are aware of what Dr. Eastwood said about
             them - that they would provide a facility for maintenance
            and enable the Police to get to different section of the
            crowd, having those gates there?    A. That may have been
            Mr. Eastwood's interpretation.

       Q.   Well, the documentation is there to be seen.     A. That
            was there before the meeting.

       Q.   When the certificate does talk about "exits", etc., and
            "manning", or when the certificate suggests an intention
            that something shall be "attended", that someone should i
            be present, it uses the word "manned". If that was the
            intention of the Fire Service that these gates should
            be manned, why depart from the language of the certificate
            and use another word like Vdontrol"?   A. I've already
            said, sir, that David Vaughan from South Yorkshire
            County Council penned the letter.

       Q.   You see, may I suggest this to you: that the understanding
            of the Police of what was expected of them was not that
            they should exercise constant surveillance at the gate,
            but they should have the key to it and that wbfen the
            gates were locked open, that was it, they were not
            expected to be there. Did you understand that?     A. We
            didn't understand that, because we needed someone on that
            gate in case there was a need for emergency evacuation.
                     49
                                              A. K. SEAMAN

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Is it right that if there had
been an order of the code nature, officers would then
have taken up their positions ?
     Mr. WOODWARD: That is my understanding of it, sir,
that an officer would be at that gate.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    It will be in the Operational
Order, will it?
     Mr. WOODWARD:   We will look at that, sir.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You can check it.
     Mr. WOODWARD: Our recollection is that there is
nothing specific in the Order about it. It is not dealt
with.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, very well.

     Mr. WOODWARD: The view of the Fire Service was that
 there was really unlikely to be any emergency situation
requiring the evacuation of the West Terrace, was it not?
A. Yes, we saw a low hazard risk on that terrace.

Most unlikely?    A. Yes.

And the view of the Fire Service was that in the event
of any foreseeable emergency, the egress of the persons
on the terrace could be dealt with through the tunnel?
A. In all normal circumstances, yes, sir.
Do you mean normal circumstances of an emergency? A. In
all normal circumstances; not necessarily an emergency.
That is why we need to retain the ability to move through
those gates if it was ever needed.
But you would not be evacuating them unless     there was
an emergency, would you?   What do you mean     by "normal
circumstances"?   A. You have to judge what     the degree
of the emergency is before you can make the     decision.

Well, may we look at your expectations, your anticipation
You did not really anticipate a situation where you
would have to evacuate the terrace, did you? It was
unlikely? A. We never imagined a situation where we
would have to evacuate the terrace forwards.

Well, you did not envisage a situation where you would
have to evacuate it at all as a likelihood, did you?
A. Possibly, yes, if someone had said there was a bomb
in the ground.

A possibility?   A. Yes.
And that possibility; in tthe mind of the Fire Service,
could be adequately coped with by the use of the tunnel?
A. It all depends on the emergency, doesn't it?
                    50
                                            A. K. SEAMAN

Did you envisage an emergency where you would have to get
everybody out through the radial gates, then? A. I have
already said that we thought it was most unlikely that
we would lose the tunnel escape.

But your whole calculation of egress times is based upon
using the tunnel, is it not?   A. Of egress times?

Yes. A. Well, that's the basic calculation for egress,
yes. But the emergency evacuation route would be something
thaticould be used if, for whatever reason, you wanted
to evacuate the terrace more quickly than normal or you
couldn't use the normal route.

Are you saying anything more than if you have got a gate
and it can be opened, people may use it?   A. There has
to be somebody there to direct them to itv sir.

Forgive me, are you saying anything more than if you have
a gate which can be opened and there is an emergency
situation, that would be a good thing to do and get
people out, wherever the gate was?   A. We are saying
that if there is a gate and it can be closed against
people's movement, then there needs to be someone there
to open it if needed. I would make the point that it was
talked about the Police doing this task originally,
because I think the original suggestion came from them,
but as far as the Fire Service is concerned, providing
that a policeman or a steward was available to do the
job, it could be done provided that they were capable
of doing it in that location. If I could give a point
in case, if there was a situation where home and visiting
supporters were directly next to one another, then I
think that that would probably be something that the
Police might decide they would control, but it would
be a matter for the Police and the Club, as we saw it,
to decide.

When you say the suggestion came from the Police, you
mean the suggestion to have a radial fence?   A. Yes.

Not the suggestion to have a policeman at the gate?
A. I think we are talking about the discussion that
took place at that meeting and what the understanding
was of our officers who attended it.

The Police, in fact, at a later stage in 1985 were wanting
to have more radial gates, were they not? A. Yes, sir.

And if you attach any value to radial gates as a means of
egress, was there any reason for not supporting them in
that view?   A. That they should have them?

Yes.   A. Really if they felt that it was going to give
them better control, which was our understanding of what
it would do, provided that having balanced everything,
it looked a reasonable situation, no, there is no reason
why we shouldn't support them.
                        51

                                                A. K. SEAMAN

Q.   You did not support them though, and the Police conceded^
     it would seem, in the face of objection from everybody
     else?   A. I am not quite sure of the point you are
     making, sir.

Q.   Do not be too worried about the point.Would you try and
      answer the question?     Is the history of the matter
      that when the Police suggested more radial gates, that
     was not a view that the other people on the team
      considered was appropriate?    A. You mean when they
      asked for two gates in one fence?

Q.   Yes.    A. I'm not saying that it was.  The Minutes of
      that working party record that that was what the
      Police wanted, and that is what was sent to the Club.




                             /Q.   But that did not happen
                                      52
                                                     A.   K.   SEAMAN


But that did not happen, did it?            A.    B ec au se the Police
i n d ic at ed that they were w il li ng to c on cede it when D e .
E as tw oo d wrote back on b e h a l f of the Club.       It was not
a ny th in g to do with the Fire Service turning it down.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     As I u nd er s to o d it, one of
the pro bl em s about pu tt i ng a gate further down the radial
fence is that people will tumble over each other to get
down to a lower gate but not tumble over each other to
come up to a gate;        is that --- ?     A.    Poss ib ly so, sir,
but what we were saying is that we w ould want one of the
gates and we would want that one gate to be at the back.
If the P olice saw a need for anot he r gate and that gate
was at the front, that is what I u nd er s to o d their r e q u i r e ­
ment was at that me et in g and that was agre ed by the
m e etin g and put to Eas tw o od & P a rt ne rs by D avid Vaughan
from South Y o r ks hi re C ounty Coun ci l and then Dr. E a st wo od
wrotei back and o b j e ct ed to the need for it.          I think
i n i ti a ll y he thought that the Fire Service had asked for
the gate, which we had not.

       MR. WOODWARD:      Is tha'ifacility for l at eral m ov e me n t
not v a l u ab le in terms of e m e rg e nc y ?    A.   We t ho ught that
the way in which the pens w ou ld c on tain p eople if the
n umb ers were p roperly c o n t r o l l e d w ould make a safe a r r a n g e ­
ment and if it was ever n ec e ss a ry to move people from
those pens the rear radial gates could be used for that
purpose.

Lord Justice Taylor has asked you about having                  one gate
in the fence and the gate being up at the top.                    A.  Yes.

The r eason you w anted it at the top was for what p ur po se ?
Why at the top?     A.   Bec ause it is e asier for people
at the top to start to move t hr ough the gate and make
space for people below them to move up to it.

But this t errace has got crush b ar r ie r s all over it.
What is the p urpose of those?   A.      The crush b ar ri er s
will c on t a i n people.

To stop p eopl e pre s si n g down?   A.   Yes, but there are
ways round the crush bar ri er s and crush b ar r ie r s are quite
easy to dip u n d er ne at h if you want to move once people
start moving.

So there w ould be no way that you can d evise of p ro te c ti n g
a gate to e nable it to have some use lower down on the
terrace;   is that what you a r e i s a y i n g ? A. I don't
think I am saying that at all.

You see, the s u g g e s s t i o n may be made that gates lower
down were just not a good idea at all;            they c ould not
be used and they w ould cause trouble.            Do you s hare that?
A.    That is not a s ug g e s t i o n that the Fire S er vi ce has
made.

So you do not s u b s c r i b e   to the theory   that to have a gate
JjXtW

                                                53

                                                                     A.   K.   SEAMAN


             half way down the radial fence is a d i s a d v a n t a g e ?
             A.   I think it would be better to have it at the rear.

        Q.   You have got one at the rear.         A.   Again, I think you
             have got to look at the i n di vi du al c ir cu ms ta n ce s . The
             t errac e itself was rel at i ve l y shallow;   it was not
             a deep terrace.

        Q. May I move on to a nother m a tt er ?  In your e vi d en c e y es te rd ay
           you spoke of - in answer to Mr. Coll in s - the terr ac es
           having access via three tunnels.      A.   Yes.

        Q.   That is not right, is it?   A.                Well,    I agre ed with Mr.
             Collins' description, in fact.

        Q.   Very well.         The p er i m e t e r gates that you were asked about.
             Is this the situation, that the Fire Serv ic e did not regard
             the p e r i me te r gates as having any e me r ge n cy egress purp os e?
             A.    Not other than a l o c a li s ed ---

        Q.   Very local, to let s om eo ne out who m ight be by the gate.
             A.   Well, a fight in the crowd, for example.

        Q.   A fight in the c rowd?             A.    Well, that w ou ld be a crowd
             dis tur ba nc e, would it not?           People could be b elow that
             and in those c i r c u m s t a n c e s might need to use the gate to
             e vacuate.      The Police could also need to be able to get
             access to get in.

        Q. But was the Fire S ervice t hi nk in g this, that the p er im e te r
           gates really s hould be d i sc o u n t e d as m eans of e m e r ge n cy
           e g re ss ?        A.   We didn't count them as means --- " F o r the
           e v a c u a t i o n time which was c a lc ul at ed , they were not included.

        Q.   You were aware that Dr. E as t wo o d a tt a ch e d some i mp or t an c e
             to the p e r i me te r gates as a m eans of egress, were you not?
             W ou ld you have a look, please, I think it is in your bundle
             at page 54.        Sir, it is in the core bundle at 240.            A
             letter from Dr. E a s t wo od dated 8th May, 1985.         You see
             that letter, the last two s e n t en c es ?     A.    Yes.

        Q.   "It is our view that in the event of e m e r g en c y s p ec t a t o r s
             can be e va c u a t e d q uickl y enough by the gates to go on to
             the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear."                         You
             saw the order in which Mr. E as t wo o d put those imatters.
             Did the Fire S ervice ever c o n tr a di c t that and say, "No, no,
             it was wrong;         the gates on to the pitch s ho ul d not be
             taken into a cc o u n t " ?     A.   Can I say that what that letter
             was r e f e rr in g to was the r e q u i r e me n t for the s econd gate
             at the bottom of the radial fence.                  He was not c o m p l a i n i n g
             a bout the one that we w anted at the top of the radial fence.

        Q. Mr. Seaman, please, we may be at c r o s s - p u r p o s e s but w ould
           you just look at the sentence, "It is our view that in the
           event of e m e r g e n c y s p e c t a t o r s can be e v a c ua t ed q ui ckly
           e no ugh by the gates on to the pitch and by the normal exit
           gates to the rear."              He is there giving a r ea so n for not
                                       54

                                                                 A.   K.   SEAMAN


     having other radial gates,             is he not?      A.     It can be
     i n t e r p r et ed in that way.

Q. Do you u n d e r s t a n d it to mean a ny th in g else?     A.     I don't
   know why the Police s pe c i f i c a l l y r e qu es te d the a dd it i on a l
   gate.

Q.   It is Mr. E a s t w o o d ' s obser va ti on , do you see?           Mr. East wo od
     there seems to be atta ch in g some s i gn i f i c a n c e and value to the
     e v a c u a t i o n of s p ec ta to rs in e me rg e nc y t hr ough the p e ri me te r
     gates.            A.   I don't think we ever said that the gate caiild
     not be used but for a small l oc a li s ed emergency, not a mass
     e v a c u a t i o n to the pitch.

Q. But that w ould be i n s i g n i f i c a n t   in terms of e me rg e nc y
   e v acuation, would it not?            A.       Yes.

Q.   The Fire S ervice were asked, I think, to check by the South
     Y o r k s hi re Co un ty d Council on the work in g of the radial
     gates and I think indi ca te d in ---             Sir, I have gone back
     in time to 1981.           It is d oc u me n t 44 in your bundle, if
     that pe rh ap s helps us.         it follows a letter of 23rd D e ce mb er
     1981 and is dealt with in your s ta te me nt at page 19, and
     this is on the radial fence question.                 Had the Fire Service
     act ua ll y c he c k e d upon the w or k in g of the radial fences,
     do you know, in order to answer that q ue s ti o n?           A.   I
     could not be specific.            I think what it p ro ba bl y refers
     to was the rep orts that they were w or ki ng well that came
     from the Police.

Q.   I a p o l og is e for coming to that point out of order,               but
     may I go back to the per im e te r gates?    A.   Yes.

Q.   As a means of access and egress and for p ur p os e s of e m er ge nc y
     egress, the Of fi ce r W or k in g Party did pay r egard to those
     gates, did it not?       A.      They c er ta i nl y asked for those
     gates.    When the pens were c re at ed there was a r e q u i r e me n t
     for a gate in a pen that w oul d not o th er w is e have had one.

Q.   Is it not rather to o v e rs ta t e the Fire B r i g ad e 's case to
     say that they never r eg a rd e d the p er im e te r gates as p la ying
     a part in the e v a c u a t i o n p ro c es s ? A. What we have said
     all along is that they were not c ou n te d for the e v a c u a t i o n
     time.




                                                  /At   Tab 62 in your
                          55
                                   A.K. SEAMAN


At Tab 62 in your bundle, page 265 in the core bundle,
there is a meeting of the 29th July 1985 attended by
Mr. Allcock. It talks about having pitch perimeter fences,
pitch perimeter gates for the purpose of both security
and emergency egress purposes. That is right, isn t it?
- A. Yes, we have always said for localised emergencies.

May I move to one other matter please and I need your help,
Mr. Seaman.
      In your bundle, and I need to deal with it this way
because the documents are in a sequence there, in your
bundle at page 50 there is a letter from Dr. Eastwood,
dated the 9th April 1985? - A. Yes.

He Is thfere preparing a scheme:
      "We have prepared the scheme shown on the
      attached print of our drawing 6705/2."
I think, Mr. Seaman, that the drawing that then follows
is that which is in the bundle at 50? - A. Yes.
Now that drawing has got some writing on it? - A. Yes.

It is not a scale drawing. It has the various areas of
the West Stand and terraces labelled A, B, C,D and E and
there are bits which have been put in in manuscript? - A.
Yes.
Do you recognise that writing? - A. Yes.
Whose is it? - A. I believe it is Divisional Officer
Grimshaw's.
And on that drawing the only measurements that appear to
be for gates of any description relate to gates in the
radial fences?   That is right, isn't it, between C and D
and D and E? - A. Yes.
 The drawing is then considered, if we follow your documen­
 tation through, at the meeting on the 18th April 1985?
 - A. Right, sir.
 And the gates that are there referred to are at B. Do
 you have that? It was said in opening yesterday that the
 gates that one was concerned with ---   Do you have the
 letter of the 2nd May 1985 which is your document number 53.
 It has the paragraph E on the second page:
       "Certain gates to have the minimum widths and
       metres indicated on the attached plan."

 A. Yes.
 Now that is the plan that you have jnast looked at, isn't it?
    ,<v   *
V                                          56
                                                  A.K. SEAMAN


                - A. Yes, it was another copy of that plan. This is the
                actual copy of the plan that Mr. Grimshaw marked during
                the meeting.
              Q. But it is Mr. Grimshaw's markings that one was looking at
                 and the only markings on that plan are"the minimum widths
                 in metres indicated on the attached plan." Is there
                 another plan? - A. I think there is another plan in the
                 submissions.
              Q. If one follows it through, 50, 51, 52, 53, it seems to
                 be relating solely to those gates in the radial fences
                 because they are the only ones that are measured or have
                 a measurement against them? - A. Well the drawtagin gates
                 between C, D and E have got "1 metre" written on them.
                       MR. WOODWARD:   Yes, thank you.   Thank you, sir.

     •                          Cross-Examined by MR. MULLER:

              Q. Mr. Seaman, I wonder if you can help us about one or two
                 things.
                       First of all if you go please to page 2 of your
                 statement. If we have a look at Exhibit 4 in the bundle
                 attached to your statement which is that schedule, which
                 in fact is 27 in the general bundle if you prefer sir.

                       In relation to that we can if we go over the page,
                 that estimation of safe ground capacity under South
                 Yorkshire, was a matter if I can put it this way, primarily
                 for the Council? - A. Yes sir.
              Q. And to be consulted were the other organisations. Is that
                 right? - A. That is right, Sir, the members of the Officer
                 Working Party.
              Q. And the position was, was it, as you have I think already
                 indicated, that everybody would give their input the
                 various specialities, the Police, the Fire Brigade and
                 the building people, and then the final figure would be
                 determined by the Council having had all that input? - A.
                 Yes.
              Q. And as far as you were concerned, at any time have you
                 felt the Fire Brigade to be competent to do anything
                 other than supply information about escape from pens or
                 from terraces? - A. No sir.
              Q. And indeed was it as a direct result of what you personally
                 did and said to Mr. Grimshaw that Mr. Grimshaw, as you
                 understand it, made that point to the Working Party when
                 the responsibilities were revised following the abolition
                 of the South Yorkshire County Council? - A. Yes sir, it
                 was.
                         57      A.K. SEAMAN


That is dealt with, I think, at page 6 of your document,
so what we see there 1.16 and what Mr. Grimshaw is saying,
it was as a direct result of what you told him to say.
Is that right? - A. That is right sir, yes.
But I think you put some note on the original document,
have you? - A. I made some pencilled comments as I remember
on the original draft that came round. Unfortunately it
does not show on our copy.
You put some pencil marks on it, is that right? - A. Yes.
I had written that stadium capacity should be ....
The reason I ask you that question is even at that stage,
at that late stage in July of 1987 did you feel you could
assist in relation to for example the crash barriers or
anything of that kind? - A. No sir, we are not professionally
qualified to judge the condition of a crush barrier.

Can I then turn to another matter at page 3, 1.8 and I
raise this because this is something which appears in
the statement made by the Local Council. It is in
relation to the inspections that took place. I think
there is some criticism made by Mr. Bownes of the position
when South Yorkshire were doing it, that the inspections
weren't long enough and were rather short? - A. Yes.
From your experience and your enquiries, how   long did these
inspections, annual or bi-annual inspections   take? - A.
Well the inspections generally took all of a   morning and
then most of the afternoon as well. Usually    the Officer
Working Party used to break for lunch*
Would you go then please to page 5. I think I can deal
with this all at once and it relates to Exhibit 9 in
your document and I think it is 312 in the composite
bundle.
      That is the first time that redrafting of the
Certificate is mentioned, isn't it. Do you see it in
paragraph (c)? - A. Yes sir.
And we have heard what actually happened, how it was much
later, I think in July 1987, that you were being asked
to look at a draft. We have gone through that already.
All I wanted to ask you about at this stage was this:
as far as you are concerned are you aware whether the
Fire Brigade was doing anything to get the thing moving?
- A. I know that Divisional Officer Binnington who had
regular contact with Mr. Bownes on othet matters to deal
with licensing,, regularly raised the matter and asked him
how progress was going.


                        /Q. But did it have
                                              A. K. SEAMAN

But did it have the effect that we can see - is that
right?   A. Yes, sir.

In fact, as far as Mr. Bownes is concerned, he, as you
said, did not produce any Minutes as Mr. Vaughan had
done - is that jfehe position? A. The Minutes produced
by Mr. Vaughan were always very, very prompt. Sometimes
there were no Minutes at all when Mr. Bownes took
meetings.

If we look please at 78, would you just have a look at
that? Look at 78. That is a report made by, I think,
Mr. Bownes to Mr. Mackrell relating to an annual
inspection which had taken place on the 6th August?
A. Yes, sir.

Mr. Bownes is actually making the report to the Club
on the 4th December, 1987?   A. Yes.

 Many months later?   A.   Yes.
Well into the next season?        A.   Yes.

Can I ask you now please to go to page 11 in your
statement?   I just want to ask you a little bit more
about the perimeter gates.   You have made the point
quite clearly there that the existing gates were
discounted as a means of escape. You have made that
point very clearly. They were intended, as far as you
were concerned, to deal with a localised difficulty.
Can you just please look at the old green guide, if I
can describe it in that way, and ask you to look at
7.9?   A. Yes, sir.

The position is there that there is a specific require­
ment, is there not, to have such gates?   A. Yes, sir.

This is 7.9, "Pitch perimeter fence/walls This fence
should be designed to keep spectators off the pitch
but gates or other access points should be ^provided
for use in an emergency..."? A. Yes.

Was that the emergency to which you regarded those gates
as being directed?   A. Yes.

That kind of emergency that might arise in the vicinity
or round about the gate?   A. Yes.

And I think the position has already been made clear
that at that time there was no specific requirement as
to how wide those gates should be? A. No, sir, there
wasn't .

As far as the absence of exit signs at the jpiirimeter
gate is concerned, did you think it woulcM be desirable
to have an exit sign above the perimeter gate? A. No,
not at all.
                       59

                                         A. K. SEAMAN

I think you have already explained that the primary
route of exit would be through the tunnel?   A. That's
right, sir, we wanted them to go out through the rear.

If we look at the green guide at 6.13, that is to say,
the old green guide, the one thait was operating at the
time, that says:

     "Care should be taken in the planning of exit
     systems to ensure that crowds have access in an
     emergency to alternative exit routes in the event
     of their normal exit route being obstructed".
A.   That's right, sir, yes.

So the primary route was the tunnel, is that right?
A. Yes.

And when you talk about radial fences and the exits
through the radial fences, are those the exits which
you were contemplating in compliance with 6.13? A. Yes,
they are.

So that they only come into operation, am I right, if
the tunnel is not operative because there is a bomb
in it or something of that kind?   A. Yes, sir.

If the primary route is the tunnel, did you think it was
necessary to mark the tunnel with a sign? A. No, because
we thought it was obvious that it was the one they came
in and out of, an it was a very shallow terrace.

So if there was an emergency not involving any damage
or problem in getting through the tunnel, which way would
you want the people to go? A. Out through the tunnel
to the rear.

But if in fact signs had been put up, either at the
perimeter gate or at the radial gate, would that have
caused problems in normal circumstances when you were
just trying to get somebody out of the pitch for
evacuation purposes through the tunnel?   A. Yes, it
would have caused confusion.

People might be going to the front or going to the side
when they should really be going to the back? A. Yes,
sir.

Can you just help us a little bit about how you would
anticipate the evacuation would work through the radial
gates? A. I would say we would need to have someone on
the gate, a policeman or a steward, according to
circumstances.

But would you be anticipating evacuating people from,
for example, pen 3 in isolation from pens 1 and 2, or
would you have to do them all at once? A. No, I think
the decision would be to evacuate the adjacent pens as
well at the same time.
                                   A. K. SEAMAN

So if 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 and so on were all evacuated,
which way would you expect   the people in 1 and 2 to
move when they were told to evacuate? A. To the corner
exits of the terrace.
Would that then create a vacuum or an area at the radial
gate?   A. Yes, it wouia.
And it is into that radial gate that the people would then
go?   A. Yes.
From pen 3?   A.   Yes.
Can I ask you then about another matter     please, if you
will go to page 17?     Paragraph 2.10.     This refers to
the problems that there had been at the     Wolves -v-
TottfiRham Hotspur game in the summer of    1981? A. Yes.

You, I think, have looked through all your files in
your possession?   A. Yes.
Have you been able to find any letter ordocument which
gives details about what actually happened on that
occasion? A. No, sir, none whatsoever.

In particular, I think, in the general bundle at page 144,
146 and 147, you have now seen those letters?   A. Yes,
I have seen them.
For example, the letter written by Sheffield Wednesday,
but none of those letters have you been able to find in
any of your files?   A. No, sir.
Or any report by the police or anything of that kind?
A. No.
And such enquiries as you have been able to make with
the various officers,fcan you help us as to what detail
they actually had about what the problem was in 1981?
A. I don't think they ever had any information other
tfa&anthat there had been some sort of crushing incident.
They never knew the extent of the actual incident.

In that connection, can you help us about this from the
enquiries that you have made: Was there at that time,
or at any time, any complaint about the size of the
perimeter gate?   A. No, sir, none at all.
Or any problem that anybody had felt had arisen in
evacuating people, bearing in mind the size of the
gate?   A. No.
As far as you are aware, has there at any time been
any general complaint by the Police or by anybody that
there was difficulty in controlling the number of people
going into the pens?   A. No, sir.

Or into the terrace as a whole?    A. No.
O'
                                 61

                                                         A.K. SEAMAN

     Q. I think you have made this point and we can see it at
        page 28, if you can just help us about it.  You made
        the point that in 1985 a plan was put forward in front
        of the committee which involved a number of different
        or division of the terraces with different turnstiles
        feeding each part of the terrace.   Is that right? - A.
        Yes, that is right.

     Q. But then if we go to the top ofvpptge 28 I think the first
        you knew that that p l a n h a d been changed was when Station
        Officer Ryder in the course of his normal duties looking
        at building regulations discovered a completely different
        plan had been put in by the club.       Is that right? - A.
        Yes, sir.

     Q.Of course the vital difference, is this right, between the
        two was that whereas the original plan which had been
        basically approved of by the working party gave control
        through each turnstile this one no longer did because
        it abandoned all this division of the turnstiles?- A.
        Yes, it did.

     Q. At that time when that abandonment was taking place
        was anybody at that time saying well, we ought to keep
        these turnstiles because we have difficulty in controlling
        the number of people going into different parts of the
        terrace? - A. No, sir.

     Q. Would you please have a look now on that same page 28 9
        at ....

               MR. MULLER:  Sir, I do not know whether you have
          this point clearly in mind already but if you look at
          6705, the drawing 6705 ....

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Sorry.   Where are you
          asking ....

               MR. MULLER:     It is Exhibit 60. It is^on page 28
          it is referred to and it is Exhibit 60 inhis bundle.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

     Q.        MR. MULLER:   Have you got that particular drawing?
          Have you got it there? - A/i Yes.

     Q. That was the drawing which accompanied the letter from
        Eastwoods on the   25th of July showing the size of the
        personnel gate. Is that    right? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. And we can see from what appears on that plan the
        personnel gate was going to be, translating that
        into imperial measurements ....
o7 ✓                             62


                                                              A.K.   SEAMAN

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry.     This is Exhibit
            60   in the Fire Service bundle?

                 MR. MULLER:     It is.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Seems to be a plan of the
            brickwork wall.

                   MR. MULLER:  It is indeed.   If, sir, you look
            at   No. 3 on the legendaathe right-hand side it gives
            the size of the personnel gate which is 838 by  ....

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

             •   MR. MILLER:Which is actually a         2 foot 9 gate
            or a normal size door:

       Q. Now, were you ever - that is what you were anticipating
          was going to be put in there as a result of those plans?
          - A. Yes, sir.

       Q. Did you at any time realise or have you seen anything to
          indicate that anybody realisedcthat that gate had been
          increased in size from a wooden door to a steel gate
          much wider? - A. Seen nothing at all, sir.  We under­
          stood that is what ....

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am not clear.  This is
            the gate in the dividing wall, the personnel - that one?

                 MR. MULLER:  The one that was used on the day of
            this semi-final for access of supporters.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLORt    And you are saying if:
            was actually put in larger than it was planned^on here?

                 MR. MULLER:   I do not know whether it was enlarged
            at some later stage.  It may very well have been.  I do
            not know.  The plan certainly was originally it was just
            to be a door but later on became a gate and although it
            is described as a personnel gate ....

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    It might have been even more
            disastrous if that is all it had remained.

                 MR.   MULLER:   May   I just take it a little further?

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

       Q.        MR. MULLER:   Was it ever understood by you at
            the working party or what you had seen, by the Fire
            Brigade, that that was ever going to be used for
            spectators? - A. No, not at all.  W& just understood
            it would be used for staff to be able to pass from one
      *
o'!
                                     63


                                                                A.K.   SEAMAN

               side of the wall to the other.

          Q. So as a result of that fiaali pian^tha|fer1?ai@^£rloir§aicd which
             included that wall with the personnel gate in it, was it
             the understanding of the working party that the terraces
             would be fed partly through the turnstiles A to G and
             partly through some of the turnstiles 1 to 16? - A. Yes,
             sir, that is right.

          Q. And so the position which had actually arisen during the
             semi-final was that one that the working party as far as
             you knew never knew about? - A. They knew nothing what­
             soever about it.

          Q. I think we have been told that was a system that was
             being used generally by the time of the semi-final.
             Totally unaware of it?

          Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Do you mean the north end
               of the west terracing you expected to be fed through
               1 to 16? - A. Yes, on the drawing, the 6705/8A, it
               shows the intended use of turnstiles.

                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Yes.

          Q.        MR. MULLER:    But you were never aware - as far as
               that is concerned, looking  at it, does that at least
               afford some control through the turnstiles by dividing
               of course the terrace into two parts? -A. It would, sir.
               It would have done a fairly even split of the spectators
               needing to gain access to the standing terraces.

          Q. Just would you please go now to page 31? There is there
             a reference to a meeting in 1986, in the summer of 1986,
             which was a meeting at which there was discussion about
             the removal of the barrier in pen 3? - A. Yes, sir.

          Q. But that has never been minuted at any time? - A. No, sir,
             I have never seen anything in writing about it.

          Q. But it was discussed.        Is that right? -A. Yes.

          Q. And approved of apparently by the people who were there
             and of course including the Fire Service? - A. Yes.

          Q. Would you'now go, please, to page 34? Page 34 you deal
             specifically with one of the recommendations that you made,
             or the Fire Brigade made, in relation to condition
             10(a)? - A. Yes, sir.

          Q.Difficulty of the pens being controlled by stewards or the
             terraces being controlled by stewards.  You were there
             considering what provisions there should be for the
             future? - A. Yes.
                                               A.K.    SEAMAN

At that time as far as you can tell had it in fact ever
been suggested that either the stewards or the Police
were finding it impossible or difficult to actually
control the numbers? - A. No, sir.

And as far as your proposals and your acceptance of
the number of people that would be in these pens,
if you ftseEbeen told at any time that we cannot control
the number of people going in these pens would you
have agreed to these pens coming into existence? -A.
Not at all.    There is no way we would have accepted it.

Can I ask you   then about the access to the ground?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Put it this way.  Question
of whether they could have controlled or not.  Supposing
it had been said to you well, we* think the best way to
control these pens is to leave it to the fans to sort
themselves out, we have given them a couple of gates
at the back and if they do not like it in the central
pens because it is too crowded they can move themselves
through but we are not going to go on, neither Police
nor stewards, to take any part in that unless we find
somebody absolutely screaming out or see something which
is in the nature of disorder, would you have been happy
with that situation? -A. Certainly not, sir, no.




                           / MR. MULLER:    When you ....
                                        65


                                                              A.     K.    SEAMAN


Q.            MR. MULLER:       When you c o ns id er the whole of your
     e v ac u a t i o n times, that is all based, is it not, on a
     certain number of people being in that pen?               A.   Yes.

Q. Of course, once you get more people                       in that pen,         they
   have no meaning.   A.   No.

Q. Can I just ask you then about the q ue st io n of access
   of fire appliances.         As you have been reminded, there
   was a p r o b l e m on the South S t a n d . - that related, I
   think, not to fire appl i an c es g en e ra l ly but just to a
   fire e m e rg en cy tender.    A.      That's right, sir, yes.

Q.   So the normal fire engine could get through.                                A.   Yes      I
     believe it could do.

Q. But the e m e r ge nc y tender            could not.         A.        The e m er ge nc y
   tender was too high.

Q.   I think we were          told    earlier     on    they are rather           high.
     A.   Yes.

            MR. MULLER:        Sir, I do not have any other questions.
     I am mi nd fu l of the fact that this w it ne ss has refe rr ed
     from time to time to Mr. Grimshaw.                    Mr. G r i m s h a w - perh ap s
     I can extract from the wi t ne s s but the p os i ti o n is - a l th ou gh
     he is act ua ll y here in this room at the moment, he has been
     ill off work quite a long time.                   He is now c o mi ng back again
     and the p o s i t i o n is, as I u n de r s t a n d   it, that he is due
     p oss ibly to go into h o sp it al this afternoon, the p o si ti on
     being that he has got to see a doctor this afternoon, I
     think at 3 o 'clock and the result of that may mean that
     he has to go into hospital.              I think it is d es i ra b le I
     should tell you that i m me d i a t e l y beca us e there may be
     p eople here who w ould wish him to give evidence.

            Sir, I make it clear i m me d i a t e l y and I am sure my
     l ear ned friend Mr. C oll in s w ould agree with this that
     the u n d e r s t a n d i n g t h ro u gh o ut was that one r e p r e s e n t a t i v e
     in the form of Mr. Seaman w ould a c tu al ly deal with these
     m atter s and that is why we have dealt with them in that
     way, not b ecause we have any r el uc t an c e to call a ny body
     else.       Sir, pe rh ap s it is a m atter we could consider.

               MR. HYTNER:            Sir, may I say that I do not really
     need to c onsider it.                Mr. G ri m sh a w has heard the q ue s ti o ns
     that I have put with rel a ti o n to him.                  I w ou ld be very
     content if he is able to deal with those q u e s t i o n s at all -
     and he may not be - it could be done on paper, b ec au se if
     he has no r e c o l l e c t i o n there w ould be little point in
     c r o s s - e x a m i n i n g on it.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   It is really his                             recollection
     of what was said at that meeting.

           MR. HYTNER:     --- said at the meeting. He may not have
     a rec oll ec ti on . If he has, he can put it on paper and
     I w ould be content.
                                        66




             MR. COLLINS:  That, with respect, would seem a very
     s e nsi ble way of going about it, h aving regard to what we
     have been told.

            LORD JUS TICE TAYLOR:              Is there a ny bo dy not content
     with   that?    P erhaps that           could be done, Mr. Muller.

             MR. MULLER:    Cert a in l y the q ue st i on s are put and
     c er ta in ly he can answer them as besfcthe can.

                          R e- ex a m i n e d   by MR.   COLLINS:

Q.   There are two matters, I think, of cla ri fi ca ti on .                 Mr.
     G l as g o w asked you ra bo ut c o m m u n i c a t i o n with the Club, you
     remember.       A.   Yes.

Q. Am I right in t h i n ki ng that it was not the Fire S er vice as
   such w hich nor ma ll y w ould c o m m u n i c a t e ? Communication
   would be th ro ug h either the South Y or ks hi re C ounty Coun ci l
   or the City C o u n ci l?   A.     That's right, sir, yes.

Q. Mr. W o o d wa rd asked you .about your E xh ibit 50 and t h e plan
   and some slight su pp o se d confusion.      Can I ask you to look
   at the core bundle, page 235.         That is the letter of 2nd
   May to w hich you were refe rr ed from the Coun ty C o un ci l to
   the Club and if you look at (e) on page 236 you will see
   referenc e to the gates having m i ni m u m widt hs in m e tr es on
   the at ta ch ed plan.     Have you got that?      A.   Yes.

Q.   Would you look at 237, which is the a t ta ch ed plan and you
     can see there, can you not, that the w i dt hs refer        only to
     the gates o utside and do not refer to the gates in the fences
     on the t e r r a c e s ? A.    Whilst that is true, sir, I have
     c on t ac t ed the people c on c er n ed and they are adamant that the
     the other gates in the radial fences were included.

Q.   They cle arly were not.   You can see it from the plan.
     A.    I accept that the w o rd in g of the memo would indi ca te
     not but I think what they would say is they used their
     own p h ras eolog y.

Q.   It may be they did but the fact is, as we can see,            that the
     letter sent by the South Y o rk sh ir e Coun ty C o un ci l c on t ai n ed
     that plan and it   manifestly did not refer to the widt hs
     of the gates on the terraces, w ha t ev e r may have been intended.
     That is right, is it not?      A.       That's right.

Q. And it makes it e qu al ly clear that t h e r ea f te r the Club
   were ent it l ed to assume, and inde ed e ve r yo n e was e n ti tl ed
   to assume who read the c or re sp on d en c e, that the only
   gates whose w id th s were rele va nt and thus the only gates
   to w hich s u p e r v i s i o n rela te d were the g ates outside.
   A.    Well, I w ould point out there was a further s u bm i s s i o n
                                                           A.   K.   SEAMAN


later on in the July and the same s t at em en t went again
but u n f o r t u n a t e l y I suppose it would read the same way.

Of course it would.            A.      But the i n t e n ti o n of the
d i sc u s s i o n with our Of fi c er s was the same.

Mr. Seaman, sadly, w ha t ev e r may have been the intention,
the fact is that what was put on paper related only to
the outside gates, did it not?        A.   I cannot dispute
that.

     MR. COLLINS:    The only other matter, sir - the width
of the gate was ref er re d to by Mr. M uller ---

       LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      The p er so n ne l    gate?

        MR. COLLINS:     The pers on ne l gate.            The only s ub se q ue n t
refe re nc e I have been able to find fairly quic kl y is page
319 in the core bundle where there is a r ef e re n ce in June
of 1986 to Mr. C hester a g re ei ng to disc us s with Dr. East wo od
and the Board the p o s s i b i l i t y of a w ider door in the wall
inside the Lep pi ng s Land area.            Now, I assume that that is
the wall in qu es ti on and I do not know w he th er that means
that the door was to be wider than the one that there now
is or the door was to be wider than the one that was then
i nc lu de d and thus b ec om es what it now is, because I have
not been able to t r a c e ka n y s u b s eq u en t d oc u me n ta t io n . But,
of course, it was not c o n t e m p l a t e d at that time that that
was going to be used by - or when it was put in - that it
was going to be used by fans at all, beca us e it was put
there for the p urpose of segregation.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          What it really comes to is the
whole a r r a n g e m e n t at Lepping s Lane e nt r an c e is a p ie c em e al
product of a number of plans and p r o p os a ls w hich have been
m o di f i e d ad hoc from time to time.

     MR. COLLINS:       That is right.         The truth w ould seem
to be that once s e g r e g a t i o n was not a relevant factor
that wall s hould have been d e m ol i sh e d but anyway, that is
another matter.

      LORD J USTICE      TAYLOR:      Very well.

         MR. MAXWELL:      Could I m e nt i o n a m at te r that arises
in the core bundle w hich might cause d i f fi c ul t y to those
l a b o ur in g over the long w ee ke nd and it relates to c er ta in
plans.        O thers may not have found this d if fi c ul t y but I
did.        It is page 146 where Dr. E a s t w oo d w rites in with
his p ro p o s a l s for the radial fences in 1981 and on page
146 at the very end he refers to a d ra wi ng 3563/1 and
there follows at page 149 a very rough draw in g 3563/1
and I do not know w he t h e r it was a s su me d that that was
the doc um en t w hich came to the Coun ty Council.             If that
was so assumed, then it is wrong and the docu me nt which
came to the County C ounc il - three of them - that is
3563/1 which is a d ra wi ng of the radial fence.               I am not
*   4%   4




                                          68

                                                        A.    K.   SEAMAN


             sure that this has ever been copied             or been made     a v ai la bl e
             to other persons.

                    LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:   We had better note, then,
             that   on page 146,     3563/1 there you say is not page 149.

                    MR.   MAXWELL:     Yes.

                I   LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:     What it is we have         not got.

                    MR. MAXWELL: I am not sure w he t he r          you have    got it,
             sir,   or not.

                  MR. COLLINS:         I think that is right.        I do not
             know w hether Mr. G o l d s ac k has seen those p a r t ic u la r draw in gs
             but I think c e r t ai nl y we found a 3563/1 and it came in
             at  page 14®.       It looks as if someone may have m i st a k e n
             the relevant drawing, I do not know.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Thank you.   We will break
             now, as I i n d ic at ed earlier, until Tuesday m or n in g at
             10.00 o'clock.



                              (The Inquiry was a dj o ur n ed until
                          10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 20th June, 1 9 8 9 )
