                                                Cc-




    /    -               v
                                . /ve                 v / cc   Mr Boys smith
    P\    &    - _Z.         *r-v^ue                    |      Mr Turney

    '*'****- .                                          V _    Mr Brown"
         f r * / ' , c'" V-v.                                  Ms Ja9°


    TAYLOR: POLICE IMPLEMENTATION                        X      f~       '   *


    It might be helpful to record the police reaction so far to
    Sir Peter Taylor's interim report, and the response we have given
    to difficulties.


    Supt Hewitt (Staff Officer to Mr Anderton, Greater Manchester)
    telephoned me at the end of last week to report that forces
I   generally were doing all they could to meet Sir Peter's interim
    recommendations.   Inevitably some recommendations would not be
    implemented in time for the new Football League season this
    coming Saturday (19 August), despite best endeavours.         I agreed
    that common sense and realism must prevail over what could be
    achieved in any given time.


    We are only aware of one ground where the licensing authority may
    have it in mind deliberately to go against one of Sir Peter's
    recommendations: Millwall.         TO 20 Branch (public order) at NSY
    have kept me informed.      The particular local difficulty stems
    from some very large gates (5 metres or so) put in hurriedly
    after Hillsborough for added safety.         The licensing authority
    would prefer them to remain closed but completely unbolted, in
    conflict with Sir Peter's 8th recommendation that they should be
    fully open.   A compromise suggestion is that they might be opened
    the standard distance of 1.1 metres.


    I have emphasised to TO 20 that this is for local resolution but
    in discussing the problem I have reached broad consensus with
    TO 20 and the ACPO office at Greater Manchester (Inspector
    Howells, in Supt Hewitt's absence) on general criteria.          Our
    approach is to encourage the police to take the view, if a
    licensing authority proposes to go against one of the Taylor
recommendations:


(i)    that Taylor should be compiled with unless there are
compelling reasons (especially of safety) against; and


(ii)    that if the licensing authority still want to breach a
Taylor recommendation, against police advice, the range of police
responses could include:


- registering disapproval but going no further,


- appealing against any change in the safety certificate (which
may or may not be applicable in any given case), or


- declining to police the ground.


Setting the criteria of 'compelling' in (i) raises the threshold
to more than just local preference.   Clubs and licensing
authorities should not, for example, feel entirely free to make
up their own mind, arguing the rationale that Sir Peter did not
visit their ground before making his interim recommendations.
But if breaching a recommendation did not in the view of the
local police actually pose any threat eg to safety, the police
might have no grounds for going further than registering their
objections.


You will be on leave from 18 to 25 August and I will be on leave
from 17 August to 4 September.




                                                   F J SMITH
                                                   F8 Division
15 August 1989
