                                                         6W     . n\t                       *T b *** G r t ^
, ' |" V                          A                           *®»                                   10 Great George Street,
  | J|                    * A                                                                       London SW1P3AE



POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY


The independent body established by Act of Parliament                           ■» T T - iT A TC^   T>T*T T * A P P
to oversee public complaints against police officers.                                JH y \ / S      | \ |H | I_ N   A '• j M




                                                                                                     13 January, 1992



                                                        HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY



             After very careful consideration, the Police Complaints Authority

             have decided that disciplinary charges regarding police operations

             at      Hillsborough                  Football         Stadium   on    15 April          1989      against         a
             Superintendent should be withdrawn.



             The Authority had directed that charges be preferred against both

             the Superintendent and his superior officer a Chief Superintendent.

             The retirement of the Chief Superintendent on medical grounds means

             that what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty

             cannot be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior officer.



             Full details of the Authority's decision are contained in the
             attached statement.




                                      Further information: Richard M Offer, Press Officer 071- 273 6483
                        HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY



1.   On 11 July, 1991 the Police Complaints Authority directed that

charges     of     neglect    of    duty     be     preferred    against   a     Chief
Superintendent and a Superintendent of the South Yorkshire Police,

in respect of their handling of police operations at Hillsborough

Football Stadium on 15 April, 1989.               The Authority wish to make it

clear that their direction was not a finding of culpability, which

would be a matter solely for the disciplinary tribunal hearing the
charges to adjudicate upon.



2.   On 10 November, 1991 the Chief Superintendent was retired from

the Force on medical grounds with the consequence that he was, with

effect from that date, no longer subject to the Police Discipline
Code and, therefore, the disciplinary proceedings against him could
not continue.



3.   The South Yorkshire Police have now sought the leave of this

Authority     to    withdraw       the     single    charge     laid   against    the

Superintendent, who was subordinate to the Chief Superintendent at

the relevant time.



4.   The Authority have considered the request with great care and

conclude that it would be unjust and inappropriate to pursue the

charge against the Superintendent alone,                 in the absence of his

superior officer.            We have     therefore decided to exercise our

discretion,      in accordance with Section 93(6)               of the Police and

Criminal Evidence Act 1984, to give the Force leave not to proceed
with the charge.
5.   The Authority do not resile from their original decision to

direct that charges against both officers be heard and considered

by a disciplinary tribunal.        We are satisfied that there was prima

facie evidence to support such charges.            The subsequent retirement

of the Chief Superintendent,            on medical grounds has,          however,

substantially altered the position.



6.   The charges against the Chief Superintendent covered a number

of different matters.       The Authority directed that one of these

charges should be laid both against the Chief Superintendent and

the Superintendent,       as his immediate subordinate.               This charge

alleged failure to control the movement of supporters subsequent to

the opening of Gate 'C ', which was opened in order to avert danger

to supporters outside the ground.



7.   We have made our decision to accede to the South Yorkshire

Police requests for the following reasons:



     a.    the background to the alleged failure to control those

     entering through Gate 'C' involved, inter alia, preliminary

     planning and preparation for the police operation which it

     would be impossible to assess fairly at a disciplinary hearing

     in   the   absence    of    the    officer   in    charge   of    the    whole

     operation;



     b.    the primary responsibility, for controlling spectators

     entering     Gate     'C'    did     not     lie    directly      with     the

     Superintendent;
     c.      the precise nature of the Superintendent's responsibility

     cannot be adequately assessed in the absence of his superior

     officer at the tribunal;



     d.   what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty

     cannot be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior
     officer;



     e.      the Superintendent's ability to put forward his case

     fully     in   the   absence   of   his    superior   officer   would    be

     impaired; and                                         ^   V



     f.      it would be an injustice to the Superintendent,                 who

     conducted himself with dignity at the Inquest and throughout

     the investigations, for him to stand alone charged with being

     a cause of the tragedy which occurred and thus to appear to be

     a 'scapegoat' for faults which may well be attributable to
     others.



8.   In reaching what we have found to be a very difficult decision

we have taken into account the interests and feelings of those who

have made complaints about the police conduct, the Hillsborough

Families Support Group, all those who have suffered bereavement as

the result of the tragic events and the public interest on the one

hand and, on the other, justice to the Superintendent and the sense

of unfairness which would           result     from   continuing the   process

against him alone in the absence of his superior officer.
9.   The Authority have therefore granted the leave sought by the
South Yorkshire Police not to proceed with the charge which we

directed against the Superintendent.
