 M EM ORANDUM



From: CHRIS BONE
      Room 1106
      8 2512



Date:     5 September 1997

To:       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




               Z £*f         f t '   J A . ms r

I attach the submission we received yesterday afternoon from Alun Jones QC.

It is described as an ‘interim submission’. I understand from Ann Adlington that we can
expect a revised and expanded version later (and she knows that this should not be too much
later).




CHRIS BONE




G: \HILLSBOR\S-S\OI 0. DOC
                             THE JUDICIAL SCRUTINY INTO
                      I H E iilL L S B Q R Q U G H STADIUM DrSASTf.R




             IKTERIM W RITTEN SUBM ISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
                     HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROIT




        INIftO m iC H Q N

       The Hillsborough Fam ily Support Group. These submissions tire made on behalf o f the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the Group”), which consists o f most o f the
       families who lost relatives in the disaster.1 The Group was responsible for the submission
       o f the new evidence to the Home Secretary in March 1997 which resulted in the
       establishment o f this Judicial Scrutiny. These submissions are provisional, for reasons
       which appear in the course o f this document.

       The aims o f the Group. The Group contends that the fresh evidence discovered justifies
       criminal proceedings for perverting the course o f justice at the inquest in 1990-91. The
       culpability o f particular individuals needs to be discovered by further investigation.
       While some believe that proceedings for manslaughter should have been brought, others
       argue that an acceptance by police officers o f fault at the inquest would have assuaged
       grief and anger, and that the concealment o f the truth and misrepresentation of events is
       more serious. All seek from this Scrutiny a further judicial inquiry into the disaster on
       the basis o f evidence not made available to the inquiry o f Lord Taylor in 1989, nor to the
       inquest in 1990-91. It is accepted, eight and a half years after the event, that it is
       impracticable, and may be undesirable, for a fresh inquest to be convened. Ii is not
       argued that a judge should be appointed to re-examine all the issues considered by the
       Taylor Inquiry. It is submitted that the matter should be referred to the High Court for
       a determination whether the verdicts of “accidcntal death” should be set aside by reason
       o f the fresh evidence. However, these submissions will demonstrate that there are issues
       o f fact which can only be resolved by the presentation o f oral evidence at such a
       proceeding. The most appropriate course would be

               (a) an invitation by the scrutinising tribunal to the Attorney-General to issue his
              fia t for an application to the Divisional Court under section 13 o f the Coroners
               Act 1988, with a view to having the inquest verdicts quashed, combined with;

              (b) the grant o f leave to move for Judicial Review o f the inquests verdicts, or a
              recommendation that leave be granted.



        The submissions have been prepared by Alun Jones QC and Julian Knowles o f Counsel,
3 Raymond Buildings, Gray's Inn, London WC1R 5BH, instructed by Ann Adlington, solicitor
to the Group.
04 - S E P - 3 7   IB: 35     FROM.   3   RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                    ID:   0171   242   4270               PAGE   2




                            Section 13 o f the Coroners Act reads

                         (I)
                                    I his section applies where, on an application by or under the authority o f the of
                                   the Attorney - Genera!, the High Court is satisfied as respects a coroner (“the
                                   coroner concerned”) e ith e r...

                            (b)
                                  where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason o f fraud,
                                  rejection of evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, the
                                  discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or desirable in the
                                  interests of justice that another inquest should be held.

                        (2)        I he High Court may -

                        (a)       o r d e r ... another inquest to be held into the death ..

                       (e)        where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that inquest.



                       In Kg R apisr [1988] 1 Q.B. 26 the Court stated (at p28C) that it was desirable for
                       applications under section 13 o f the Act to be combined with an application for Judicial
                       Review in order for the Court to have the broadest range o f remedies at its disposal.



                       Ih£..adyantaggs o f a Divisional Court hearing. Such a hearing would have a number of
                       advantages over a “first instance” type o f enquiry .

                                               Divisional Court could inform itself o f               background   and
                                          uncontroversial evidence by affidavit evidence;

                       M                  the Divisional Court could, at an inter partes hearing, decide how much
                                          evidence need be called live to determine whether verdicts should be
                                          quashed.

                                          the very flexible Judicial Review procedures available would obviate the
                                          need for expensive and cumbersome re-litigation.

                       ihtf motives o f thg Group. Most, but not all, o f the members o f the Group arc from
                      Liverpool. Otherwise they have little in common beyond the fact that all of them lost
                      cherished relatives. They come from a variety o f backgrounds, circumstances and
                      occupations. The Group is not political, and has no interest cxcept in promoting the
                      legitimate legal interests o f its members in relation to the disaster. A number o f letters
                      arc attached from members o f the Group who wish to express their own reasons for
                      wanting a fresh enquiry. (Appendix 11)

                      Common to all the members o f the group is a deep-seated conviction that the legal system
                      tailed them, at a vulnerable time in their lives, when they most needed its protections.
                      Hostility is not directed towards the Taylor Inquiry. Many recognise that the disaster

                                                                   2
04-SE P-97   16:36      FROM;   3   RAYMOND   BUILDINGS                      0171    242   4270                PAGE   3




                   lead, through Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, to great and lasting improvements
                  in safety at football grounds. However, the Group's attitudes to the inquest are very
                  different. Repeatedly, members have told their lawyers, and wish to express u> Lord
                  Justice Stuart-Smith, that they attended the inquest full o f trust in the police and coroner’s
                  court, which subsequent events have proved to have been misplaced. The feeling of
                  betrayal is profound and has led to deep bitterness and, in some, a sense o f alienation
                  from the courts and law enforcement authorities. Many feel that they have failed their
                  dead relatives by failing to assert themselves effectively at the inquest.

                 The new evidence demonstrates that the inquest proceedings, culminating in verdicts of
                 accidental death, were deeply flawed. The inquest verdicts were procured by the
                 presentation o f false and misleading evidence, and by the conccalment and rejection of
                 material evidence. Responsibility for this lies with the South Yorkshire Police, and with
                 the West Midlands Police, who investigated the disaster.

                   The inquest verdicts were the culmination of the attempts of the South Yorkshire Police
                  attempts to shift the blame for the disaster from themselves to others, in particular to the
                  supporters. This evasion o f responsibility began as the disaster unfolded, when the
                 officer in charge lied to the Secretary o f the FA about whai was happening, and continued
                 through to the inquests, despite Lord Justice Taylor's condemnation (&& Report
                 (Appendix 1) para. 285). The fact that the Taylor Inquiry is not criticised by most o f the
                 Group enhances rather than diminishes the need for a further Inquiry. The Taylor Report
                 was directed to other issues than the Inquest, and was, from the point o f view of the
                  families o f the deceased, impersonal and general. Each bereaved person looked to the
                 Inquest to discover the individual circumstances of his or her relative’s death;: instead of
                 this, it became apparent to them, eventually, that the Inquest did not direct itself to the
                 questions of the facts of each individual’s death, but was another general inquiry into the
                 overall circumstances o f the disaster, which succeeded in the minds o f certain sections
                o f the public in undermining and even reversing the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor. It
                 is submitted that a useful starting point in understanding the background is to contrast the
                 Interim Report of Lord Taylor of August 1989 with the summing-up o f the Coroner to the
                jury.

                 In these Submissions the Group will:

                (i)        Present and analyse the new evidence, none o f which was considered by Lord
                           Justice Taylor or the inquests;

                (ii)       Analyse the false evidence which was given;

                (iii)      Demonstrate how the new evidence might have affected the course o f the
                           inquests.




                                                          3
04 - SE P -9 7   IB: 36     FROM:    3   RAYMOND   BUILDINGS               ID:   0171   24 2   4 2 70             PAGE   4




                                         CHRONOLOGY

                          The most important dates arc as follows:

                      1282

                          April 15              2.52pm: Gate C opened

                                                3.06pm: Match stopped

                                               3.15pm: Mr Duckcnlield tells the Secretary of the FA that
                                               Liverpool funs have hurst in through the gates. Later, other
                                               officers tell the press that excessive drinking by Liverpool fans
                                               was the cause o f the disaster.

                                               Two video tapes go missing from the locked and alarmed club
                                               control room room at Hillsborough.

                      April 17                 Lord Justice Taylor appointed

                      April 18                 Inquests opened and adjourned

                      April 19                 The Sun article "The Truth". False police allegations that drunken
                                               fans were to blame and that they had looted the bodies o f the dead
                                               presented as established fact.

                      April 24                 West Midlands Police begin their investigation

                      May 15                   Taylor Inquiry begins (174 witnesses give evidence)

                      June 29                  Taylor Inquiry finishes

                      August 4                 Interim Taylor Report published

                      August 5                 Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire (Peter Wright) offers to
                                               resign in the light o f the Taylor Report. Lie expresses surprise at
                                               the extent his force's failings.




                      February                 Decision taken to hold 'mini ■ inquests' dealing with the statutory
                                               questions of'w ho, where and when’, but not with 'how'.


                                                                4
04-SE F-97   I B : 37    FROM:     3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                      0171    24 2   4270              PAGE   5




                        April 18                 ‘Mini - inquests' resume. On average, 20 minutes spent on each
                                                 case.

                        October 30               The DPP announces his decision that no police officers will be
                                                 prosecuted because o f "insufficient evidence".

                        November 19              Main inquests begin in Sheffield.

                        m i

                        March 28                 The jury return verdicts olaccidental death by a majority of 9 - 2,

                        July 11              Police Complaints Authority (PCA) direct that charges o f neglect
                                             o f duty be preferred against Mr Duckcnfield and Mr Murray

                        November 10          Mr Duckenfield announces his retirement on medical grounds.

                    im

                    January 13               The PC A drop the charges against Mr Murray.

                    April                    Memorial presented to the Attorney - General, for the purposes o f
                                             section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, asking for new inquests on
                                             in the case of six families the basis of evidence which has come
                                             to light since the original inquest.

                    August 20                Attorney - General says that there is insufficient basis for the
                                             exercise o f his fiat

                    im
                    April 6                  Leave to move for judicial review granted

                    November 5               Judicial review refused by the Divisional Court (McCovvan 1..J and
                                             Turner J) (Appendix 2).




                    December 5               Granada Television           broadcasts    drama     -    documentary
                                             'Hillsborough'

                    1997

                    March                    Roger Houldsworth's evidence, the footage from Camera 5 before
                                             15.02 pm, which the Coroner at the Inquest stated had gone
                                             missing, and the evidence of Dr Edward Walker presented to the
                                             Home Secretary and the DPP.


                                                                 5
04 - SEP - 9 7    16:37     FROM;       3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                ID ;   0171   242   4270               PAGE   6




                          June 30                     Hume Secretary announces a judicial scrutiny o f the fresh
                                                      evidence.




                          K Y ID E K C E NOT PRESENTED TO THE INQUESTS OR TO LORD JUSTICE
                          TAYLQK'S INQUIRY; TW O GENERAL SUBJECTS




                 11       There were two serious areas o f human failing at Hillsborough, applicable u> all the
                          deaths:

                                 (i)         The failures of control in the policc control box, highlighted in the Taylor
                                             Report, caused the crushing in the pens.

                                 fii)         The slow and inadequate response to the developing disaster delayed the
                                             arrival o f the emergency services, and prevented the injured from
                                             receiving medical attention. It is remarkable and shocking that only
                                             fourteen of the deceased were taken to hospital. The remainder were left
                                             for dead in the gymnasium at the football ground, or at various locations
                                             at the back of the Leppings Lane terraces.

                          Fvidence relevant to both o f these limbs of failure was withheld from the Inquest jury.
                          To the first o f these, the evidence of Roger Houldsworth is directly relevant. To the
                          second, the evidence o f Dr Edward Walker and the ambulanceman Tony lidwards is
                          directly relevant. None o f these was made available to the Coroner’s court nor to the
                          Taylor Inquiry.

                             The police control box: the importance of the video tape evidence.

                 12   The recently-discovered evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is of central importance. In
                      order to understand its significance, it is ueccssary to consider the very different evidence
                      advanced between 1989 and 1991. Lord Justice Taylor found that the primary cause of
                      the disaster was the failure o f control which occurred in the police control hox at
                      Hillsborough. He said that the decision to open gate C at 2.52pm should have been
                      accompanied by measures to divert the fans away from the tunnel into pens 3 and 4
                      which, he found, were overfull at 2.50pm (Para. 184). Although he acccpted the police
                      evidence that they were unable to see the terraces because o f a faulty camcra, he found
                      that it was foreseeable that opening the gate would cause injuries in the pens. He
                      described the police's failure to take these measures as "a blunder o f the first magnitude"
                      (See paras. 229 -232) He singled out Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the officer in
                      charge, for particular criticism. "Mr Duckenficld’s capacity to take decisions and give
                      orders seemed to collapse ... He froze." (Paras. 282 - 284). Mr Duckenfield and his
                      deputy, Superintendent Murray, were charged with neglect o f duty by the Police
                      Complaints Authority, although the cases were discontinued when Mr Duckenlield
                      retired on medical grounds.


                                                                     6
04-SEF-S7   1B : 3 0    FROM:   3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                     0171    242   4270               PAGE   7




                   -LllS. false allocation o f blame to Liverpool supporters. The police, aided by 'The Sun'
                   newspaper, had sought to blame the disaster on drunken Liverpool fans ( m : Chronology.
                   supra). The Taylor Report repudiated this completely. Lord Justice Taylor both
                   exonerated the fans and criticised the police, not just for their mistakes, but for telling
                   lies and refusing to face up to their responsibilities (para. 285). The Chief Constable of
                   South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, offered to resign after publication o f the Report,
                   expressing surprise at the extent to which his force had been criticised.

                    By the time the main inquests resumed in November 1990, therefore, it was clear that the
                    focus o f the evidence should be upon the actions o f the police rather than the behaviour
                   ol the fans. It was apparent that a central question would be whether the police's 'blunder'
                   was of sufficient gravity so as permit the jury to return verdicts o f unlawful killing. This
                   made it extremely important that all the evidence relevant to the issue o f the police's
                   culpability was put before the inquest.jury. The two police forces would have been aware
                   that the more the jury heard that it was obvious that the pens were full when gate C was
                   opened, the more likely it was that verdicts o f unlawful killing would be returned

                  The basic legal issue at the inquest. At the inquests the Coroner left two verdicts to the
                  jury, namely accidental death and unlawful killing. (&&? Appendix 3, 25/3/91, Day 77,
                  p3 el see/.). In relation to unlawful killing, tic directed the jury in accordance with
                  Watkins LJ's formulation in R, y, West London Coroner ex parte Cray [1988] Q B. 467,
                  namely:

                                    Was the failure to act for the benefit o f the health and welfare o f the
                                    deceased reckless ? An act o f recklessness means that he did or failed to
                                    do something where there was an obvious and serious risk to the health
                                    and welfare o f the deceased, to which that person whose conduct you arc
                                    considering having regard to his duty was indifferent or that recognising
                                    the risk to be present he deliberately chose to run the risk by doing
                                    nothing about it.



                  Issues of Fact. There were two main general factual questions lor the jury to consider in
                  connection with the vcrdict of unlawful killing.

                  (i)     Should the police be blamed for opening gate C, given the crush which had
                           developed outside the turnstiles and, if so, to what extent ought they to be
                           blamed?

                 (ii)     Should the police be blamed for failing to take measures to divert fans away from
                          the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 when gate C was opened and. if so. to what extent
                          ought they to be blamed ?

                 In his summary ol the evidence, the Coroner first considered the events outside the
                 ground and the crush which developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior to 2,52pm.
                 (Day 77, 25/3/91, p7 el seq.). Having considered this evidence, the Coroner told the jury
                 (p25):


                                                           7
04 - S E P -9 7   16:38    FROM:    3   RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                  ID:   0171    242   4270                PAGE   8




                                         All the evidence would seem - not all but virtually all the evidence would
                                         seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open the gate was
                                         reasonable in the circumstances.

                          Therefore the Coroner effectively directed the jury that the answer to (i) was 'No'.:

                       1 he Coroner then went on to consider the event# in the police control box On no lower
                      than four occasions he directed the jury that the most crucial issue in the case was the
                      knowledge and actions o f the officers in the control box. In particular, he directed the
                      jury to consider very carefully what the officers knew about the overcrowding in pens 3
                      and 4 before 3.00pm, and whether they were aware that the pens were already full when
                      the orders were given to open gate C, which led to the influx o f supporters and the fatal
                      crushing on the terraces.

                      At pp54 - 55 the Coroner described the following question as one o f the "root questions":

                                        [A]t what point could - assuming somebody had looked at the terrace -
                                        could anybody have realistically noted that there was serious
                                        overcrowding with the terrace (sic ) ...

                      Having directed the jury on Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C the Coroner said
                      at pp 125 - 128:

                                        Now, what about the assessment of the terraces, because this is may be
                                        the single most important factor which you have to weigh,

                                        The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room, from Mr
                                        Duckenfteld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard, was that none of
                                        them had noticed any problems with the pens until people came over or
                                        the gates were opened. In other words, shall we say in round terms, three
                                        o'clock.

                                         This was partly because their attention was focussed on what was
                                        happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think Mr Goddard certainly
                                        said he did glance around and he had noticed nothing unusual... [he] also
                                        said that in fact the front of the pens is quite difficult to see because of the
                                        a n g le s ...

                                        So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have noted at



                      There are a number of members of the Group who believe that the decision to open gate
             (' was, by itself, an understandable reaction to what was happening outside the ground. I lowever
             a number of families believe that this decision cannot be looked at in isolation, and that because
             the police were to blame for having allowed the crush at the turnstiles to have built up, the
             decision to open the gate was o f itself a culpable act for which they ought to be held responsible:
             an alternative remedy was available, to delay the kick-off

                                                                  8
04-SE P-37    1B:33     FROM:   3   RAYMOND       BUILDINGS                ID .   0171   242   4270              PAGE   3




                                        the point in time when the gates w'erc opened that those pens were so full
                                        or so over full that diversion was something which had to be taken, and
                                        secondly, of course, would the connection, would a reasonably prudent,
                                        skilled police officer in the shoes, if you like, o f Mr Duckenfickl or
                                        indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the opening o f the gate,
                                        diversion o f the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?

             21       The following day the Coroner returned to this question. He directed the j ury (26/3/91,

                      Day 78, P22):

                                        [I]n the final analysis you may feel the real apex o f the problem is the
                                        issue o f whether or not there was such a failure m not diverting ihe fans
                                        from the tunnel that you can classify that as creating an obvious and
                                        serious risk ofinjury.

             22       At p24 he said:

                                        It all hinges, as 1 said to you yesterday, on whether or not; what the
                                        assessment, if any, o f the pens were because if the pens w'ere either not
                                        observed or were observed and not noted to be abnormal then that might
                                        help you in deciding whether or not there was an obvious and serious risk
                                        to the people involved.

                                        One o f the big problems, of course, is that whenever you think about this,
                                        and when everybody thinks about it, one has to ask the question,
                                        "Obvious and serious to who ?". You have heard the officers say, "It
                                        wasn't obvious to us" and if you believe them you might say that is the
                                        end o f the m a tte r...

             2 3   The evidence o f the police about Camera 5. T he officers blamed their failure to see the
                   overcrowding on the terraces on what they said was a defective camera, Camera 5,
                   pointing at pens 3 and 4. The issue for the jury was whether the police had ignored an
                   obvious and serious risk when they opened gate C without taking measures to stop fans
                   from entering the tunnel to pens 3 and 4. Because of the evidence o f the officers (which
                   was unchallenged) the jury must have based their consideration o f this question on a
                   finding that the police, through no fault of their own, did not know about the
                   overcrowded condition o f pens 3 and 4 until it was too late. It was therefore almost
                   inevitable that verdicts o f accidental death would be returned

             24     The appropriateness o f the jury's verdicts therefore depends upon the reliability of their
                    findings about what the police knew about the terraces. The Group submits that the new
                   evidence goes directly to the obviousness and seriousness of the risk that was ignored by
                   the police, and undermines the reliability o f this finding, and thus also undermines the
                   jury's verdicts. As the Coroner said, this question was the question upon which the jury's
                   verdict hinged.



                                                                9
04-SE P-97    1B ; 3 9    FROM:    3   RAYMOND     BUILDINGS               ID :   0171   242   4270              PAGE   10




                         The evidence of the police officers is contained at Appendix 4. The following is a
                         summary o f the most pertinent parts.



                         PC 1revor Bichard was in charge o f the video cameras in the police control room. The.se
                         cameras had the ability to pan and till, and to zoom in and out. PC Diehard was forthright
                         in his evidence to the tribunals that the picture from Camera 5 had been distorted, and
                         that was the reason that the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 had not been noticed by any of
                         the officers in the control box.

                          The video tape o f the pictures taken from camera 5 which was shown to the jury began
             r




                         at 3.02pm, and was a time lapse video o f poor quality. PC Bichard was asked by the
                         Coroner why the video began at 3.02pm, and whether there .should have been film of
                         events prior to 3 02pm. PC Bichard's response was inconclusive. He replied that there
                         should have been, but that (p80):

                                        I have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was part of the tape
                                        and the tapes w'ere ali sealed up at the end o f the day.

             28          At p80 PC Bichard said:

                                       My recollections are that the particular camera had been faulty and in fact
                                       you saw some o f the problems that occurred. You were getting what is
                                       called flare. It is reflection of light coloured objects and you lose the
                                       picture. The camera was not really being used as much as it would
                                       normally be because o f the sub - standard picture. H was just left in
                                       position. That is why the picture never really moved at all because it was
                                       just left in position.

             2‘)     PC Bichard was then asked by the Coroner about when he had first noticed something
                     wrong on the terraces (p82):

                                        Q.    At what point, either visually or by monitor, anything that
                                              warranted comment, if that is the right word 7 - A. 1 saw some
                                              people climbing over the fence and a situation similar to that,
                                              people climbing to the stand, had occurred the year e a rlie r...

                                       Q.     That is the first time your attention was drawn to that part o f the
                                              ground in a significant sort o f way ? - A. Yes

                                       Q.     Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor ? -
                                              A. It is very difficult to rem em ber... i am not sure

                     At p92 he was asked:

                                       Q.     What do you say, officer, so far as the ability of a camera, trained
                                              from the South Stand, to give you an idea in your terms of


                                                               10
04-SE P-97    IB :40     FROM.   3   RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                 I D = 0171    242   4270                PAGE   11




                                                overcrowding within that urea ? - A, It would no! give you a view
                                                o f overcrowding.

                                         Q.     Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment to make
                                                any decision about overcrowding from the monitor that you would
                                                have in Iront o f you '? - A. I don't think it would bo a sound
                                                judgment

                                         Q.     In fact, part o f the problem is that the position and angle of the
                                                 camera in the South Stand, instead of ideally, if you like, being on
                                                 the centre of the pitch gives you a diff iculty bccausc o f the angle
                                                 itself ? - A. That combined with the inadequacy of the camera,
                                                 yes.

             30        At p% he was cross - examined by Counsel for the families on his evidence that it was
                       not possible to pick out facial features:

                                         Q.    ... Do you maintain the view that the zoom facility is .such that it
                                                 is not possible to zoom in so that one can clearly identify a given
                                                 individual if one wishes to do so ? - A. 1 am quite happy with that
                                                 comment, yes ... when there is a group, a large crowd there, to
                                                 pick out an individual would be difficult.

                                         Q.    But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial features,
                                               can you not ? - A. I don’t think so, sir.’

                       At p97 he said:

                                         If I had seen (overcrowding] J would have done something about it.




             31        In his evidence to Lord Justice Taylor on June 12 1989, PC Diehard said:

                              The camera was not up the mark ...we were getting pictures, that is the best way



                      This evidence should be compared with the evidence given to Lord Justice Taylor on 25
             May 1989 at pp 1 2 8 -9 where the camera systems at Hillsborough were described as 'the finest
             in the country'. The following extract from an article in 'Policc Review1' by Mr Locke, the club’s
             head o f security, was read to Lord Justice Taylor:

                       Today at Hillsborough ... a senior officer can follow crowd movement outside the
                       stadium by using the closed - circuit cameras as his eyes. He is able to anticipate
                       problems, see incidents as they build and employ necessary resources to abate them.
                       Inside the ground he can watch crowd behaviour and identify offenders through the zoom
                       facility.

                                                                 11
04 - S E P - 9 7    16:40     FROM =   3   RAYMOND      BUILDINGS               ID    0171   24 2   4270               PAGE   12




                                    of describing it.




                   32       Seryeant Goddard gave similar evidence. His evidence to Lord Justice Taylor was as
                            follows (June 11 1989, p87):

                                            Q.      What did you see inside the ground that put you on notice that
                                                    something was wrong in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. People were climbing
                                                    over the fences.

                                            Q.     When did you see that ? - A. About three o'clock time.

                                            Q.     What did you do about it ? - A. My first thought was, "We have
                                                   got a pitch invasion1' and it was a matter o f deploying as many
                                                   men as possible down to the Leppings Lane end o f the perimeter
                                                   track.

                   33       At p94 he was cross - examined by Mr I Iytner QC on behalf o fth e families:

                                            Q.     ... Were you aware that there was a special problem on die
                                                    Leppings Lane terraces or not ? - A. No, sir, 1 was not

                                            Q.      ... Did you at any stage before you saw people climbing over the
                                                    pens notice any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. No. sir,

                                            Q       Apart from noticing there was crowd trouble in that people were
                                                    climbing over did you ever say to yourself pens 3 and 4 are
                                                    beginning to look overcrowded. They have reached capacity -
                                                    A. No, sir. 3 and 4 were getting full, were full. From my vantage
                                                    point they were not overcrowded.

                                            Q.      Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at any stage
                                                    that pens 3 and 4 looked fu ll'? - A. No, sir. They did look full but
                                                    not overfull.

                   34       At p96 Sergeant Goddard was cross-examined by Mr Muller QC (lor the South Yorkshire
                            Fire and Civil Defence Authority). He said that there was a 'blind spot' ai the front ofthe
                            tcrraces, which meant that Camera 5 could not focus on what was happening on the
                            bottom steps o f pens 3 and 4. He said

                                            You would not be able to pick out [fans] individually. You could see
                                            figures.




                   35   At the Inquest his evidence was (14 March 199], p92):

                                                                    12
04-SE P-37   1G:40    FROM:    3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                 ID:   0171   242   4270                PAGE   13




                                    Q        On this day ... at what point did you yourself first notice anything
                                             unusual about the pens ? - A. The first point I noticed, the unusual
                                             part, was when 1 saw people start climbing over the fences onto
                                             the perimeter track and then I saw a gate open ...




                     Later he said (15 March 1991, p6):




                                    Q     \ our evidence to the Inquest is very .simple; you never saw
                                          anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in the pens there
                                          until you saw the people climbing over around three o'clock ? - A.
                                          That is correct, yes, sir.




                 PC Ryan had worked in the control box at Hillsborough for five years. lie gave evidence
                 to Lord justice Taylor as follows (June 11 1989, p52):

                                   Q.    There was a problem with one of [the cameras] is that correct V -
                                          A. That is correct, yes. There was an apparent fault with on the
                                         camera to the West Stand, West terraces...

                                   Q.    Where is it mounted ? - A. I think that is the one that is mounted
                                         on the electronic scoreboard.

                                   Q.    ... What was the problem with that camera as you can recall ? - A.
                                          The picture was very distorted,

                                   o.    (Lord Justice lay lor) Very what ? - A. Distorted, sir.

                                   Q,    Was the fault mended ? - A. I contacted the engineer myself.

                                   Q     I hat is Mr Houldsworth ? - A. Roger Houldsworth, yes. He
                                         attended and came out and worked on that camera for some time.
                                         Quite how long he was there I do not know. He was certainly
                                         there working on it for some considerable time. The picture was
                                         never satisfactory' as far as I can recall that day although that was
                                         not my specific duty to look at that.

                                   Q,    ... When you say the picture as far as you can sec was not
                                          satisfactory what was wrong with it ? - A. It was not as clear as
                                          you would hope the picture to be.

                                   Q.    Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way


                                                           13
                                                                         ID=   0171   242   4270                 PAGE   14
0 4 -SEP-37    1G;41   FROM:   3   RAYMOND     BUILDINGS




                                             inoperative or less adequate than normal o r ... - A. As far as I can
                                             recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality o fth e picture
                                             that was the problem.

              37   PC Ryan did not give evidence at the inquests.

              38   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield began his evidence to I .ord Justice Taylor on 24 May
                   1989. He did not refer to any faults with the camera system. On 25 May 1989 at pi 29
                   he said that he did not use the zoom facility at all, but mainly looked out o f the window.
                   On 26 May (pi 5) he referred to the surveillance system as "an excellent system".

              39   Chief Inspector MeRohbie gave evidence at the 'J'ay lor Inquiry, he was not called to give
                   evidence at the inquests. This is o f great significance , because his evidence to the I aylor
                   Inquiry flat ly contradicted that o f his colleagues, especially PC Bichard.

              40   Mr McRobbie gave evidence on 13 June 1989. At p20 he was asked, with reference to
                   the statement he made shortly after the disaster;

                                    Q.     At the bottom of p5 you refer to an incident which drew- the
                                           attention o f the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) ... - A.
                                           That is correct sir, yes.

                                    Q.     You say:

                                                    "Police Constable Biehard operated the camera and 1
                                                    watched him to be able to zoom onto him (sic) which 1
                                                    thought was a super facility for spotting trouble makers in
                                                     the crowd."

                                             A. That is correct, sir.

                                    Q.     No difficulty with the picture at all ? - A. Well when you say "no
                                           difficulty" it certainly brought this person closer to us than I think
                                           it would have been possible for a Police Officer to select the
                                           correct person that Control were identifying without any problem.

                                    Q.     That is the whole purpose o f it, isn't it ? - A. I would think so sir,
                                           yes.

              41   At p22 he was cross - examined by Mr Glasgow QC (for Sheffield Wednesday Football
                   Club):

                                    Q.     Chiel inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was that
                                           which was showing the seenc on the terraces, was it ? - A. it was
                                           able to pick out someone directly under the control box, yes. but
                                           1 do not know where the camera is sited. I am sorry.



                                                              14
04 - SEP - 9 7    16:41     FROM-   3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                ID:   0171   242   4270              PAGE   15




                                         Q.       You arc quite sure that was the camera that was being used, the
                                                  one that shows the scene on the terraces ? - A. I cannot speak
                                                  about a camera. Ail 1 cun say is on the monitor a person was able
                                                  to be enlarged.

                                         Q.       You might be able to help us it'you can remember by chance
                                                  whether it was black and white or colour. - A. It was black and
                                                  white.




                          This exchange shows that it was Camera 5 to which Mr McRobbie was referring. The
                          other camera trained on Leppings Lane, situated in the centre of the South Stand, was a
                          colour camera.

                 42   At p26 he was again asked whether it was Camera 5 which had been zoomed in by PC
                       Richard:

                                         A     1 would have thought so from the definition, but, as I say, I would
                                                n o t ...

                                         Q.    (Lord Justice Taylor) When you say "the definition" was it good
                                                definition ? - A. it was quite reasonable, sir, yes.

                 43   Despite Mr MeRobbie's evidence. Lord Justice Taylor accepted the police's evidence that
                      they did not notice anything amiss until fans began to climb out o f the pens (para. 78).
                      Nonetheless, because ot the layout o fth e ground, and the crushes which had developed
                      at previous matches in 1981 and 1988, he said it was foreseeable that disaster would
                      result from opening gate C if preventative measures were not taken.

                 44   The evidence o f Roger Houldsworth. Roger Houldsworth installed and repaired the
                      CCTV (“Closed Circuit”) system operating at Hillsborough on the day ofthe disaster, and
                      was present in the club's video room during the disaster. Mr Houldsworth made a
                      statement to officers from the West Midlands Police on 16 May 1989, and expected to
                      be called as a witness at the Inquiry and the inquests. However he gave evidence at
                      neither tribunal. Although Mr Houldsworth was well known to the investigating officers,
                      he was variously described on the Coroner's witness list as a 'sound engineer' and as
                      ’ground staff.

             45       Mr I louldsworth's evidence, together with the missing footage, arc contained in Appendix
                      5. It is believed that the significance o f his evidence was not made known to the Coroner.
                       Mr Houldsworth watched the disaster on the video monitors in the CCTV room, one of
                      which showed what was being recorded on the police system, l ie was the only
                      independent civilian witness who watched what was being shown on the monitors 1lis
                      evidence shows the police evidence analysed above to be deliberately false and
                      misleading. In particular, his evidence shows the following:



                                                                15
04 - S E P -9 7   16:42     FROM:     3   RAYMOND   BUILDINGS                ID:   0171   242   4270               PAGE   16




                          (i)      That the video camera trained on pens 3 and 4 o f the Leppings I ,ane terraces was
                                   functioning normally, having been repaired by him on the morning of the disaster:

                          (ii)     That the pictures from this camera were being received normally in the police
                                   control box before 3.02pm (the time the video shown to the jury began) and were
                                   being recorded continuously (rather than in time - lapse mode) on video;

                          (lii)    That the camera was panning and zooming in on the terraces, and was therefore
                                   being operated by an officer in the control box;

                          (iv)     That at the time Mr Duckenfield gave the order to open Gate C, the screens would
                                   have been clearly showing that the terraces were full and that some people w-ere
                                   obviously in distress, with many more clearly uncomfortable. It would therefore
                                   have been apparent to the officers in the control box that death and injury would
                                   result if more people were permitted to enter the pens;

                          (v)      That the officers stationed in the box, in particular Mr Duckenlield. were
                                   therefore able to see the overcrowding develop in these pens prior to 2.52pm;

                          (vi)     That those in overall control ofthe policing operation at Hillsborough would have
                                   been aware o f the overcrowding on the terraces as it developed, and there was
                                   therefore an obvious and serious risk of injury if gate C were opened and the fans
                                   not prevented from entering the tunnels;

                          (vii)    That on the night o f th e disaster, 2 tapes went missing from the locked and
                                   alarmed club control room

                          (v in)   That the evidence given by the relevant policc officers, namely that they could not
                                   see the overcrowding on the terraces because the camera was defective, was
                                   knowingly false.

                  46      Because o fthe disappearance of footage from Camera 5 tape and the poor quality ol the
                          footage from 15.02 (which was in time lapse mode), counsel for the families was
                          prevented from cross - examining the police officers in the control box effectively. l or
                          example, in his cross - examination of PC Bichard, when PC Bichard had denied seeing
                          any overcrowding (at p97) he said: "I cannot take that any further with you, officer." Had
                          the tapes been available at the inquests, Mr King could have positively contradicted the
                          evidence given by the officers. As it was, he was able only to suggest that the officers
                          were mistaken in their protestations of ignorance.

                  47      The jury therefore assessed the culpability o fth e police on the basis o f evidence which
                          was false and misleading. It is almost certain that they must have concluded that because
                          the cameras were not working properly it would not have been obvious that the terraces
                          were overcrowded, and that the police were therefore not to blame for not recognising the
                          danger on the terraces when they opened gate C.




                                                                   16
04-SE P-37        16:42   F ROM. -   3   RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                 ID    0 17 1   24 2   4 2 70              PAGE   17




             48                     in w m p te tt virtw ffhuwn to tltt jury ? The tape played to the Inquest iurv
                      was produced by Sergeant Killoch o fthe West Midlands Police as police exhibit TBV\
                      oil 15 March 1991 at the conclusion o f Sergeant Goddard’s evidence (15 March 1991,
                      p62). It became the Coroner’s exhibit C.539. On 13,h March 1991 the Coroner had
                      acknowledged that this footage was of very poor quality. It showed only events after
                      3.02pm in others words, after gate C had been opened. The pictures were recorded in
                       time - lapse mode, and the tape did not clearly show what was happening. The same
                      incomplete tape appears to have been shown to Lord Justice Taylor (&& Transcript
                      May 1989, p i 29).                                                                     '


             4)       Shortly after the disaster Yorkshire Television began work on a ’first Tuesday'
                      documentary about the disaster. They were given a set o f tapes which contained footage
                      from the cameras in the police control room. Sections o f these tapes were used in the
                      programme. The tapes contained high quality footage o f events before 3.02pm. The
                      tapes lay undiscovered in Yorkshire Television's archives until they were found in a
                      search requested by Trevor Hicks in February 1997. The statement o f Trevor Hicks
                      outlines the circumstances. (Appendix 6).

             >0      The Group believes the suppression of this evidence to be sinister, and. />nmu ja c k \ a
                     perversion ol the course o f justice. It was potentially the most important evidence in the
                     inquest. It should be noted that two tapes also went missing from the locked CCTV room
                     shortly after the disaster. The Coroner failed to pursue the question of where the missing
                     tootage had gone, despite PC Bichard’s response "I have no idea at all where it could have
                     gone to. It was part o f the tape and the tapes were all sealed up at the end o f the day."
                     He ought to have summoned the West Midlands officers responsible for gathering this
                     evidence to give an explanation for its disappearance. The West Midlands Police should
                     now be asked to explain how this evidence came to be suppressed. This is an issue which
                     can only be resolved by oral evidence.


             1                                            The jury were fully aware o fth e significance of
                     the video evidence. On 13 March 1991 the Coroner addressed the legal representatives



                                          ... there is just one thing which the jury have mentioned to me. In fact
                                         they have mentioned it twice, and that is what about the video evidence
                                         of the terraces. 1 have had the videos looked at and there is actually next
                                         to nothing on the videos because, o f course, not everything was recorded.
                                          I hat does not mean to say they weren't possibly scenes (,v/V), but there is.
                                         I understand, a little tiny bit which is actually on the compilation which
                                         you have seen. There is another little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes
                                         on for a few minutes.

                                         What we have done is that we have clipped it, if that is the right word, and



                11        he Crown Prosecution service have suggested by letter o f 10,h April 1997 that this was
        m lact Lxhibit TB/2.

                                                                 17
                                                                           0171    242   4270               PAGE   IS
04-SEF-S7    16:43   FROM:   3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS




                                  we will show it to you, hut it is of very poor quality and 1 do noi think it
                                  is going to help us very much. As fur as I can tell there isn't much
                                  recorded. Does that help ?

            52    The jury were therefore led to believe that the tiny clip o f Film they were shown was alt
                   that existed by way o f video evidence. The poor quality of this clip would undoubtedly
                   have persuaded the jury that the missing footage o f events before 15.0pm would have
                   been equally poor and would not have assisted them significantly.

            53    The only acceptable explanation for the contradiction between what is shown on the tapes
                  and what was .said in evidence at the inquests is that the officers lied in their evidence
                  The officers in the control box were fully aware of the situation on the terraces and had
                  been monitoring the fans in pens 3 and 4 during the build up to the kick - off. However
                  they failed to consider the effect that the opening o f gate C would have on the terraces.
                   Thus it was that the ‘blunder o f the first magnitude’ was made. The officers' explanation
                  that the camera equipment was not working was an excuse invented ex p o s t fa c to in an
                  attempt to shift the blame elsewhere. It should be noted that the explanation given by the
                  South Yorkshire police has changed since the disaster. At the time the officers said that
                  Camera 5 was defective. After the television programme 'Hillsborough' was shown last
                  year, the police initially said, in January 1997, that they had found the missing tape, and
                  that it supported their claim that the camera had been faulty. After it was learned that the
                  Group had received tapes from Yorkshire television, they changed their explanation and
                  claimed that there had been interference from television outside broadcast equipment.
                  This second explanation is also contained in a Press Release from South Yorkshire Police
                  of I” April 1997

            54    Summary. The police evidence to the tribunals was intended to give the impression that
                  they were not to blame for failing to see the overcrowding on the terraces before opening
                  gate C because of faulty camera equipment. In feet, the video tapes show camera 5 was
                  working properly prior to 3.02pm. Incomplete video evidence o f very poor quality was
                  shown to the jury; in particular, the pictures from Camera 5 prior to 3.02pm were never
                  shown. This evidence was deliberately suppressed. The video show's that Camera 5 was
                  operating correctly and that the overcrowding was clear and visible to those watching the
                  screen. The jury therefore considered the most important issue in the ease on a false and
                  misleading evidential basis.



                 The medical evidence at the Inquests and the evidence o f Dr Edward Walker



            55    Lord Justice Taylor found that there was delay and confusion in evacuating the casualties
                  from pens 3 and 4 and in responding to the magnitude o fth e disaster. The police w'ere
                  obsessed by the idea that a pitch invasion was in progress, even though it was d e a r to
                  those in the television commentary box (who were further away) that the problem was
                  overcrowding and not hooliganism (Para. 250). In particular he made the following
                  findings:



                                                          18
                                                                       ID:   0171   24 2   4270              PAGE   19
04-SEP-97   16   44     FROM:   3   RAYMOND   BUILDINGS




                      (a)   No officer took effective charge o fth e evacuation o f the injured from the pens
                            (Para. 251);

                      (b)   Organised evacuation of the injured from the pitch did not begin until 3.12pm
                            ( lhid.)\

                      (c)   There was delay in activating the Major Accident Plan (although he
                            underestimated the extent o fth e delay - see below),

                      (d)   No request was made for cutting gear from the fire brigade until 3.1 3pm,

                      (c)   There was no co - ordination o f rescue efforts, and no call for the assistance ol
                            doctors or nurses until 3.29pm;

                      (f)   There were cases where the earlier provision of medical treatment might have
                            made a difference, in that more lives might have been saved (Paras. 2 5 1 and 252).

            56    In contrast, the medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the deceased
                  had died quick and painless deaths, that they were alt dead by 3.15pm, and accordingly
                  that I .ord Justice Taylor had been incorrect in deciding that the secondary failures of the
                  police had resulted in further loss of life. For this reason, the Coroner ruled that no
                  evidence after 3.! 5pm would be considered. The 3.15pm cut off was predicated on a
                  number o f unrealistic assumptions about the time it took for the deceased to be
                  asphyxiated, such as that all the deceased were subjected to continuous pressure so that
                  they were unconscious within a short period and dead within minutes.

            57    I Evidence which has emerged since the inquests shows this conclusion and the
                  assumptions upon which it was based to be false Sonic oi this evidence was presented
                  to the Divisional Court in 1993, and some has been uncovered in the period since 1993.

            58    Or W alker's evidence. The evidence o f Dr Walker is contained at Appendix 7. It
                  consists o f his contemporaneous account o f his work on the day o f the disaster, and a
                  copy o f a police statement dated 20th July 1989

            59    Dr Walker, who was not at work, responded to televised pictures o f the disaster and
                  assisted a large number of patients at the Northern General Hospital. He was praised by
                  the consultant in charge, Mr Wardrope, for his efforts, and received a letter indicating that
                  it was likely that he would be required to give a statement to the investigating police
                  force. In due course, Dr Walker gave a statement to the West Midlands police. Dr
                  Walker was not called as a witness at the Inquiry or at the inquests, and was repeatedly
                  referred to in evidence as an 'unidentified doctor’.

            60    Dr W'alker's evidence, in summary, is that when he arrived at the Northern General
                  Hospital the staff were aware only of a 'disturbance' at Hillsborough. He was told that
                  there was a paediatric cardiac arrest on its way to the hospital, but no connection was
                  made between this casualty and Hillsborough. There was no sign that the Major Accident
                  Plan had been activated and no awareness that the hospital was shortly to receive a large


                                                             19
04-SE P-97        16:44     FROM:    3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                       0 17 1   24 2   4 2 70           PAGE   20




                          number ol; critically ill patients. The first patient to arrive was Lee Nieol, and the second
                          patient was- Philip Hammond. Both boys were young teenagers. When they arrived at
                          the hospital their hearts were not beating. Dr Walker and others worked on th a n and
                          .succeeded in restarting their heart and breathing. Lee Nicol survived until the following
                          Monday. Philip Hammond survived for a time but later died, however. Dr Walker then
                          treated a number o f patients, some o f whom died but some o f whom survived.

             6I       Dr W'alker's contemporaneous evidence is significant in that it clearly demonstrates that
                      there were- a number of patients who were extremely ill when they reached hospital who
                      were successfully treated. It is also significant because it shows that the treatment ofthe
                      injured was hampered by a shortage o f drugs and equipment ofthe type necessary to treat
                      cardiac arrests. Dr Walker lists eight deficiencies which hampered the treatment of
                      patients at the height o fth e crisis.

             62       When the evidence given at the mini - inquest into the death o f Philip Hammond
                     (Appendix 7) is compared with Dr Walker’s evidence numerous deficiencies and
                      inaccuracies can be discerned. The evidence at the mini - inquest would have left the jury
                     with the totally false impression that Philip was dead before 3.15pm. Dr Slater, the
                     pathologist who carried out Philip's post - mortem, testified that the policeman who said
                     that he felt Philip’s pulse probably felt his own pulse. He said that the only signs of
                     treatment were ECO electrodes attached to his chest and that "essentially only lay people
                     saw him." Dr Slater said that Philip was 'brain dead at Hillsborough' (Transcript, P5).
                      I he evidence o f Dr Walker shows that this opinion was wholly wrong, and that Philip
                     was alive far beyond 3.15pm. Dr Walker's evidence accordingly raises the possibility that
                     Dr Slater's other diagnoses were wrong and that patients were alive well beyond the times
                     given at the mini - inquests and well beyond the 3 . 15pm cut - off.

         63          I h g significance of Dr Walkvr’s.evidence and the Memorial to the Attorney -
                     O enyral in 1 9 V There is evidence that four o fth e deceased, Paul Carlile, Ian (ilover,
                     Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams' were alive after 3.15pm. This evidence is contained
                     in the Memorial presented to the Attorney - General in 1993. (Appendix 8).

         64          Although the Attorney - General did not consider this evidence by itself to be suff icient
                     to justify him exercising his powers under section 13 o f th e Coroners Act 1988. it is
                     submitted that this evidence together with the evidence o f Dr Walker constitutes
                     incontrovertible evidence that some ofthe conclusions reached at the mini - inquests were
                     erroneous, and that many o f the deceased were alive after .3,15pm and that an inquiry into
                     the precise circumstances of their deaths was warranted, including an inquiry into the
                     matters referred to above.

        65          It is significant that the Divisional Court acceptcd the validity o f some o f this evidence,
                    but declined to grant relief on the basis that the Coroner was not at fault (Judgment o f 5
                    November 1993, pp 18 - 29, p30, p34). It can therefore be inferred that the Court
                    considered that this evidence warranted detailed consideration, but because of the nature



                     Separate submissions have also been made in relation to Kevin Williams by his mother

                                                               20
0 4 -SEP-97   16:45   FROM:    3   RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                  ID    0171    242    4270                PAGE   2 1




                   ot the court s function on an application for judicial review, insui'licicnt to warrant relief
                    I he Court specifically said that at p30 that had the hearing been a reference pursuant to
                   a reference by the Attorney General under section 13 the position might have been
                   different. It is respectfully submitted that the functions o f this Scrutiny are not so limited.
                    1he issue is whether this evidence might have altered the outcome o f the proceedings if
                   it had been heard by the jury ai the inquest. For the reasons set out above it is submitted
                   that it is more than likely that this evidence would have affected the outcome o f the
                   inqucst.s.


                  It is plain from Dr Walker's evidence that there was evidence available to the Coroner of
                  a slow response by the police and the emergency services to the plight ol'the injured,
                  evidence that some people might have been saved by a more timely rcspon.se. and general
                  evidence o f a lack of equipment. These were all matters which, it is submitted, required
                  investigation in order to determine properly "how" the deceased came by their death, and
                  they make the Coroner's decision not to go beyond 3.15pm unjustifiable.

                    I lit j ustification for th e 3 , 15pUl cut - Off point. Prior to the resumption o fthe Inquests
                   m November 1990 the Coroner decided, in spite o f objection, that he would cail no
                  evidence on events after 3.15pm. His reason was that the medical evidence which had
                  been given by the pathologists at the mini - inquests, in particular Dr Slater and Professor
                  Usher, was to the effect that death from traumatic/crush asphyxia occurred four to six
                  minutes alter the chest became fixed so as to prevent breathing, and on the assumption
                  that the deceased's chests had become fixed at the latest by 3.06pm, the lime the match
                  was abandoned, it could be further assumed that all the deceased were dead or dying by
                  3.15pm, and accordingly that nothing further could be done for them. He also chose this
                  lime because it coincided (approximately) with the arrival o fth e first ambulance ( a s
                   I ransenpt, 30 October 1990, pp8, 14.).

                 The Jtfd t M Mgdical Journal Article The Divisional Court observed in the six families
                 Judicial Review in 1993 that the Coroner imposed the 3.15 pm cut-off

                           because he took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence
                         available to him permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by
                         all the deceased” (Appendix 2, page 6C; McGowan U ) /

                  In November 1991, a very different account appeared in the British Medical Journal,
                  written by, among others Dr Wardrope (Appendix 9) Many injured people taken to
                 hospital survived and recovered. (See Table 3) They suffered from a variety o f injuries,
                 serious and minor. Some unconscious victims were revived. The following questions arc
                 inevitably posed by this evidence. How many other injured supporters died o f injuries,
                 untended, at the football ground of injuries other than asphyxia, or o f asphyxia at the
                 ground which could have been treated if they had been taken to hospital.? ( Only 14 of
                 the 95 victims (as opposed to the injured) were taken to hospital) Why was this evidence
                 not made known to the Inquest9

                 f he Divisional Court held that although there was evidence tending to show that some
                ol the deceased were alive alter 3.15pm ( ^ e.g. p34), there was no basis for interfering


                                                           21
0 4 -SEP-97        16:45     FROM:    3   RAYMOND   BUILDINGS                 ID :   0171   242   4270                PAGE   22




                           with tlx* Coroner’s exercise o f discretion in imposing this cut-off point. It is .submitted
                           that the new evidence., now available, presents a completely different account o f events.

              70           The ruling had a number o f consequences:

                           (i)   The main consequence was to prevent any further inquiry into the individual
                                 circumstances o f the 95 deaths. At the mini - inquests the Coroner had assured
                                 the families that the question o f'h o w ' would be dealt with later. The Inquest
                                 therefore became simply a general inquiry into the circumstances o fth e disaster.
                                  A number o f the deceased were not mentioned at all during the 96 days of
                                 evidence, save when their names were read out during the initial roll - call and
                                 when the verdicts were announced. Accordingly, their families never discovered
                                 how they died. An example is the family of Peter Tootle (sec Memorial section
                                 of Appendices). His parents travelled nearly every day ofthe Inquest by car from
                                 Liverpool to Sheffield . His name was mentioned only in the list o f victims and
                                 when the verdicts were announced.

                       (ii)      The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f the deceased
                                 were alive for a considerable period after 3.15pm;

                       (iii)      The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f fans who were
                                  left for dead at the ground in fact survived. Therefore, they never considered the
                                  possibility that a number o f those who died might have been saved had they
                                  received prompt and efficient medical attention;

                       (iv)       They never heard evidence about the failure o fth e Northern General Hospital to
                                  activate its Major Accident Plan until well after the onset o f the disaster, and the
                                  detrimental effect this had on patient care. Dr Wardrope’s article referred to the
                                  failure to activate the Major Accident Plan and stated (at pi 381):

                                          Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier meant that only a few
                                          staff had to cope with a large clinical workload in addition to
                                          implementing the major incident plan.

              71      The Coroner's ruling prevented any inquiry into the secondary failures o f the police and
                       the emergency services to provide prompt and efficient medical attention to the injured.
                       The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3. 15 pm cut-off

              72      The evidence of Anthony Edwards Anthony Edwards was an ambulance driver who
                      attended Hillsborough at around 3.32pm. Me made a statement in June 1989 but did not
                       give evidence at either the inquiry or the inquests, because his evidence dealt with events
                      after 3.15pm. His evidence consists of a note o f an interview' with a television researcher
                       in December 1995, and his statement of June 1989.

              73      Mr Edwards arrived at the ground in his ambulance to find a cordon of police across the
                      entrance to the pitch. Two ambulances were already parked outside the ground, and had
                      not gone in. There was a discussion between the ambulance men and the police officers.


                                                                  22
04-SE P-37        16:46     FROM:    3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                  ID:   0171   24 2   4270              PAGE   23




                           I hey were told by the police that it was not possible for him to go on 10 the pitch because
                          "they are still fighting in there." Eventually ho and others were permitted to go onto the
                          pitch. Mr Edwards saw a number o f dead bodies being taken out and so it was obvious
                          that the incident was a disaster and not crowd trouble. Eventually they were allowed onto
                          the pitch, where they commenced attempting to resuscitate the injured.

             74       Mr Edwards' evidence is .significant because it shows that the police were not just slow
                      in requesting the ambulance service to attend but that they positively interfered with the
                      ambulances' efforts to get on the pitch. For whatever reason, some o fth e police did not
                      appreciate that there was a disaster in progress. Although Lord Justice Taylor made some
                      findings on these aspects of the disaster, they were not discussed at the inquest This has
                      left the families with the sense that the inquest was therefore deficient. I lad the Coroner
                      heard that the police had intentionally or negligently hampered rescue efforts then there
                      is a possibility that he would have concluded that it required further investigation.

             75       Further evidence on this point is awaited by the Group. It will be submitted us soon as
                      it is received.

                                                         Individual Casts
             76       In recent weeks, much new material has been disclosed to individual families, and to the
                      Group. Numerous examples are coming to light, and have already comc to light,
                      indicating that deaths occurred in a variety o f circumstances and times, contrury to the
                      evidence presented to the jury. Other examples are of persons left for dead, who survived,
                      and who were recovered, at hospital or at the ground, from unconsciousness.) The
                      evidence in those cases (Including that o f Roger Ball, Appendix 10) will be summarised
                      and presented to the Scrutiny, it is hoped by 15th September. Evidence presented by the
                      six families to the court in 1993 is in the Memorial section o fth e Appendices

             77      The work o f those representing the Group is hampered by the fact that disclosure of
                     documents is a laboured and painfully slow process. It is submitted that it is unjust and
                     unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in the possession o fthe West Midlands Police,
                     are now controlled by the South Yorkshire Police. Statements of police officers have been
                     disclosed recently providing names of officers who were apparently concerned with
                     individual cases, but whose existence has never before been made known to the families.
                     Critical ambulance records are now being disclosed. A wholly different picture is
                     emerging from that provided to the families and the Coroner’s court in 1990-91.

                                                I h e im p m ta n w o f full disclosure

             78      It is submitted that the facts o f the Hillsborough Inquest need to be examined in lull. The
                     office of the Scrutinising Judge is requested to take possession o f all the material in the
                     case and to ensure that it is made available to all parties. Statements o f witnesses were
                     not disclosed to the bereaved families at the time of the inquest, and disclosure has been
                     refused since.




                                                                 23
04-SE F-37    16:47     FROM =   3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                 ID:   0171    242   4270                PAGE   24




                                                The Purpose of an Inquest



             7<>       In R, v. H.M. Coroner for North Humberside & Scunthorpe ex partg..iamicsQn [1995] I
                      Q.B. 1Sir Thomas Bingham M.R. considered the nature and purposeo f an inquest in the
                      context o f the death o f a prisoner in custody. He said:

                                      An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with or
                                      without a jury, to establish r e l i v e answers to four important but limited
                                      factual questions ... It is the duty o f the coroner as the public official
                                      responsible for the conduct o f inquests, whether he is sitting with a jury
                                      or without, to ensure that the relevant facts are fully, fairly and fearlessly
                                      investigated. He is bound to recognise the acute public concern rightly
                                      aroused where deaths occur in custody. He must ensure that the relevant
                                      facts are exposed to public scrutiny, particularly if there tii.&ddaKe.iii
                                      foul plav. abuse or inhumanity. He fails in his duty if his investiaatiQiija
                                      superficial, slipshod, or Dcrfunciary (Rmphasis added)


                      In R. v. South London Coroner ex parte Thompson 126 S.J. 125 Lord 1-ane CJ said

                                      The function o f an inquest is to seek out and record as many o fth e facts
                                      concerning the death as the public interest requires.

             80       The Croup acknowledges the difficulties inherent in holding inquests into the deaths of
                      95 people in a single disaster. Nonetheless, the circumstances in which the inquest was
                      held, in Sheffield, before a Sheffield Coroner, and the way it was handled give rise by
                      themselves to feelings o f profound unease. A reading o fth e transcripts o fth e evidence,
                      particularly relatives o f victims, repays study. The disproportionate time given to
                      questions as to whether drink had been consumed was absurd and offensi ve. Meaningless
                      detail was adduced about the circumstances in which supporters travelled to and arrived
                      at the ground. Condescension was shown to relatives in questioning. Relatives were
                      never given copies o f their own witness statements, but shown them perfunctorily outside
                      court before they were called in. In contrast, alt police officers visibly had copies which
                      they studied, and retained, outside court. The legal representation was wholly
                      disproportionate. One junior barrister sought to represent over 40 families, while every
                      South Yorkshire institution with an interest to protcct was represented.

             81       These features o f the Inquest intensify the belief o f the Group that justice was perverted
                      and the truth hidden in order to protect the South Yorkshire authorities and services,
                      further information will be provided as soon as it is available.

             82       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has posed certain questions to the Group by letter. U is hoped
                      that these representations have answered them. It is submitted that the fresh evidence ol
                      Houldsworth, Walker and Fd wards (and in relation to individual cases, others) would
                      have affected the terms in which Lord Taylor wrote his report and expressed his
                      criticisms. The new evidence of Houldsworth would have made verdicts of unlawful


                                                               24
04-SE P-37    16:47   FROM=     3   RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                 ID = 0 1 7 1   242   4270              PAGE   25




                    killing much more likely because the question o f what was visible was, as the Coroner
                    repeatedly suggested, at the heart o f the issue (see paragraphs 18 and 19, a b o v e ). It is
                    known that the evidence was not submitted to the jury, and it appears that its significance
                    could not have been explained to the Coroner. The evidence o f Walker. Fdwards, and
                    the account given in the British Journal of Medicine by Wardrope should and would have
                    lead to a different type of inquest in which manslaughter on the additional basis of
                    criminal neglect o f injured people would have been open to the jury in indi vidual cases
                    as the evidence o f events after 3.15 pm demanded. This aspect will become clearer when
                    the analysis o f individual cases is submitted. The address o f Tony fid wards is being
                    sought.



             4'" September 1997.
