Information for the research-team Hillsborough

Visiting Otrecht 18 and 19 November 1989



1. Background information Dienst voor Sport en Recreatie (DSR).

     In 1927 the "Foundation for Physical Training in Utrecht"
     ("Utrechtse Stichting voor Lichamelijke Oefening") was founded.
     In 1988 this Foundation is merged in the "Local Service of Sport
     and Recreation" ("Dienst voor Sport en Recreatie (DSR).
     The "DSR" manages and runs the local sports-accommodations in
     Utrecht, and stimulates inhabitants of Utrecht to sport
     or exercise. For this purpose the "DSR" has engaged about 170
     people. Most of them are grounds-men, swimming teachers or the
     organizers of sport activities and -courses.
     In all there are 37 sports-accommodations:

     -2   athletics-accommodations
     -1   rowing-accommodation
     -7   sports-halls
     17   sports-grounds
     -5   tennis-grounds
     -4   swimming-pools and
     -1   footbal-stadium (Galgenwaard)


2. Introduction

     Mr. H.W. Hulsen is managing-director of the Local Service of
     Sport and Recreation (Dienst voor Sport en Recreatie) in
     Utrecht, a municipal authority that manages and runs i.a. stadi­
     um Galgenwaard.
     In Holland we have a Society wherein the managing-directors of
     the Stadiums and Sports-grounds are united ("Vereniging van
     Stadion- en Sportparkdirecties). For some years mr. Hulsen has
     been the President of this Society. The Society believes that
     the safety-measures in stadiums have to be adjusted to the dif­
     ferences in construction and use.


3. Stadium Galgenwaard

     The old stadium
     In 1936 a stadium was built in Utrecht for two sports: football
     and cycling. The stadium had 1800 covered seats, 4700 seats and
     16.200 standing places in the open air.
     The stands and fences were transportable. This stadium didn't
     meet the modern safety and sports requirements. For example
     there were standing places behind the goals, so that the fences
     had to be repaired after every match. In 1980 the decision was
     made to build a new Stadium.
’ h .W Hulsen
 D ire rte u r   ______
The new stadium
The 20th of April 1981, building of the new stadium started, 16
monthes later, the 18th of August 1982 it was ready. Fast buil­
ding was made possible because of the use of prefabricated con­
crete .

Commercial interests
In Utrecht a combination of commerce and sport has been achie­
ved. There is a vast amount of space available under the stands
and these have been used to best advantage. The commercial areas
are parted by the entrances to the field. The buildings at the
four corners are offices. Because of the corner buildings the
stadium doesn't have vent-holes.

Hooligan behaviour
To design the proper building details the behaviour of the sup­
porters was studied for two years. For instance: the windows are
made of "Lexan" (unbreakable glass), the footpaths are covered
with large and heavy flags, and parts of the wall are covered
with anti-graffity coating; there are no standing places behind
the goals, because if one is seated one does hardly have suf­
ficient leverage to throw anything oyer a lengthly distance. To
do so, one has to stand up which is identical to stand out,

Access of the public
There are 14 entrances created to the stands. The access routes
are long enough to help calm down the spectators. At the end of
each entrance there is a mechanical fence, which makes it possi­
ble to let the spectators enter one by one. The fences fall into
niches so that there is no barrier. Every entrance has a box-of­
fice , facilities for buying refreshments are intalled, as well
as ladies' and gentlemen's toilets.
The public enters the stadium on ground-level and climbs up the
stands. This prevends that people wil be pushed downwards.

Acces of the players
For the safety of the players there is a tunnel, which can be
pushed in and out.

Stands
The four stands are separated from each other. The distance
between the stands and the playing field is 5 m. The maximum
distance between the spectators and playing field is 32,5 m. All
20.000 places are covered. There are 12.000 seats, situated on
the long stands and behind the goals. Research has proved that
an audience that sits behave more quiet and have less tendency
to throw objects on the playing field.
Fencing between the public and the players

The sight on the field is nowhere hindered by pillars or fences. To
sepreate the public from the field, the field is surrounded by a 2
meter deep and 4,5 meter wide walkway. During the match the walkway
in front of the 4 stands is parted by fences.
On the height of the field there is placed an almost horizontal fence
above the walkway.

Separation between public from the visiting and local club

There is chosen for as little as possible fences. The standing and
seating areas are seperated by a fence. Between the places for the
public from the visiting and local club there is a blind space of 2
meter wide. The last places of the separation of the head/long stand
is not open to the public.
There has been considered to separate the places by nets but this is
against the principle of this stadium. There are limits to place
physical fences. It is better to try to up-lift the mentality of the
public.

Seats

The bucket seats with a high back are made of synthetic material.
They are very comfortable, are reasonable colourfast, unbreakable and
uninflammable. When the seats will be cleaned by spraying or blowing
the rubbish can be underneath the seats.

Calamity

In case of emergency the public can use the walkway as escaperoute.
There are 8 emergency exits. The fire-brigade has severe regulations
to the emergency exits. The requirement is: 270 persons at 110 cm.
exit width. The walkway is also open to ambulances.

Field of play
The field of play is 105 x 69 m. with an outlet of 4 m. On 70 cm.
deep there have been placed drainpipes and there is a automatic rain-
installation.
Football-vandalism in this stadium

The main user of this stadium, FC Utrecht, is responsable for the
course of things in the stadium. The police will only come in action
if the public order is at stake. The police escorts the public. Due
to the good contacts between FC Utrecht and the public and due to the
way of building of this stadium there is hardly football-vandalism.
During the cupfinale in 1984 for the first time, and only time,
public came on the field. But this was a planned action. So vandalism
have been restricted by unleashing coloured chickens on the field and
throwing an object of metal to the football-players.

Future

* There are thoughts of creating VIP-places in the stadium. These
  places generate sponsor-money. This thought however does not fit in
  with the Dutch mentality which makes little difference between
  poor and rich.

* Only seating places are considered in future.

* The tendency is to privatize stadiums.

* The tendency is to create more commercial exploitation, for example
  to organize popconcerts.

* Artificial turf is considered.
Main data football stadium

Number of conrete pile            1424

Measure of the field of play   105 x 70 m
Width walkway                     4,75 m

Number of seats                   12,000
Number of standing places          8,000
Total number of covered seats and
 standing places for spectators   20,000
Distance between stand and
 touch-line                        8.75 m
Maximum distance from spectators
 to touch-line                    32,50 m

Length of long stand              112.50   m
Length of head stand               67,50   m
Horizontal width of stands         21.00   m
Free projecting roof               20.50   m
Maximum height of roof             16.00   m

Stands with seats:
 -number of steps                 26
 -height of steps                0,40 m
 -width of steps                 0,80 m
 -total length of steps          7500 m

Stands with standing places
 -number of steps                  52
 -height of steps                0.20 m
 -width of steps                  0.40 m
 -total length of steps           3700 m

Club-rooms and commercial areas:
 -overall outside dimensions 187.50 x 142.50
 -total floor space               32.600 m2

To be divided:
 -club-rooms                       1,600    m2
 -toilets and areas for technical
  use                              1,000    m2
 -commercial working areas         6.000    m2
 -commercial offices              24,000    m2

Entrances and exits               15
Additional emergency exits         8

Seats: bucket seats of synthetic material
Field lighting
 -power of ligthing 800 a 1000 lux
 -4 masts at the corners, each with

  20 HEN high pressure mercury lamps 2   kW,
  placed in such a way that the
  level of lighting is optimal for
  the colour television camera.

Automatic rain-installation:
 -48 sprinklers & 5m3 an hour
 -total ca. 12 mm water an hour

Draining:
 -material: p .v .c .-rib-pipe covered
  with peatdust
 -diameter drains 65 mm
 -mutual distance drains 5 meter.

Grassfield:
 -40% English darnel - majestik en sprinter -(holuim Perenne)
 -60% veldbeemd - kimono en pasade (Poa Fratensis)

Underground field of play:
 -80 cm low of sand
 -5 cm low of top material
