  HILLSBOROUGH




     LEPPINGS LANE


SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989




       MY VERSION


        M G HILL




 Personal Details
 Statement of Events
 My Ticket
 Hillsborough Questions
                                                      - 2 -


PERSONAL DETAILS


Michael Gerard Hill




Age:          37 Years




I have followed Liverpool F.C. for over 20 years, seeing on
average 20 games a season - including the Charlton, Luton,
Coventry, Derby and Sheffield games in recent weeks.
                                                                - 3 -


                          STATEMENT OP EVENTS


                        SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989


    My ticket is Leppings Lane Standing Entrance B.      I have not
    been into the   Hillsborough Stadium before.     I was   meeting
    friends at 1.15 p.m. to 1.30 p.m. in the Fat Cat, Alma Street,
    near the centre of Sheffield to go to Hillsborough together.   I
    drove south down the Ml to Junction 34 (Tinsley) arriving
    before 1.00 p.m. - but then spent over 45 minutes travelling 4
    miles to reach the city centre, late because of the      traffic
    congestion/roadworks.

•
    We then travelled half the journey by car parking near Hillfoot
    Bridge, Neepsend Lane where Forest fans had congregated.     We
    walked up Penistone Road, then up Parkside Road turning right
    into Leppings Lane arriving at 2.35 p.m.    Penistone Road was
    heavy wit-h Forest fans.


    Ir my opinion this time was comfortable bearing in mind that
    the game was all ticket.    There was chaos in the narrow area
    between Leppings Lane and      the   turnstiles.   There were   2
    Policemen on horses outside the outer gate and 2 Policemen on
    foot.  No other Police were in sight.     There appeared to be no
    plan to the Police action when at the outer gate I noticed that
    the ground gates to the right of the Entrance B were opened to
    allow fans in directly.  I was separated from my friends in the
    crush by the panicking horses.    In the mass of fans in the area
    between the outer gates and the turnstiles, I headed for the
    right of the turnstiles hoping to get to further turnstiles or
    that the gates would be opened again.


    The gates were opened for a second time and I entered the
    ground at 2.50 p.m. without ticket inspection.   I still have
    the full ticket.   In my opinion there was not a sufficient
    crush to cause the gates to be opened.  There was no evidence
    of any drunken behaviour - just many anxious people trying to
    enter the ground.


    Once inside the gates I was opposite the tunnel under the West
    Stand and could see the pitch down the tunnel.   From my ticket
    map I assumed Entrance A and D led to the two corner areas
    therefore  I should go down     the  tunnel.   No Police were
    before/in or at the end of the tunnel.
                                                                           - 4 -


When    through   »-v.o h
                  the   tmu nnpnle l I
                                     ^ took
                                       t o o ^ to^ the^ right
                                                            ^ hand
                                                                ^    side x to^ be

  rimfortable as* more and more fans kept ■ coming down the
tunnel   I kept moving to the right heading away from the m a m
crush.

<?                kirk off I was getting squashed but still   tried to
S° r toftthe          "h f hoping that it would thin out towards the
8             of the ° ground.    There were no Police at the centre
S'       a thp eoal so when the first fans escaped to the edge of
 t h e ^ i t c h the only immediate reaction was from the Press who
 the pitch               y              crush. It was nearly 5 minutes
b e t v e L the c?ush becoming      unbearable and     any Police action.


As     the game   stopped
                        I came upon a crash barrier and took the
r i s k of going underneath, but struggled to stand up.       I managed
      01 so   o             right.    It was then I realised there
were^fences between the perimeter fence and the West Stand.           I
was shoulder to shoulder        with one fan who was next to the
fence     He pursuaded supporters in the adjacent area to help
     Vumb    and get over the     fence.   I followed him over the
fence     I then lay down and gradually recovered over the next
half hour. I saw no looting        or any theft.   I saw no Policemen
        attacked. • The events between 3.10 pi.e ._ asa 4 . 00 p.m.
well°lodged by T.V. so I have not covered them in any detail
luff ice it to say that there appeared to be i n s u f n c i e n t
medical staff (i.e. St John's Ambulance volunteers/firemen) or
 equipment (e.g. stretchers).
                  HILLSBOROUGH QUESTIONS



Ticket allocations were clearly wrong.  I would suggest
they should be in proportion to the average home gate.   The
parking could have been as on match day, but Forest fans
use Parkside Road to reach Leppings Lane end.


Why was Junction 34 off the Ml used for Nottingham Forest
fans when there are diversions/roadworks which caused
considerable traffic delays.


The landlord of   the pub b y |........... .......
was interviewed   on ITV on 18 April.     He was descrxDing tne
vast amounts of   alcohol consumed by fans - but did not_
state that they   were Nottingham Forest supporters, instead
he implied they   were Liverpool supporters.


Many thousands of Forest fans must have arrived at the
Spion Kop turnstiles well after 2.35 p.m.  Can the
electronic turnstile records show how many fans entered
the Spion Kop in the last 25 minutes compared to the
Leppings Lane end as the Liverpool fans accused of being
late; in my opinion more Forest fans were outside the
ground at 2.35 p.m.


The Police presence outside the Leppings Lane end was
minimal and inadequate.  More officers should have been
there to do an initial ticket check to keep fans without
tickets well away from the turnstiles.


Why did the Police outside Leppings Lane not get the fans
to form queues.  This is surely standard practice.


 When the gates were opened the-Police could still have
 collected the ticket stubs as fans entered.


 A better solution to cater for crowd safety outside the
 ground would have been to delay the start by 15 minutes
 to allow everyone to enter.
                                                          •Z'-r
                                                          o<-                           ;5
                                                                                        .a. -
                                                          < UL                .>“ •             C
          n iM fa o a ia n iM w    _   »                                      -cn        zn
                                                                                         I—I
                                                                                                             $
                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                       UJ
          'anresrwHncBo, Q.                                                                                  e         vr
          ^   a»
               r*
                r»i■ wmma* r » \           —>                                  UJ
                                                                                  §o-    Q
                                                                                         Z
          —        *•"' ■ ■**   ^                         8 2 :•              *cc
                                                                               o §H    . <E.
                                                                                  >■*¥ H
                                                                                  u.
                                                                                       -r-®.v        i-J
                                                          35??f
                                                          4     a    m        x
                                                                                                kj---o<r.
                                                                                               .2- -
                                                                                       • a ~ : «£--V-CC-fC-:
                                                                                       .= = - -_lv-.td.<£.
                                                                                        aj-av-
*¥} >i




                                                          ia.(3:''3 ..''=
                                                              Hczsa&sfe                                                        > .'H
toOlM U




                                                                                                                      .'V.'*’■ ~ //■ I
                                                    3-2
                                                                                                                      7 'O
OVM




                                                                                                                      ; ,o-
                  rsxYiiMsasFepi                                                                                               »
                     arrisnn                                  S t r i f e ' ; - <9
                                                                                                    .-       a
                                                                                                                       .'■>a
'!•»




                                                                                                         -   2-   -


                                                              PVi&Sl:;:.-          . i."
                                                                     -»_3 •-•'>••  ,.                    :.. '.<*




             The Official Programme is
           obtainable onty at Hilisborougti
                         from
             Official Programme Seitefs.

                                                                                  -CC -

                BEWARE O f "PIRATE”
               PROGRAMME SELLERS.
                                                                         !>
                                                                         a                                                      o
                                                                                  rs   n                                        o
                                                                         O        _j   n
                                                                         UT       _i n




                                                /
                                                    O
The gates shown on BBC T.V. on 17 April and in the
F i n a n c i a l Times on 19 April as the gates chat were opened
vcrc n o i those that I eiitcicd LIiti ground.     The gates on
T.V. were concertina metal gates to the left of turnstile
B, I entered by wooden gates to the right of turnstile B.


The P.A. System should have been used to tell fans at the
rear of the West Stand/outside that the central area was
full.  The video T.V.'a must have shown the concentration.
The P.A. System could have given instructions how to get to
the crowed - free areas.  If the P.A. System was
inadequate; then the Police/Ground Stewards could have done
it.


The ticket ground plan needs clarifying.   My ticket is
ijfcpings Lane Standing Entrance B which the plan would lead
     to the tunnel only.  One would assume A and D have
access to the corner terraces.


The tunnel was unlit and sloping downwards.        It would be
far safer to be both properly lit and flat.


Why weren't the Police at either end/in the tunnel.


Why didn't the video T.V, show the crush and so action
prior to kick off.


Why didn't the Press raise the alarm or help.


The Police action immediately after the game was stopped
was very slow.  Only a handful of Policemen were in the
trouble spot.


Why were the fences across the uncovered standing area not
taken down as the end was entirely Liverpool fans.  The
gates at the back of those fences should have been open.


Why didn't the Police have ladders or rope to pull fans
out onto the ground fence.
                                                           - 7 -


19. Why was the immediate Police priority to create a Cordon
    across the pitch (approximately 100 Officers were out in
    the middle) when only a small number were assisting the
    crushed.  Where were all the other Police.


20. Why w a s n ’t the P.A. System used properly.  Instead of
    telling fans to get off the pitch it should have told the
    Forest fans what was happening and also asked for medical
    people in the ground; many doctors must have been in the
    ground unaware of the crisis.      The P.A. could also have
    told fans to go back up the tunnel.


21. Why did there appear to be such a shortage of medical
    staff.  Why was there such a lack of any medical equipment.


22   I was annoyed by the immediate T.V./Radio comments,
     particularly from Mr Kelly.  Why say the gates were forced
     by fans without tickets if you are unsure.  The Police
     waited until 7.00 p.m. before admitting that they had
     opened the gates.  Why the four hour delay!
