                                                  fivv 4j




15th July 1989.


Ky Lord,
          I enclose as requested by your Secretary to the
Enquiry, Part 2 of ay report.
I apologise for the delay, and for the poor standard of
the typing.




I would think that by now, you will have learned of
almost everything that happened at Hillsborough.
I wffs not at the match, but I have been on the terraces
for at least 2500 other matches.
Having read the proposals I have put to you, and thinking
of my own personal experiences, it seems to me that there
are many more procedures I could have put to you.
Three months have gone by, but the sorrow is still so much
in my heart.
If anyone dare claim that the costs of putting in any
proposals are too expensive, let them visit just one
of the ninety five graves and then comusre the costs.



Yours faithfully
            The Report — Part two.   15th JUly 1989
            Crowd Safety Proposals - a new outlook*

The safety of a large crowd on the terraces depends neinly
on four factors*

They are;

Control
Co-ordination

Communications

Space.
Since control and co-ordination are so closely linked X will
deal with these matters first.
The police should create a new department.
It could be called ' Crowd Safety Control Department   .
It should consist of eight members, a secretary, and a
Chairman.
The eight members should be paired off; there should be m
each team a Controller, and a Deputy Controller.
All members should hold senior rank in the force. Previous
experience, particularly at football matches would b e a n
advantage, but it would be expected that members holding
such a senior ranking would in any case have the experience and
the ability to deal with any type of situation*

Procedure. It is not difficult to forsee that one particular
match due to be played in the near future will involve crowd
problemsyrhich will involve safety procedures.

The F.A. or the League, according to the match itself; i.e.
a Cup Tie or replay, or a League match involving possibly
promttion orv relggation will meet a team from this new
department not less than two weeks before the match is due
to be played.
This will mean the end of Cup replays which might come into
this category, being arranged for the week following the
original Cup tie.
The team, after inspection of the ground at which the match
will be played, and studying carefully all the safety^
procedures already in force, will then make their decision*
If they are completely satisfied with all they have seen and
heard, they will leave the matter in the hands of the Chief
Constable of the area.
 If. on the other hand they feel that the situation 9«§r well
 require the full crowd safety procedures, they will then
 take ove^complete and total responsibility and command*

 The Controller and his deputy will then immediately put into
 practice the procedures required to ensure as far as possible
 the safety of the large crowd expected.

 The F.A., the League, and the club at which the match Is to
 be played, must clearly understand that if the Controller
 is not completely satisfied in all respects, he will order
 that the proposed match will not be allowed to take place
 at that particular ground*
                     ( 2 ).

The procedures.
Some of these are dealt with under th^jheadings ' space *
and ' communications '.
The Controller will call for an early meeting to be held
with the leaders of all the services that may be called
on such as; hospitals; fire brigade; transport authorities;
motorway officials, ( if there is a motorway in the
visinity of the ground ) the R.A.F helicopter service;
the chief crowd marshal, carpark and turnstile officials,
British Hail station officer if there is a station near
the ground, and of course, the club chairman, managing
director and secretary will be present.

It need not b e a long meeting. The Controller will not
discuss individual matters with any of the servicesthat
might be involved.
tfhat he will do is to make it quite clear to everyone
present, that he is the Controller, and that* his commands
and orders, and his alone, must be carried out without
question, nor can they be countermanded by any other

He^/ili insist of cuorse, that only the heads of the
various services should and must attend this meeting.
Having now met personally all the leaders of all the
services that may be involved, he and his deputy will
proceed with individual meetings of each service.

By the end of the first v/eek, he will know exactly what
assistance will be available for hi*, the name and telephone
number of the person who will set up the assistance he may
require, and will have discussed and resolved any particular
difficulties that may have arisen.
He and his deputy will (incognito ) have attended at least
one match as an ordinary terrace supporter,in order that
he may obtain a personal viewpoint of what might arise
when the big match is played.
 He will require an operational centre. If one is not
 available, thn he must take over a section of the directors
 area.
 A complete telephone switchboard must be installed,
 the services of at least three well trained operators must
 be available.
 ■IV closed circuit sets mustv be in evidence in the control
 area.
 He should then be ready to issue a string of orders, all
 of which should be complied without argument.
                  C 3 )
To quote a few of the orders that may be issued by the
Controller.

On the day of the match;
all official carparks belongingcto the club must be empty
and available for his own requirements, such as, for
example, a complete emergency medical centee together
with ambulances, etc.
A possible landing park for helicopters should there be
injuries requiring specialised attention.
No Vehicles of any description other* than those authorised
by him, should be allowed to park anywhere within fifty
yxards of the ground.
Squads of police will be standing by the nearest motorway
junction awaiting his order if deemed necessary, to put up
barriers which will prevent motorists coming off the
motorway proceeding towards the ground. If there is no
motorway in the area* the same principle could apply to
the nearest main road turnoff.

British Rail will also be standing by awaiting his orders
if necessary to shunt supporters or other trains stopping
at the station neaeest to the ground.

His deputy will be stationed in the cente of the terraces.
He will stand on a concrete block say 2' sqy.are and
2' high surmounted by railings. Ee will have direct
access to the controller by telephone.

T h e holding area which will be at least 100 yards from the
ground will also be manned by police squads readyb to be
cordoned of; if required. This will ease the pressure and
the crowds outside the ground itself.
The controllers switchboard assistants will have checked
that communications to all the services are at their stations
and that communications are all in working order.

There will be a final check say at noon, that everyone and
everything that may be required are in position and ready
to act on any order given b£ the Controller.

I have no doubt that there are other safety measures which
could be introduced.
                    SPACE.
  i
Ii|we accept the fact that collapsible fences or large
automaticglly opened gates are a necessity, and, without
these we hare no hppe of preventing another tragedy in
the future, how can we find or make aore space.

1. All large clubs have two terracBS. On a big match day
   the whole of one terrace must be reserved for visiting


 2. All vertical barriers must be removed. Terrace
    supporters will then be free to move to any part of
    t!:e whole terrace without any barrier.

 3. In order to assist this e v e n % spread of supporters,
stewards with their little bibs should be abolished.
    A new body of mei^known as r Crowd Marshals ' should
    be formed.
    They should wear distinctive overalls ( say scarlet
    red in colour ). They should wear crash helemets
    with the words ' (Crowd Marshal ) printed on them.
    They should be trained by the police and would know
    e v e n t u a l y exactly what they have to do.
    Tfeey would t$ke up their pre-allotted positions as
    soon as the gates were opened.
    In a firm but frien<lly attitude, they would shepherd
    spectators^evenly over the whole of the terrace.
    Large prominient notices must be displayed outside
    every turnstile leading into the terrace.
    The wording should read ' Once inside the ground, for
    your safety and the safety of^others,follow the instructions
    given to you by an official crowd marshal.
    Failure to comply could result in injury or even death
    It could be you. r

4-.   I cannot understand* how a club expecting a very large
      gate can operate efficiently siith only four turnstiles
      at one end of the terrace.
      The inevitable present situation is that although you
      might arrive at the ground one hour before the kick-off
      you may well still be queuing up when the match is
      started.
      Besides using valuable space, iriitation and often
      violence is stimulated.
      There must be at least twelve turnstiles in full
      operation.
      It will be the club's responsibility to see that this
      order is carried out. Whether permanent or portable
      terrace turnstiles are used will be for the club to
      decide.
      Above all the present ecandal of having at least one
      turnstile open at an all ticket match with a notice
      saying * cash admission * must be terminated forthwith.
                  ( 5 ).

5. Many clubs have quite large forecourtsr leading on to
   the terraces and seating entrances*
   This space is vital.
   Its sole use on the big match day should be a wide
   avenue^with an easytoand continuing flow of spectators
   steadily moving forward.
   It would only need a few policemen who would move on
   loiterers or people waiting for friends, etc. They would
   be politely but firmly pushed off the forecourt back to
   the street.

6. The Controller should examine all accesses to the ground.
   He should select the most suitable site or sites as
    'holding areas '. These sites should be not less than
   at least 100 yards from the ground.
   They should be manned by police on foot and mounted *
   Portable barriers- should be made ready, the stree^or road
   closed to all but authorised vehicles if necessary.
   There will be direct telephonic communication with the
   Controller.Should the crowd situation attthe ground ease
   up, thepfficer in charge of the holding area, on
   instructions given to him by the Controller, willkllow
   small sections of his own crowd to move forward aft
   regular intervals.


                COMMUNICATIONS.
                                  T t \£   ^
One of the Controllers prime dai£«s would be to ensure
that the system in use i s ; efficient; clearly heard by
all the people in the ground^nd have a back up system in
case of failure of the original.
He would have at his desk a microphone which, at the
touch of a switch would immediately cut off any music or
messages being relayed by the usual commentator, leaving
him free to speak to any of the services individually,
orx issue instructions and orders to everyone or anyone*
Only the Controller would be allowed to use this
microjaiione.

                TEE HEP ALERT.

I pray that this will never ever be used.
It is a button, which when pressed, and only the Controller
would have the right to use, which would sound a police
type of siren.
At least twice before the match h9s commenced, the Controller
should notify the crowd with words to this effect,
Plesse listen very carefully to this message. If despite all
our efforts and your co-operation, a situation develops
where your safety is endangered, I will set off a police
siren.
All members of the services will immediately carry out the
orders I have given to them.
For people on the terraces where there may be danger, as
soon as you hear the siren, walk forward, DO NOf RUN, straight
on to the playing are§. Move forward towards the centre
circle, and then stand still.
The match will automatically stop when the siren is sounded,
players and official^dll leave the field immediately.
People in the seated areas should remain where they are
This message will be repeated before the* game is started.
