                                                              Nottingham,
                                                              NG4

                                                             4th December 1997


    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
    Room 1106,
    50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
    London, SW1H9AT

    Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

                                         Hillsborough

    Thank-you for your letter o f 3rf December 1997.

    The first I knew of a change on the certification form was on 24th November 1997
    when, whilst looking at the body file of Kevin William I noticed some correspondence
    about this. This alteration was undertaken by my successor presumably when he dated
    the revised form in April 1994. I had been retired as Coroner for well over three years
    by then.

    As you rightly say the evidence of Dr. Slater was not altered during the inquests nor
    do I recollect that he has ever communicated with me about any change.

    From what I saw in the file I believe that he did correspond with Mr. Domes and it is
    Mr. Dorries who will have to deal with the question which you have put to me. To
    save time I am photocopying your letter and enclosure and sending it on to him for his
    attention. I have also phoned him and alerted him to your enquiry.

    Perhaps you will permit me to add that in addition to the point which you have
    mentioned Dr. Slater said specifically on plOOl (page 3) ‘In addition there was
    evidence of bruising to the lungs, again supporting compression of the chest.’

    It has to be remembered that the post mortem was undertaken very shortly after the
    tragedy and that the reports were completed months before the start of the interim
    inquests. I do not have a copy of the actual post mortem report to hand but no
    doubt Mr. Dorries could send you a copy of it with his reply as it is possible that
    it will be more detailed.

    I do not have copies of the original certificate but I am sure Mr. Dorries will be able
    to send you a copy of it.




o / c 6 . Mr.^Dorries
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
         Room 1106
w lw     50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Direct Line: 0171 273 2512 Fax: 2007


Dr. S.L. Popper                                                       Our reference:

N ottingham                                                           Your reference:
N G 4F
                                                                      Date: 3 December 1997




        A question has arisen in relation to the alteration of the Coroner’s Certification in the case of
Kevin Williams. The original one (apparently dated 28 March 1991) gave parts of the body injured as
‘chest’ (the copy I have is poor). This seems to have been changed subsequently to ‘neck’ in a further
certificate (dated 4 April 1994?). Copy enclosed.

       It was D r Slater’s evidence at the inquest 2 & 4 May 1990 that both the neck and chest were
injured (2 May, p3) I am not aware that this was ever altered.

        Mrs Williams’ solicitors are now asserting that the only injury was to the neck and the later
certificate shows this. I wonder if you could help me with this problem. Did D r Slater ever alter his
view that asphyxia was due to the compression of the neck and chest?

       I should also be grateful if you could arrange for me to have a copy of the original certificate.

       Finally, thank you for your letter of 24 November, the points in which I have noted.




                                            Aa . S       ' t      -—



Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
      -*) Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line: 01712732512 Fax: 2007


Or. S.T.. Pfinnpr                                                      Our reference:

Nottingham-------------- ^                                             Your reference:
NG4P~       I                                                         Date: 3 December 1997




        A question has arisen in relation to the alteration of the Coroner’s Certification in the case of
Kevin Williams. The original one (apparently dated 28 March 1991) gave parts of the body injured as
‘chest’ (the copy I have is poor). This seems to have been changed subsequently to ‘neck’ in a further
certificate (dated 4 April 1994?). Copy enclosed.

       It was D r Slater’s evidence at the inquest 2 & 4 May 1990 that both the neck and chest were
injured (2 May, p3) I am not aware that this was ever altered.

        Mrs Williams’ solicitors are now asserting that the only injury was to the neck and the later
certificate shows this. I wonder if you could help me with this problem. Did D r Slater ever alter his
view that asphyxia was due to the compression of the neck and chest?

       I should also be grateful if you could arrange for me to have a copy of the original certificate.

       Finally, thank you for your letter of 24 November, the points in which I have noted.




                                             Aa .   S            v/—


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
