          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SWIH 9AT
          Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007



Edwards Frais Abrahamson                                       Your reference:    EA KD 06526.1.9
Solicitors
8/9 Myrtle Parade                                              Our reference:
LIVERPOOL
L7 7EL                                                         Date:              February 1998




I enclose a copy of the transcript of the evidence which Mr Derek Binder gave to Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith, which you have requested on behalf of Mrs Anne Williams.

I am sorry for the delay in forwarding this. Perhaps I can say that, following a conversation
with your office on 15 January, I was expecting a fax to confirm that you did in fact require it.
That did not arrive. There seems to have been a little confusion about this - in my own mind
at least - possibly stemming from the fact that your letter asking for the transcript arrived here
on 4 December, when I was on Scrutiny business elsewhere.

I confirm that we have Mr Bruder’s permission to let you and Mrs Williams have a copy of
the transcript.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny
                                                                   D   a v i e s          W    a l l i s         F   o v s t e r

                                                                                  s o l i c i t o r s




       C F Bone Esq.,
       Secretary to the Scrutiny,                                                                                                                   None given
                                                                                                                                      Your Ref:

       The Hillsborough Scrutiny,                                                                                                                   ADB.MR.Bruder(2)
       Room 1106,                                                                                                                      O u r Ref:


       50 Queen Anne’s Gate,                                                                                                                        12 January 1998
       LONDON SW1 9AT.




           ear Mr.

        Re: Derek Bruder

        I understand that Messrs. Edwards Frais Abrahamson have asked for a copy of our client’s evidence
        and that you did not wish to release it without his consent. Mr. Bruder is content for his evidence
        to be released to the solicitors for Mrs. Williams.

        Yours faithfully,




        Davies Wallis Fovster


                                                                                                                              O ~~                  11\. t                                      l-t
                                                                                                                                                    1 I
                                                                                                       rA&AMjtk                      £? <s4-w o w S

                                                                                                                                                       fc U % 4 j^ y t           / d

                                                                                                                                                                                W \ £r|-
                                                                                                         j\ Jy                           iNS\ <j t)                   V 0



                                                                                                                                                                   cr j i
        G:\ADB\18806\2\L-12Q198.BON




               5 C A S T L E STREET, L IV E R P O O L L 2 4X E TEL: 0 1 5 1 - 2 3 6 6 2 2 6 FAX: 0 1 5 1 - 2 3 6 3 0 8 8 D X : 1 4 1 2 8 L IV E R P O O L
                       Jam es C.M. D avies, G u y St. J. Wallis, M ark I. O 'C onnor, A n d re w J. Green, C h risto p h e r R.J. Sorrell, D a v id N . Clay, Ian Titchm arsh, M ichael P. Jennings
                        G erald F. Pow er, C h risto p h e r R. D u rra n t, T. D u n can S. C had d e rto n , Jo n ath an S. Bramley, Jennifer A. G em m ell, John G ow er-Jones, H. A n d re a McWatt
            E d w a r d T. B ootland, N igel B. Wallis, M ark Selwyn, G rah am Sidlow, D av id L. W ood, D a v id Blaquifere, N icholas H. Dickinson, L. C h risto p h e r Sm ith, Susan K. P a rk er
                D av id D av id so n L und, Susan M.C. Fran k lan d , G rah am P. Small, Pau l Berry, G w y n eth H eritage, A n d re w H. Gregory, P eter S o u th eran , Pau la Park, Alex M egaw,
P eter Barber, Jo h n a th a n D.M . Rees, Jam es Szerdy, Paul Liddle, D av id C. M oon, Ross W ellm an, P eter W arburton, M ark D ennis, Kate Ive, Ian Slater, Tim Scott, A n d re w West, H ilary N icholls
                                                    Associates: P eter G elling, Sim on W. Jones, Ian M acA lister Director o f Finance: R ichard H. Evans F.C.A.
                                                                       Consultants: John N . Entw istle D.L., D av id M . H a llw o rth , J. Brian R hodes

                                      Also at Harvester House, 37 Peter Street, Manchester M2 5GB Tel: 0161-228 3702 Fax: 0161-835 2407
                                                                       Authorised by The Law Society to conduct investment business
                                                                           A Member of the EU-LEX International Practice Group
£cA, fra . Pb>r
  I\Ar              j


aeJS h f >              \



o a t /.' t > * s
          iA|
            ‘/‘•m J ;
(jfr                                 A. S. L a w
\\V     C - f- !
^ E b -e -C ire V w - u ^   "Y ^o   <S c r \ i V C c ^ v v r v v O f y e c

 R o o rw           \ \oV s
   O o e -e ^ -v      C X rv rx -e ^ s
                                            °vf-N '
                                            With Compliments
                                         abrahamson & simm solicitors
      Myrtle Parade, Liverpool L7 7EL. Telephone 0151 -707 1212 DX 28953 LIVERPOOL 2 Fax 0151 -707 2458
M r C.F. Bone,
Secretary to the Hillsborough Scrutiny,
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
London SWIH 9AT.                                                      Mr Abrahamson
                                                                      EAKD 06526.1.9

                                                                      2.12.97




Dear Sir,

RE KEVIN WILLIAMS


I have seen a copy of the transcript of the meeting with Ms. Williams, Ms. Coleman and
myself. You will recall that Lord Justice Stuart Smith kindly confirmed that written
submissions would be entertained.

I would like to make the following submissions:-

1. The Coroner’s Inquest and the cut off point.

Lord Justice Stuart Smith stated (page 5 line 33) that there has been some
misunderstanding about the cut off point; that the Coroner did not decide to adopt the cut
off point on the basis that everybody was dead by then but on the basis that they had
received their injuries by then.

I do not think with respect, that is a full explanation of the reasoning adopted by the
Coroner. I refer the Learned Judge to the transcript of the proceedings which took place
on the 19th November 1990. At page 17 of that transcript the Coroner stated as follows
(and what follows is a summary and I would of course refer the Scrutiny to the full
transcript):-
 I ticked the arrival of the first ambulance not because there is anything magical about that
but because when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it is a convenient
marker, that is all.... The medical evidence was that once.... the chest was fixed so that
respiration could no longer take place then irrecoverable brain damage would occur
between four and six minutes. That is the point”.... The latest time when this permanent
fixation could have arisen would have been approximately six minutes past, which is when
is when the match stopped.... Add another six minutes to that, that is 12 minutes past and
then as I say, I went on to find a convenient marker beyond that time”.

 So the reasoning of the Coroner was as follows:-

1. The injuries which would have led to irrecoverable brain damage will have taken place
by the latest, at 3.06 p.m.

2. The irrecoverable brain damage itself would occur at the latest 6 minutes after that.
That takes the timing to 6.12 p.m.

3. 3.15 p.m. was a convenient cut off point in light of the above.

So the 3.15 p.m. cut off point is not so much when the injury occurred as when, to use his
words, the damage was done - namely when irrecoverable brain damage took place. It
was part of the reasoning process of the Coroner that all the people who died did so as a
result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia leading to irrecoverable brain damage between 4
and 6 minutes after the trauma fixing the chest so that respiration could no longer take
place.


However, Doctor James Bums in his report of 11th April 1994 (appendix G to the second
memorial), points out that what is important is whether the severe compression (causing
traumatic asphyxia) is sustained or intermittent. This seems a matter of common sense.
This seems also not to contradict the comment of Professor Usher (which is that
irrecoverable brain damage would occur between four and six minutes after the time when
the chest was fixed so that respiration could not longer take place. Professor Usher will
have assumed a situation whereby the chest was “fixed” whereas Doctor Bums talks of
intermittent pressure - presumably therefore not fixing the chest.

Most importantly of all, it is now accepted that Kevin had a neck injury and not a chest
injury - to the extent that Doctor Slater agreed to amend the Coroner’s certificate (see
paragraph 3 of our letter to you dated 22nd September 1997). It follows that the whole
basis of the reasoning adopted by the Coroner - namely the period o f time elapsing
between a chest injury of sufficient severity to “fix” the chest so that traumatic asphyxia
followed leading to brain damage within six minutes at most - was based on a false
premise.

This is not therefore a question of comparing the evidence of one expert with that of
another - it is a question of applying cold common sense to the concession now made by
the Coroner as to the physical injury itself.

2. The evidence of Tony Edwards.
I understand that the Scrutiny has now heard from Tony Edwards and I have a copy of a
letter dated 10th November 1997 from Anthony James Edwards. I have also now been
provided with a copy of a statement of the same Mr Edwards taken on the 25th October
1989 by Inspector M. Layton. This statement had not previously been made available to
us. However, the statement confirms the statement of Mr Edwards forwarded as appendix
H o f the second Memorial. Mr Edwards comments in that (hand-written) statement, dated
5 September 1995, that on an unknown date he was taken to the Ambulance
Headquarters on Moorgate Road in Rotherham (which you will note is the address given
as the place where the statement dated 25th October 1989 was taken from him) that he met
two Officers of West Midlands Police, that they did not take a signed statement from him
(which it would appear is incorrect), and most importantly that he was shown a video of
his ambulance, that they discussed various ambulances and that his ambulance was
distinctly and correctly identified.

As Mr Edwards says, this evidence was not supplied to the Coroner or to PC Bruder.

It does not appear to form part of the body file of Kevin Williams.

During the Coroner’s Inquest Inspector Roberts Sawers testified on the 4th May 1990. The
transcript of evidence which we have gives his evidence as commencing at page 5. At
page 7 Inspector Sawers is explaining that he had seen Mr Bruder the previous day and
had drawn the attention of Mr Bruder to problems in relation to the known timing of
ambulances arriving on the pitch.

You will recall that a little over five months previously, in October 1989, Inspector Layton
had seen Mr Edwards and had shown him footage of his ambulance arriving on the pitch
at 1535 that day. Mr Edwards is of the firm view that the Officer with Inspector Layton
was Inspector Sawers yet Inspector Sawers in his evidence to the Inquest talks of the
apparent discrepancy with timing - the point being that the two ambulances which
Inspector Sawers said had arrived at the pitch arrived at about 3.15 and 3.20 p.m. whereas
the photograph showing Kevin Williams on the pitch with Mr Bruder is timed at 3.32 p.m.
The Coroner was clearly misled by Inspector Sawers - and it seems a reasonable inference
that he was deliberately misled - into believing that there were only two ambulances
involved; not three; that there was no ambulance involved at 3.32 p.m. that Mr Bruder
was therefore clearly mistaken as to the existence of the third ambulance and that this
must place a question mark over the reliability of his testimony. This, combined with the
fact that he had by then given two different statements, lessened further the credibility of
his testimony.

I understand that Mr Edwards has not yet been invited to give evidence to the Scrutiny
despite his request to do so and I would urge the Scrutiny to hear from him.

3. The terms of reference and the implications of (1) and (2) above.
Turning to the terms of reference, which I note do not refer to the Inquest itself, the
Scrutiny is asked to ascertain whether evidence exists which was not available to the
inquiry or others. Clearly, this evidence was not available to the inquiry.
