                                                                    §

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

INTERIM REPORT

Introduction


The Interim Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
under Lord Justice Taylor is published today.    The Judge makes
extensive findings as to the cause of the disaster and in his
recommendations proposes 43 instant measures capable of being
implemented forthwith and where possible before the start of the
next football season.


Brief Summary of Causes


Lord Justice Taylor finds that:-


     "The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the
     disaster was the failure, when gate C was opened, to cut off
     access to the central pens which were already overfull.


     They were already overfull because no safe maximum
     capacities had been laid down, no attempt was made to
     control entry to individual pens numerically and there was
     no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.


     When the influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the
     barriers there afforded less protection than it should and a
     barrier collapsed.    Again, the lack of vigilant monitoring
     caused a sluggish reaction and response when the crush
     occurred.   The small size and number of gates to the track
     retarded rescue efforts.    So, in the initial stages, did
     lack of leadership.


     The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at
     the turnstiles.    That occurred because, as both Club and
     police should have realised, the turnstile area could not
     easily cope with the large numbers demanded of it unless
     they arrived steadily over a lengthy period.      The
     Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed to
     provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of large
     numbers should that occur in a short period.      That it might
     so occur was foreseeable and it did.     The presence of an
     unruly minority who had drunk too much aggravated the
     problem.     So did the Club's confused and inadequate signs
     and ticketing."


Interim Recommendations


The interim recommendations are designed to prevent overcrowding
and crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety
procedures.     But Lord Justice Taylor says that they do not and
cannot meet all the problems or address all the issues of post-
Hillsborough football.


The Judge says:-


     "Wider issues such as membership schemes, identity cards,
     all-seater stadia, super-stadia and long term
     recommendations fall to be considered in my Final Report.
     So do a number of other specific matters such as a
     comprehensive review of the Green Guide*, the problem of
     excessive pre-match drinking, fans without tickets and
     ticket touts."


          *       Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.


Lord Justice Taylor says that further evidence and study will be
required before he can make recommendations on these matters.
Accordingly, he says, the main thrust of the interim
recommendations, as a holding exercise,


     "is to reduce numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance
     and to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between
     prevention of disorder and maintenance of safety."
The Judge has made no recommendations about taking down perimeter
fences.   But he says that gates in them to the pitch should be
kept open whilst the terraces are occupied.     He does, however,
stress that "it will of course be necessary to have a police
presence sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for improper
reasons through the open gates".


The Judge finds that in the assessment of figures for capacity,
the criteria in the Green Guide were not applied with sufficient
rigour at Hillsborough.     Since this may also have been the case
elsewhere, he recommends that they should be reassessed with
proper and realistic allowance for all the factors concerned.        On
top of that, he proposes a further reduction of 15% as an interim
measure to improve the safety margin.


The scope of the interim recommendations covers the maximum
capacities for terraces, filling and monitoring terraces, fences
and gates, crush barriers, Safety Certificates, the duties of
football clubs, police planning, communications, the co­
ordination of emergency services, and first aid, medical
facilities and ambulances.


The interim recommendations are set out in Chapter 24 of the
report, a copy of which is attached.


Part Two of the Inquiry


Lord Justice Taylor and his Assessors will now be starting work
on Part Two of the Inquiry.    This will be directed to making
final and long term recommendations about crowd control and
safety at sports grounds.     The Judge will be considering the
large body of written evidence submitted to him, which he may
want to supplement in some instances with further oral evidence
or discussion in conjunction with his Assessors.     He will also
need to make a number of visits and inspections.     He has
indicated that he expects to prepare his final report and
recommendations at about the turn of the year.
Background Note


Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on 15 April, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary:-


       "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
       ground on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about
       the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.11


Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors:    Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle upon Tyne.    The Secretary of the Inquiry
was Mr Robert Whalley from the Home Office.    The investigation of
the disaster and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the
West Midlands Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey
Dear, who appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to
take full time charge of the investigation.     Counsel for the
Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew Collins QC.     Technical tests and
studies were carried out at the Health and Safety Executive1s
Research and Laboratory Services Division in Sheffield.


The hearing began on 15 May in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on 29 June.     174 witnesses gave oral
evidence.    Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
some      million words in all.   Lord Justice Taylor also received
some 1550 letters.
