                              8 inx
     SECilfjj.

                                                                Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT

                                             cc   |w }J[ ;cWwl
                                                  Nat Q ' E>-< i
The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP                                                           09 F
Attorney General _
Attorney Genera’s Chambers                          Lo^> ^         a :c w '"
9 Buckingham Gate                                   P*rr~ s e c
London SW1                                                 Bou!>        -2>WV' tK



                                                    N nt    P
                                                    hV M
                                                     Mr £- e s Jqa^

                                                                      *•»
                 vA   ^ nJS
                                                                Va j < V a «1T


                                          HILLSBOROUGH

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is any new
evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office was provided
with a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now to agree our response to
his conclusions.

A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially he had
two tasks.

         (i)           to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                       significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and

         (ii)         to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
                      constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be relevant to
                      your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been considered.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear. He considers that there is no basis for
establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. Nor is there any basis for
a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. Nor does he consider there is
any material which might require re-consideration of previous decisions in relation to
criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full and detailed. Having
considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his central conclusions are right.

When I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the judge’s
report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he considered as
possible. Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to his report. Most of
the remaining material which he has considered is already in the public domain, such as
transcripts of public proceedings. There is some material, however, which Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith refers to but which has not so far been made public. This includes
particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and 1997 about whether the evidence
available would support criminal proceedings. I would be grateful for your views on
whether that advice can be placed in the Library at the House.

When the report_is published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and the
reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public inquiry. It is
important that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw a line under
speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that both your and the
Director’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility that, should anything
new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I should give as firm an
indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you agree, I consider that I should
say on publication of the report that you and the Director have considered its conclusions,
and on the basis of the material which it contains, the Director consider that there is no
basis which would justify fresh criminal investigations, and that you consider that any
application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of
succeeding. I would be grateful for your views.

There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your views.
The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers submitted to the
inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail, setting out exactly how
and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material effect on the outcome of the
proceedings. There are bound to be questions, however, about whether anything in this
process might amount to misconduct of a criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith considers that it would not. It would in theory be possible to instigate a
further police investigation to confirm this conclusively, but I think the outcome would be
a foregone conclusion, and I do not consider that such an investigation should be
instigated. I would be grateful for your confirmation view on this point.

The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
about the state of the ground. He suggests that the condition of the terraces and the over­
estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that information had
been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have attributed a greater
proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. However, it is clear that Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the
balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.

One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is unsatisfactory to have
an inquest where there has already been an_inquiry, chaired by a judge, into a major disaster.
This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on disasters and
inquests, whose report was published last March. This recommended that, where a major
disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into
the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner
should be limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its
resumption except in the most exceptional circumstances.

Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice Stuart
Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity, there are
no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require primary
legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove one of the
causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.

Publication of the-report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here. I
will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have escaped blame -
the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise also that we are putting
right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system which in part enabled the officers
in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want nearer the time to clear with you the
text of my statement, but I would be grateful for your urgent agreement in principle to
what I propose.

My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the week
beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested 18 February. The report is
very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for MPs to read in a
short time. But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and requests for further debate.
If Ann agrees, I would like to head off those protests by indicating that we would be
prepared to make time available for the House to debate the report.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of the
Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                     JACKSTRAW
From: Linda Rushton                                   cc: Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                      Mr O’Brien
      Room 702                                            Lord Williams
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                   Mr Omand
      @ 273 4238                                          Mr Boys Smith
                                                          Ms Wheldon
      9 February 1998                                     Mr Middleton
                                                          Mr R Evans
                                                          Mr Pugh
                                                          Mr Edmundson
                                                          Mr Butler
                                                          Ms Clifford
                                                          Mr Warner
                                                          Mr Owen
Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

Mr Howarth has seen Paul Pugh’s submission of 6 February concerning the
handling arrangements for the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report and has commented:

1. “Having read the submission and report carefully, I agree with the
recommendations in the submission and the conclusions in the report.
                                               •


2. On handling, I think that the proposed arrangements prior to and following
the statement are suitable (paragraphs 28-31 of Paul Pugh’s submission).
However, I reiterate that I feel we should involve both Jane Kennedy and
Peter Kilfoyle in discussions about handling and other arrangements. In
practice, this will have to be arranged for this week. (I understand that Maria
Eagle MP has already jumped the gun and has arranged for the families to
meet local MPs on Monday of next week (16 February).

3. On the detail of the report itself there are, I think, some potentially
contentious issues which need further consideration prior to any statement
from the Home Secretary or debate. These are:

(a) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s evaluation of Debra Martin and Paul Taylor’s
evidence (Chapter 4, paragraphs 37-72) is likely to be interpreted as a
whitewash of South Yorkshire police force (and by implication the West
Midlands police force). Frankly, it reads in a manner which supports the police
officer’s version of events without any serious attempts to appear even
handed.

(b) Paragraph 92 of Chapter 4, unless it is read in conjunction with Appendix
8, seems again to rubbish the evidence of the “lower orders" ( in this case
police officers) preferring instead to accept explanations given by senior
officers and those acting on their behalf. To overcome this impression, it may
be necessary to draw attention to the sort of corrections which were made to
the original statements as contained in Appendix 6.

(c) We need to be seen as having responded to the ten questions that were
put to David Maclean MP in 1996, then a Minister at the Home Office, by
Granada Television, the programme makers o f'Hillsborough’. This
programme had a significant impact on a large number of people, the majority
of whom will not read Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. I think that we will
need to ensure that the responses to these ten questions, contained in the
report, are emphasised in a proactive manner; perhaps this could be
achieved via the press release or could be incorporated into the Home
Secretary’s statement? In addition, it could be helpful for the Home Secretary
to give an extended interview outlining the responses to the ten questions
and other matters.

(d) With regard to the two missing video tapes (Chapter 2 Paragraph 22) the
conclusion drawn by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that they would not have
provided anything in addition to the video evidence available to Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry, the Inquests or any other proceedings should be brought out clearly.
It is particularly important to emphasise, as the report does, that there was a
substantial amount of other video footage which covered much of the ground
and outside for most of the period in question. It is therefore likely that any of
the coverage which these missing video tapes could have contained has
been obtained from other footage. The Granada Television programme
supported the conspiracy theory whereas Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report
rejects it. However, the point that we must get across is that, either way, it
does not mean that there is material missing which would have shed further
light on events.

4. With regard to the details of the Home Secretary’s oral statement, I
suggest the following amendments to Annex B (draft oral statement):

Paragraph 11         Second sentence

Replace: ‘it could never happen again’ with ‘it is much less likely that such a
disaster will ever be repeated’.

Paragraph 14          After second sentence

Insert: ‘Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its
present form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind’.

Paragraph 20

I feel that to use the phrase “draw a line” under the whole Hillsborough
disaster could easily be misconstrued if the Home Secretary were to use it in
his statement to the House. While I agree that it is necessary to make it clear
that this is the final word on the issue of any further inquiry, this point needs
to be made with great care and sensitivity.”




                                LINDA RUSHTON
