be paramount.    But when the police have an option to let fans
without tickets in or keep them out, their policy must clearly be
to exclude them.     Unless that rule is firmly and universally
applied and known the problem will grow.


Ail-ticket Matches


272.         All the evidence I have received suggests that great
caution should be exercised before making a match all-ticket.          To
do so can assist in achieving segregation.       In general,   it should
however be done only where a capacity or near capacity crowd is
expected.     There should then be little difficulty in selling all
the tickets in advance.     The point of making such a match all­
ticket is to prevent the arrival of greater numbers than the
ground can accommodate.     However,   if a less popular match is made
  »                                     t

all-ticket,    it may turn out that only a modest proportion of the
tickets is sold in advance.      If then fans arrive without tickets,
they will be aggrieved at being turned      away when there is space
available.     Moreover,   the club will be tempted to give in to them
and sell tickets on the day.      This discredits the all-ticket
policy and may cause breaches of the segregation strategy.         I
therefore recommend that all-ticket matches should be confined to
those at which a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected and
that, having so designated them, clubs maintain a firm policy of
not selling tickets at the match.


Touts


273.         The recommendations in the last two paragraphs are
designed to deter those without tickets from turning up at
matches and so obviating any trouble they may be tempted to
cause.   However, manyfans without tickets turn up at the       ground
in the hope of buying them from touts.


274.         During my visits to sports grounds I have found
universal condemnation of touts by all involved in organising and
managing large stadium events.     Apart from the obstruction they
themselves cause, touts attract fans without tickets to attend at
gr ou nd s   in the hope of getting in.    Moreover,   they sell tickets
to all comers regardless of their allegiance.           Thus tickets for
the home area at a soccer match fall into the hands of away
supporters and vice versa.       The result is to frustrate the
efforts of clubs and police to achieve peaceful segregation.
Pockets of alien affiliation       planted amongst home supporters
form a focus for hostility and often violence results.           Apart
from these objections, voiced by the FA, the FL, the police and
the clubs, most supporters also detest touts because they often
corner the market for a popular match and offer tickets at
grossly excessive prices.


275.           From all these quarters the ple^ is to take positive
action against ticket touts at football matches.           I am mindful of
the need for caution before advocating a law limiting liberty to
conduct oneself and one's business freely and according to
established practice.       I likewise accept that market forces
should,      in general, operate freely in the commercial field.
Nevertheless,      I am satisfied from what I have read, heard and
seen that outside football grounds the presence and activities of
touts have a grossly anti-social effect leading both directly and
 indirectly to disorder.      Directly,   through obstruction and the
attraction of numbers without tickets.          Indirectly, because of
 trouble from those so attracted who, in the end, cannot or do not
buy tickets and from those who buy their way into an opposition
 enclave.


 276.         Touts operate, of course,    at places other than football
 grounds.      They are to be found,   for example, at national rugby
 stadia,     at the All England Tennis Club at Wimbledon and at
 countless other sporting events.         Depending on how one defines
 "touting",     the activity could include selling unwanted tickets
 for the opera, the theatre or concert halls.          Touting usually
 means, however, not just selling at face value a ticket you
 cannot use, but selling numbers of tickets at an inflated price
 as a commercial venture.       There is a clear distinction between
 the impact of touting at football grounds and elsewhere.
 Football is the only sport at which segregation is practised to
prevent violence.     This is because it is the sport where violence
inside and outside the ground is, at present, most prevalent.
There are therefore strong grounds for regarding football as a
special case as the Government has recognised by promoting the
Football Spectators Act.


277.       Whatever the policy merits of freedom to trade and
market forces, they must surely yield to the maintenance of
safety and the prevention of disorder.        Touts at football matches
put both at risk.     At other sports and in other leisure fields
the tout does not endanger safety or order to the same extent.
Accordingly, whether one finds him attractive or not, he can be
left to ply his trade there.      But. so far as football is
concerned,    in my view touting should be made unlawful.       The fast
buck should stop here.


278.       At present, police can deal with touts only by somewhat
strained and stretched use of existing laws.         They arrest them
for obstruction even if the physical obstruction caused is
minimal.     Alternatively,   they make an arrest on the grounds that
they suspect the tout of carrying forged tickets, although the
suspicion c f. fcrgsry ir.sy ir.srsiy be ccnv 2 ni.snt conjecturs.   After
holding the tout during the match the police release him and the
now valueless but genuine tickets are returned to him.          Growing
wise to this, many touts now carry only two or three tickets at a
time, relying on a runner to bring up more from a "banker"
standing off with perhaps hundreds of tickets in his possession.
If the salesman is arrested the merchandise is not all lost.
Police should not have to stretch the law to deal with a public
mischief.  There should be a specific prohibition which police
can then enforce.


279.         How to formulate a prohibition against touting at
football grounds will require careful consideration and drafting.
It could be made an offence to sell tickets for and on the day of
a football match without authority from the home club to do so.
Another way would be to prohibit such sales within a specified
radius of the ground on the day of the match.        Yet another would
                                   112
be to prohibit sales of tickets for a football match at more than
face value.   This third alternative would permit any genuine
purchaser of a ticket who found he could not use it to recoup his
outlay by selling his ticket outside the match.     Its disadvantage
would be tne difficulty of proving a tout had sold at more than
race value;   ways would also be devised to evade the prohibition.
I tend to favour the first alternative which is simple and
capable of easy proof.     The genuine ticket holder, finding
himself unable on the day to use his ticket,    and not permitted to
sell it outside the ground, should be permitted to return it to
the club and recover his money.     Clubs should be prepared to
accept such tickets in the interests of fairness and of having a
law which defeats touts.     If touting outride the ground is
banned,   fans with no tickets for an all-ticket match could have
no excuse for turning up outside hoping to get in.




                                                         %




                                  113
