                                                                                                     khk
            Scottish Education Department                        New St Andrew’s House
                                                                 Edinburgh EH1 3SY




               Room No.                                          Telephone Direct Dialling 031-244
                                                                 Switchboard 031 -556 8400
                                                                 G TN 7188
                                                                 Telex 727301
Jonathon Sweet Esq
                                                                 Fax 031-244 4785
The Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry
The Home Office
                                                                 Your ref
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
                                                                 Our ref            ) t? - /S 2 ,



                                                                 Date       16 December 1989
                                                                 Please reply to The Secretary




VALUATION OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

I am sorry that it        has taken so long to respond to Lord Justice Taylor's
request for a note        on the basis o f valuation of Scottish Football League
grounds for rating        p u rp oses. The trouble has been that my colleagues in
Local Government          Finance are working under extreme p ressu res on a
number o f fronts         at once and have simply not had time to prepare
anything.

However, they have supplied me with the attached note which I now
forward for information. I hope that this answers Lord Justice Taylor's
q u ery. If not, I am advised that further information is available from the
Scottish A ssessor's A ssociation, the Secretary of which is Mr William
Anderson,    Tayside   House,     28 Crichton  Street, Dundee      DD1 3RH
Telephone 0382 23281.




alan   mcpherson




E0201916.129
VALUATION OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

1.   The rateable value o f a property is the rent at which it might
reasonably be expected to let from year to year. In valuing a property
for the purposes of rating the a ssesso r will base the rateable value on
actual ren t, or if this not available, on the general level o f ren ts p assing
for that class of p rop erty.      There i s , how ever, little if any rental
evidence relating to football grounds in Scotland.             The a ss e s so r s ,
therefore, have resorted to the contractor’s basis o f valuation in
determining rateable valu es.

2.   In general, in valuing on the contractor's b asis, th e a ssesso r first
arrives at what is called the effective capital value (ECV) of the lands
and heritages in question, taking due account of any expenditure on their
construction which is unremunerative or redundant so far as th e purposes
of the hypothetical tenant are concerned. He then applies to that figure
a rate of in te r e st, known as th e decapitalisation rate to arrive at an
annual value. Finally, an end allowance by way of deduction or increase
may be made to take account of any special features which have not been
allowed for in the previous sta g es of the calculation.

3.    In determining the ECV the objective is to arrive at a f ip ir e which
rep resen ts the p resent value of the subject in terms of a capital sum as
at the date of the valuation. The usual approach is to take th e historical
co sts o f construction and, after allowing for unremunerative and
redundant expenditure, to adjust th is cost to the date of valuation u sin g
an appropriate index in order to arrive at an estimate o f replacement
cost.     In the case of football stadia, how ever, th e a ssesso rs have
recognised that most of th e se were built at least 60 years ago and that
now even the w ell-supported Clubs could do no better than replace them
with utility stru ctu res with only the most essen tial items included.
Effective capital values are, th erefore, determined on the basis of unit
costs from which all unremunerative        costs and obsolete features    or
facilities have been eliminated. As a result the effective capital values of
football stadia are of the order of only 50-75% of full replacement co st.
In addition,     the decapitalisation rate u sed is below that    applied to
commercial/industrial     su b jects, but   above   that  for  philanthropic
organisations.
4.    In determining the ECV consideration i s , how ever, given to modern
features of     the stadia,    such  as the introduction of all-seated
accommodation. The actual co sts of such modern features are included in
the ECV. Expenditure to meet safety legislation is omitted except where
it also incorporate new featu res.

5.   Although 3 football clubs appealed to the Lands Tribunal for
Scotland against the rateable values determined for their grounds by the
assessor at the 1985 evaluation, the effective capital values were in each
case agreed     by the ratepayer and the a sse sso r .     The  method of
determining ECV has not, therefore, been tested at appeal. The question
for the Courts would presumably be whether th e new features were likely
to increase the rent which the landlord might reasonably exp ect and the
tenant would be willing to p ay.




 H0401238.129
