    HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS Cl- THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER




               PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                          Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B,   B.MED.Sci,    BM. BS, M R C G P .


               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                             At

                 The Memorial Hall,
                     City Hall,
                     Sheffield.

                             On

            Wednesday,    18th April,     1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                 (AFTERNOON SESSION)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                                     J. WARDROBE


                           gentlemen? Would it be very inconvenient for you?  I would
                           like to do what we are planning to do today.  We will be as
                           quick as we can, but as I said, I want to do it properly and I
                           want you to know what we are talking about.  We will listen, I
                           think, to Mr. Wardrobe next, and then we will break for a few
                           minutes and then come back and do Prof. Usher and the two
                           Inquests.  All right?  We will certainly do one of the
                           Inquests.

                                               JAMES WARDROBE Sworn

                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                           Mr. Wardrobe, can you give me your full names, position and
                           qualifications? - A. My name is James Wardrobe.    I am
                           consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine to the Sheffield
                           Health Authority based at the Northern General H o s p i t a l ,
                           Sheffield.

                           And in fact there are two consultants in A & E at the moment?
                           - A. At the moment.  At the time of Hillsborough I was the
                           only one.

                           You wer e the only one.  Could you give your qualifications as
                    D      well, so that we know what you have got? - A. I am a Bachelor
                           of Medicine and Surgery, University of Edinburgh, I hold a
                           Fellowship in General Surgery from the Royal College of
                           Surgeons of Edinburgh and a Fellowship in General Surgery from
                           the Royal C ollege of Surgeons, England.  I also hold the
                           Fellowship in Accident & Emergency Medicine and Surgery from
                           the Royal College of Surgeons and Physicians of Edinburgh.

                    Ed. Mr. Wardrobe, the reason why I have asked you to come is
                        because I want you to very briefly describe the set up or at
                        least what happened at the Northern General so that we can
                        understand a little bit better the problems that you faced,
                        and also what happened to one or two of the cases.  Can you
                        perhaps outline for me, it is quite a big department.  I think
                        you say about 55,000 patients a year.  Is that right? - A.
                        Yes, sir, there are 55,000 attendances per year to the
                        department.

                        Ct. And that is 365 days a year,    is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And I worked that out at about 150 a day.      Would you agree? -
                           A. That is correct, on average.

                        <$. Of those 150, and obviously this is just an average figure,
                    G
                            how m any are admissions? - A. Our admission rate is about 10%
                            of that total.

                           So about 15 per day? - A. yes.

                           Of those 15 how many would you expect to go to the intensive
                           care unit or the coronary care unit? - A. There would be on
                H          average about one seriously ill patient per day.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          19
                                                                            J . WARDROBE


                              So really, quite a small number to intensive care? - A. Who
                              are s eriously ill, yes.

                         3. The others obviously need treatment and help? - A. Yes.

                         3. But they are not life threatening? - A. That is correct.

                              Now, the department is set up with the usual facilities,
                    JJ        including a resuscitation room? - A. That is correct.

                              And the resuscitation room has got how many beds or tables
                              within there? - A. There are two beds in the resuscitation
                              area.

                              So you are really    aiming to be able to cope with two             seriously
                              ill people at any    one time? - A. Yes.

                              On the day in question on the 15th how many doctors were
                              actually on duty, A & E doctors? - A. There were two accident
                              and emergency doctors on duty.

                              That is the average number for the hospital? - A. There are
                              always two on.

                D|a.          Both SHOs or....    - A. Both Senior   House Officers,        yes.

                         3. You carry a bleeper.       Were you on call that day?          - A.    I was on
                            call that day, yes.

                              That does not mean you have got to be at the hospital? - A.
                              No.
                    E    Q. You have got to be contactable? - A. Yes.

                         a.   In fact, you were contacted? - A.      Yes.

                         Q. What time was it? About half-past-3 or so? - A. At about
                            15.23 I was contacted.

                         Q.   And you made your way to the hospital? - A. Yes.

                         Q.   Can you remember about what time you arrived? - A. 15.33.

                         Q.    At that point had any patients arrived then? - A. Yes, and
                              there were three patients in the resuscitation area and three
                              also were in other parts of the department.

                    Q Q. So at that time about six patients had arrived? - A. Yes.

                         Q. And then within the next hour how many patients approximately
                            did you receive? - A. 87 patients.

                         Q. So you got more than half-a-day's work,           on average,     within an
                            hour? - A. Yes.

                H        Q. And of those patients how many went to the coronary care unit
                            - I mean intensive care or coronary care? - A. There were 17


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                            20
                                                                   J. WARDROBE


                         patients went to intensive care u n i t s .

                    Q . So a large number? - A . y e s .

                    G . In addition to that there were also patients who never made it
                        to coronary care, unfortunately, who were dead? - A. That is
                        correct.

                        . And I think you made arrangements - I don't know whether you
                          did it or whether this is part of your planning - that one of
                          the plaster rooms should act as a temporary mortuary.  Is that
                          right? - A. Yes, sir, that is part of the major incident plan
                          for the hospital.

                    Q . So that was a pre-planned arrangement? - A. Yes.

                        . O bviously the department was overrun with patients, I think it
                          would be fair to say? - A. We were extremely busy, especially
•                   ®     initially, yes.

                    Q . And it is probably true to say, is not, Mr. Wardrobe, that in
                        those circumstances yours and everybody else's objective was
                        to try and help those who could be helped? - A. That is
                        correct.
                D
                    Q . Paper came a very long second? - A. I am afraid that is
                        correct.

                     Q . I am not in any sense criticising you for it.  I am just
                         trying to establish the facts so that we know.  The upshot of
                         that is that documentation for at least some of the patients
                         either does not exist or is not adequate.  Is that right? - A.
                    E That is correct, yes.
                    Q . Now, w e will come to the individuals who have died in a
                        moment, but you I think, having initially had to help with the
                        actual resuscitation of individuals, but as soon as some more
                        doctors came down from various parts of the hospital you in
                        fact cast yourself in a different role, did not you? - A. That
                        is correct, yes.
                    F
                     Q . And what was that role? - A. My role in the major incident
                         plan is to stand at the ambulance receiving door and see every
                         patient as they come through that door, and to try and
                         categorise those patients into those that require immediate
                         care to safe life, those who have obviously serious injuries
                         and require admission, those who have got minor injuries but
                         require treatment to the minor injuries area, and those who
                    G are    dead.

                    Q . And the technical word for that is ’'triage*', is not it? -
                        A. That is correct, yes.

                    Q . And really the objective is to sort out those patients for
                        whom the limited number of doctors/nurses have got to be aimed
                H       at? - A. Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       21
                                                                  J, WARDROBE


                         With the hope of doing the most good? - A. Yes.
                £ ■
                    Q    And people who have only got a minor injury, and that might
                         mean a broken arm, would have to wait? - A. Yes.

                    Q.   Painful or not.   - A. Yes.

                    Q    If there is a life threatening situation? - A. Absolutely.

                    %    I think part of the major incident planning is that people
                         should get tagged with different coloured labels? - A. That is
                         correct.

                    Q. And they are given Majex numbers,     I think is what you call it?
                       - A. That is correct.

                    ©.   In fact, the different coloured labels were never used.          You
                         just used white labels, I think? - A. Yes.

                    Q.   And would I be right in saying that in the end everybody did
                         get a Majex number? - A. Eventually, some time after the
                         event.

                    Q. They may not have got them straight away,      but they did in the
                D      end finish up with numbers? - A. Yes.

                    Q. So it is possible to identify the people who died,        and I think
                        excluding Adam Spearritt and Lee N i c o l , there were 11.   Is
                        that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

                    Q. By their Majex numbers? - A. Yes.

                    ^3. Have you got a copy of your statement? - A. Yes,        I have.

                    Q. Before we come to that I just wanted to dispose of one other
                       matter.  The people who dealt with the numbering once the
                       system worked are medical records officers? - A. That is
                       correct, y e s .

                         It is their task.    They are not medics? - A. No.

                    Q    They are admin people, but it is their task to do the
                         labelling and the administration so one knows who is who         and
                         where they are? - A . Y e s .

                    Q    And of course, they had to deal with all the live ones as well
                         as all the people who had died? - A. That is correct, yes.

                    Q    If we turn to your statement and in particular I think it is
                         your statement of the 6th.  I want to go through one or two of
                         these because I have a few problems with some of the
                         information and I want to be clear in my own mind.   Majex No.
                         2 is Lee Nicol? - A. Yes.

                    Q. And he is a lad who actually went up to the intensive care
                H      unit? - A. That is correct.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      22
                                                                        J. WARDROBE


                         . And there are notes about him,       proper hospital notes and
                           records? - A. Yes.

                         . So we will leave him.      Philip Hammond,    who is No. 8, is that
                           right? - A. Yes.

                         . He was at the hospital because he had a Majex number? - A.
                           Yes.
                    B
                         . But there is no documentary evidence as to what happened? - A
                           That is correct.

                        O. Except that there are some ECG electrode marks on him? - A.
                           The post mortem report did state there were three ECG
                           electrodes attached to his chest.

                    0      And you can attempt to help m e with this by trying to explain
                           how that could have happened.   Could you tell me what your
                           best guess, shall we say, is? - A. In the initial part of the
                           incident I was sending people who came in with a cardiac
                           arrest, patients undergoing mouth to mouth resuscitation and
                           external cardiac massage, I sent them to the resuscitation
                           room initially to see whether they could have a chance of
                           being brought round, to start the heart going.     The fact that
                D          the only post mortem evidence were three ECG e l e c t r o d e s , I
                           think possibly he was sent to the resuscitation room but the
                           ECG showed no cardiac activity, and because of the great
                           pressure on the resuscitation beds at that time he would be
                           sent to the mortuary.

                        <p. To the mortuary,   yes.   Then No. 9 is Barry Bennett,    I believe?
                            - A . Yes.
                    E
                        <p. And again, it is exactly the same, there is a needle mark but
                            no record in the hospital? - A. No record in the notes, no.

                        <1. Victoria Hicks,    No. 20. - A. Yes.

                        (I. There is obviously post mortem evidence that something was
                            attempted for this young lady? - A. Yes.

                        <j>. And there is in fact, I believe, quite a lot of medical
                             evidence that people tried? - A. Yes.

                        <J>. Are there actually any properly written up notes in respect of
                             this girl? - A. There are no properly written up notes, but I
                             know from other people that she was in the resuscitation room
                             and had intensive resuscitation attempts.
                    G
                        <J). So although the notes are defective you are satisfied from the
                             information you have been given by the doctors that attempts
                             were made.  We will find out later quite a lot of attempts
                             were made. - A. Yes.

                        4>. No. 21 is Stephen Harrison? - A. Yes.
                H (p.      And as far as you can find there is absolutely nothing,          either


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          23
                                                                       J. WARDROBE


                           post mortem or in the hospital r e c o r d s .   Is that right? - A
                           No.

                     Cl.   I beg your pardon.  There is a medical record.  I misread it.
                           - A. There is no definite evidence in medical records, sir,
                           but from the post mortem report it would appear that Mr.
                           Harrison received intensive resuscitation efforts.

                    B<>.   Let us just get this right, because I have confused myself.
                           There is post mortem evidence of intensive therapeutic
                           efforts? - A. Yes.

                     O.    Is there a medical record as well? - A. And there is evidence
                           in medical records, yes.

                           When you say "medical r e c o r d ” , are you saying it is actually
                           in the notes? - A. In the notes, yes.

                        0. So there are proper hospital notes which actually refer to
                           this person by name, so to speak, or at least by number? - A.
                           Yes.

                  <). Adam Spearritt, No. 29, you know I think that attempts were
                      made to help this lad, and he in fact he went all the way up
                D     to intensive care? - A. Yes.

                      0. And unfortunately arrested there, but I have actually seen his
                         notes.  In fact, I have got them here, and I can't find
                         anything in them, and yet you seem to say that there is
                         evidence in the medical notes.  Can you just with regard to
                         that? - A. There is nothing in the medical notes but there is
                         the hospital major incident list which notes all the patients
                    E    who were admitted on that day, and that list clearly states
                         that he went to the intensive care unit.

                        <3. I see.   When you are saying there is definite evidence in the
                            medical notes you are basing it on the fact somebody has made
                            a record in your register, so to speak, what happened to him?
                            - A . Yes.

                        3. But you could not from that register say precisely what was
                           done? - A. No.

                        3. What about No. 30, Gary Jones?  Is the position the same
                           there? - A. No, there is evidence in the hospital notes and
                           from the post mortem record that Mr. Jones received intensive
                           resuscitation efforts.
                    G
                        3. So he must have come into the resuscitation unit? - A. Yes.

                        3. No. 61, Stephen O'Neill, there is some evidence from post
                           mortem but nothing in your notes? - A. Yes.

                        3. Now, the one that gives me a bit of problem with is Paul
                           Brady, No. 62.  I believe there is a statement from a Dr.
                H          Jacobs? - A. Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                           24
                                                                       J. WARDROBE


                         Cl. Or Jacob.    - A. Jacobs.

                         <p.     Who states that he attempted to do certain things but was
                                unsuccessful? - A. Yes.

                         <J).    Mr. Jacobs I think is actually a consultant,   is not he?   - A.
                                He has recently become a consultant, yes.

                        B°      He is a fairly senior doctor anyway? - A. Oh, yes.

                         Cl.    But there is nothing in the notes? - A. No.
j
                         Cp.     And there is nothing on the PM findings either?   - A. That   is
                                correct, y es.

                         (J>. And I think you said you thought he was triaged as dead? - A.
                              Yes .

                         c|l.    Is that in fact possible, because if Mr. Jacobs did
                                resuscitation on him, if he had been triaged as dead he would
                                have been diverted to the post mortem room, would not he? - A.
|                               That is correct, yes.

i                        <p. Whereas if Mr. Jacobs worked on him he must have been diverted
                    D        somewhere else? - A. Yes.

                         cjh Can you help me on that?  What do you think actually happened?
                             - A. It is very hard to be sure, given the circumstances.   I
                             know that I did send at least four people to the mortuary in
                             the latter stages of the incident coming in as dead because of
                             the great pressure on the resuscitation area, and I made the
                             statement only with the evidence I had before me - that was
                        E    medical notes - and that given to me, the post mortem reports.
                             Usually if someone has had resuscitation attempts there will
                             be a needle, ECG electrodes, some indication that there has
                             been resuscitation.  I can't explain it.

                         (j). What I am trying to find out from you is are you saying if Mr.
                              Jacobs did do resuscitation on this young man could he had
                              been triaged as dead? - A. no.

                         Cl. He could not have been,     could he? - A. No.

                         qi. That is really all I am trying to establish.       No.   63 is David
                             Thomas.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

                                And there is no evidence at all about him, and you conclude
                                that this must have been one of the people whom you triaged
                        G       as dead? - A. Yes.

                                No. 64 is John Gilhooley, and again we have got post mortem
                                e vidence but nothing else. Is that right? - A. Yes.

                       cji. Philip Steele, No. 99, is in the same situation as Paul Brady.
                            Dr. Caulder and Dr. Davidson I think were involved with this
                    jj      man;  not for very long;  but they were involved.  Would
                            accept that that is correct? - A. If they say so, yes.


    J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        25
                                                                         J. WARDROBE



                              If they say so, and if they do say that would it be right to
                              say he could not have been triaged as dead? - A. Yes.

                        C'. Because he would have been in a different part? - A. Yes,             the
                            resuscitation unit.

                        CL No. 119, Arthur H o r r o c k s , I believe Dr. Nidu - do you know Dr.
                    B         Nidu,   a lady doctor? - A. Yes,   I do.

                        Cl. I think had something to do with this gentleman.  Again, if
                            that is so could he have been triaged as dead or not? - A.
                            No, if someone underwent a resuscitation attempt he would
                            not have been.

                        Cl.   He would not have been triaged as d e a d . That is not say he
                              was not in fact dead, but you would not have triaged him as
                              such? - A. No.
•                   c
                        Cl. Now, traumatic asphyxia is not something,        fortunately,   you
                            have many cases of? - A. No.

                        Cl. But you had quite a lot on this day? - A. Yes.

                    Do.       And I think you observed that from reconstructions of what you
                              have seen - what was your observation with regard to people
                              who came in in cardiac arrest, that is what I want to ask? -
                              A. Some people who came in in cardiac arrest we were able to
                              get the heart going, but unfortunately in the three cases we
                              did that none of these patients survived.  The longest that
                              one survived was the young boy, Lee Nicol, who unfortunately
                              was brain dead.
                    E
                        <j. Would it be fair to say that everybody who came in in cardiac
                            arrest in fact died? - A. Yes.

                              We all know about cardiac arrest and heart massage.     Are you
                              saying then that if a person is in cardiac arrest there is not
                              any point in attempting it? - A. No.     There is a great move
                              afoot at the present to encourage people to perform cardiac
                    F         arrest (s i c ) because in a patient having a cardiac arrest in
                              the street, for instance, then given the ideal circumstances
                              then there is a reasonable chance of that patient being
                              resuscitated, but it does require a lot of effort and a lot of
                              infrastructure in the community to back that up.

                        o. So what you are saying, it can work in ideal situations? - A.
                           In ideal situations it can work, yes.
                    G
                        o.    Is there any difference between a person who arrests, say,
                              because of myocardial infarct as opposed to somebody who
                              arrests because of traumatic asphyxia as to the chances of
                              resuscitation? - A. I would say that I have no experience
                              personally of resuscitating anyone from traumatic asphyxia who
                              has had a cardiac arrest, but it is a very rate condition.
                H             But also I know of no case reports in the literature where
                              that has occurred.  I think perhaps the other situation where


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                           26
                                                                        .T         wardrobe



                         Dne has a similar clinical problem iw<?ul * * * J * * * ° f |
                         asthmatic who c a n ’t get air xnto thexr j h e s t i ^ r other ^
                         reasons.  In my experience I have been able                occurred
                         heart in these cases, but agaxn if the          _       th  effects on
                         outwith hospital these patients have dxed from the
                         the brain of the hypoxia.
                         in other words, what you are saying is if you have a ^ r d i a c
               Q.
                         arrest which is associated with hypoxia then that is a much
                    B    m ore serious situation than cardiac arrest on its own?     A.
                         Yes.

                                THE CORONER:      M r . Fraser?

                                           Cross-Examined by MR^        FRASER:

                         Tucit very briefly, over what period did this disaster Plan
                &        Just very prxeixy,           o f f p r t l ast7 Obviously we know
                         which the hospxtal put xnto effect last.                   h t time
                         you arrived at the hospital shortly after 3.30.        At what time,
                         if at all, was the disaster plan stood down        as xt ^  e_    _
                         The disaster plan was not officially stood down as far as I am
                         aware.
                         It was an ongoing thing in terms of treatment? - A. Yes.

                         Do you know what time it was put into effect? - A . The
                Q.
                         hospital disaster plan was put xnto effect at 15.*7.

                          So within 20 minutes of the game having been shopped some ^
                    Q.
                          little distance away the hospxtal was xn full s   g.

                          T am sorry  I will rephrase that.  The hospital was alerted
                    E-    that it was going to go on to full swing? - A  The hospxtal
                          was alerted at that time that a major xncxdent was takxng
                          place.
                          And you were called in? - A. I was actually called in prior to
                    Q
                          that.
                          I appreciate that.  Once the decision is made ^ow long does xt
                          take to put the plan into effect? - A. That will depend on
                          circumstances.  In this circumstance we had to try an      pu
                          the plan into effect at the same txme as b f Y 1"®     tre
                          large numbers of seriously ill p a t x e n t s , whxch
                          compound the problem.

                           I appreciate that, and hence the learned Coroner /»
                           about paperwork coining a poor second, and I think on £ehal
                                 families that is understandable xn the cxrcumstanc   .
                           What comes over clearly is that there was a f a s t e r p an put
                           into effect within 20 minutes of the dxsaster,
                           i S c h hopSfully operated to the best of the resources
                           available.    Can you tell me briefly what extra Jjaffx]ng
                           brought in once the disaster plan is put xnto eff      ^      •
                           pivp ug an idea of the numbers xnvolved? - A. The numD
                H
                           thinkV givingt an instance,’t h e r e ^ e r e ^   2 5   r anaesthetistsm involved


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                              27
                                                                                 J. WARDROBE


                           in a very short space of time in the disaster plan, and these
                           very skilled doctors were essential in treating the effects of
                           hypoxia especially in the intensive care unit, and there are
                           not man y hospitals have 25 anaesthetists in t o t a l . So we were
                           fortunate in having them, but the numbers who responded to the
                           incident ran into h u n d r e d s .

                     (J. I am most grateful to you.              Thank you.
                    B                              Further by THE C O R O N E R :

                           So within a very short there were an awful lot of people
                           there? - A. Yes, sir.

                     d>. Well,      a relatively short time,          anyway.     - A. Yes.

                    Co     Can we be a bit more precise.  When did you have 25
                           anaesthetists present, approximately? - A. Approximately
                           within two hours.

                           Within two hours.   So it did take a little while to get a full
                           complement? - A. Yes.   There would be an initial rush and then
                           I am not sure when the   last anaesthetist arrived.

                D               THE CORONER:   Is everything clear, members of the Jury?
                           Yes?  When we are at the Medico-Legal Centre I won't have to
                           sit with my back to you.  I am very sorry about that.

                                Ladies and gentlemen, what we are going to do is to rise
                           for a few minutes because we need a break, and then, Prof.
                           Usher, we will listen to you, if we may, and go from your
                           introduction, so to speak, straight into the Inquest.
                    E
                                                     (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )

                                THE CORONER:    Members of the Jury, I understand you had
                           difficulty hearing me.    I apologise.  At the Medico-Legal
                           centre it will be easier for all of us, but if you can't hear
                           then - who is the Foreman - then get out and shout.    Do
                           something to attract my attention, because I want you to be
                           able to participate and to hear.

                                    Right,   Prof. Usher?

                                                   PROF. ALAN USHER Sworn

                                                        Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                        O. Good afternoon, Prof. Usher, before we begin I want to tell
                           you one thing.   You have just taken the oath, but in a few
                           minutes I am going to ask you to take another one, because
                           what I am asking you to do now is to talk in general t e r m s ,
                           and then I want you to take the oath in respect of the PMs
                           which you dealt with, just so that you know why I am doing
                           that. - A . Yes.

                        (3. Prof.    Usher, you are Alan Usher,          that is right? - A. Yes, sir.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                                28
