                                                   QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group                        0 9 DEC 1997
                                    cc    K          K -'c U w i
                                           | UOt fDOwV-l n

                                           \jr -     o ' E>r«<2 n
                                              P &~CS\       ^


                                              JW*     G -ra r\u u s *r
                                               Mr         P^Ojn

                                                          2 > c x lv



                                                   JsV~     G I—» Pponaui


Thank you for your letter of 3 0 November about the terms of reference for the
Hillsborough Scrutiny. I am grateful to you for setting out your concerns, and I
hope I can provide some reassurance.

It is right that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has no formal powers to overturn the
decision of the Divisional Court. He is not sitting in a formal judicial capacity,
and only a higher court could in practice reverse the decision of another court. It
is his role, however, to draw to the attention of the Attorney General matters
which would be relevant to the Attorney's statutory responsibilities. That would
include the question of whether the Attorney should give his consent to an
application for a new inquest. That would be the proper legal route by which an
outcome different to that in the Divisional Court might be achieved.

I cannot of course, at this stage say w hat Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's views on
that issue will be nor w hat decision the Attorney General might subsequently
take. I can assurance you, however, that no outcome has been ruled out. After
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has reported, the decisions about any further action
will be taken by me and, in relation to their statutory responsibilities, by the
Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions, or the Chief Constable.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is considering whether there is any evidence which,
had it been available, would have been material to the outcome of any of the
previous proceedings. W ith any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the
course of time some new information may become available which was not
known at the relevant time, but that does not always mean that the previous
outcomes would have been any different. W e have to be careful that any re-
opening of previous proceedings is merited, and therefore that any new
information is not simply new, but also material. I do not think that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith is looking for any particular party to prove a case. His purpose is
to consider any claims or evidence which interested parties wish to put before
him and to form an impartial view about whether any of that calls into question
w h at has gone before. He has made clear that he will look equally rigorously at
all the information presented to him, whether that information comes from
individuals or official bodies. I know that the 3 :1 5pm cut off tim e, which is of
such concern to you, is one of the main issues which he has been considering.

I am sorry that you were unhappy with the letter of 3 0 June from a chief crown
prosecutor. W hat she says in that letter about the material so far presented
simply reflects w hat I said in my oral statement at the House. I think that the
letter was intended to assure you that the CPS would consider very carefully
anything which might emerge from the scrutiny. It is unfortunate that it gave
the wrong impression, but w hat Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might say will
certainly not be limited by the view of the CPS at that time.

As you know, I believe that the present police disciplinary procedures are
unsatisfactory for a number of reasons. The disciplinary system is currently the
subject of an inquiry by the House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee.
W e expect them to report in the New Year.

As I stressed in my letter of 4 December, the management of the scrutiny is
entirely a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the timescale is a m atter for
him to decide. W hat happens after he reports will be a matter for me, and for
those who have specific statutory responsibilities to discharge.


                          /'M ^ .




                                    JACK STRAW
