                                                                                                                       1 7 FEB 1993

                                                                                                   DAVIES
                                                                                                   ARNOLD
    Mr P Pugh                                                                                       COOPER
    Police Policy Directorate
                                                                                                           SOLICITORS
    50 Queen Anne Gate
    London SW11 9AT

    BY FACSIMILE



    O ur Ref:      18/22.1315/ral                                                                            13 February 1998
    Your Ref:




*   Dear Sir

    HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

    We are instructed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited who have forwarded your letter
    of 9 February.

    As you may be aware, this firm represented the Club in relation to the earlier Hillsborough enquiry
    and indeed the litigation that arose out o f the tragic events at Hillsborough. Unfortunately the
    Partner who handled this matter has since died and that hinders to a certain extent our ability to
    respond to your request and in particular to respond to it within the timescale you require.

    We well appreciate that the Home Secretary having received Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report will
    want to publish this as quickly as possible and we can see no basis upon which we could or should
    object to the publication o f that report; what we cannot do, though, is advise our clients that the
    Halcrow 1990 report be made public, in circumstances where it has not previously been made
    public given that we are not in a position to appreciate the implications o f that report either on its
    own or within the terms o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny.

    What we would suggest as a sensible way to proceed is to say that we will review the contents of the
    Halcrow report in light o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report once that is available and furthermore
    we would be happy to receive any requests for sight o f that report from any interested parties should
    any arise. You will appreciate that in circumstances where the Partner who previously handled this
    matter has died, we are not able to respond either more quickly nor more positively than this but
    trust that our offer to proceed in this way is considered constructive.




    S:\NROCHEZ\CLIENTS\12PUGH.LET
                                                                                                                     Cont.../...
                                                 A list o f partners is available for   London               6-8 Bouverie Street
                                                 inspection a t the London office.      M anchester           London EC4Y 8D D

                                                 Davies Arnold Cooper is regulated      Newcastle            Telephone +44 (0) 171 936 2222
                                                                                        M ad rid             Facsimile +44 (0) 171 936 2020
                                                 by the Law Society in the conduct
                                                                                        Stansted              LDE 172
                                                 o f investment business
                                                                                                             em ail d ad o n 9 d a c .c o .u k
                                                                                        Associate Office
                                                                                        Brussels
 Page 2                                                                               13 February 1998


 On that basis, it would be most helpful to receive a copy o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report as
 soon as the same is available, particularly if it be the case that we are likely to receive requests for
 sight o f the Halcrow report.


 Yours faithfully


 DAVIES ARN<                       CO O PER




S:\NROCH EZ\CLIENTS\12PUG H. LET
