                                          cc Mr    Chilcot
                                             Mr    Boys Smith
                                             Ms    Ransford
                                             Mr    Mullarky
                                                  (Accounts Branch)

Mr Addison
FI Division

HILLSBOROUGH: PAYMENT OF SPECIAL GRANT

Thank you for your note of 7 September.

2. Peter Brook has now written to me about the payment to South
Yorkshire Police Authority in respect of Hillsborough, and I
attach a copy of his letter. As you will see he has reminded me
that any call on the contingency fund - however organised - has
to be justified against the criterion of urgency in the public
interest.   Bearing in mind that for the moment we are talking
about a sum of only £120,000 or thereabouts for South Yorkshire,
the delayed payment of which is unlikely to be crucial to their
finances, I cannot see that we could justify immediate payment
against the     criterion for securing an advance from       the
Contingencies   Fund. I am not thereforeminded to go back to the
Treasury on this point, at least at this stage. We also have to
bear in mind that we do not yet know what the full cost of the
special grant   will be.  We cannot keep raiding theContingency
Fund as and when the bills come in.

3.    What I propose      is that once we have received South
Yorkshire's assurance that they are going to pay the present
invoice from West Midlands, we in FD2 will inform them of what
we propose to do and make arrangements with Accounts Branch to
pay to them the 51% specific grant element of the sum (totalling
£855,475). We would explain to South Yorkshire that the special
grant element would be paid as soon as we have the necessary
Supplementary Estimate approved by Parliament.

4.    I cannot see that South Yorkshire would have legitimate
grounds for complaint about this basis for proceeding.       They
cannot expect us to      pay out   special grant in advance of
Parliamentary approval.   If however South Yorkshire make a fuss
about being kept waiting for the balance of £120,000, I would be
prepared to consider the possibility of advancing payment of the
normal monthly grant advance (something over £3.5M) by a couple
of days. This would enable South Yorkshire to offset any interest
incurred on the £120,000 by allowing them to earn a bit more than
usual   on the grantpayment.           However I would welcome
Mr Mullarky's views on the practicality of such a step. We also
have to be careful that we do not appear to be trying to pay
special grant by the back door without informing Parliament.




FINANCE DIVISION 2                 N A NAGLER
12 September 1989
