                               10 DOWNING STREET
                                  LONDON SW1A 2AA
  From the Private Secretary
                                                    18 March 1




     Thank you for your further letters of 18 and 26 February to
the Prime Minister about the events at Hillsborough.

     I can appreciate your ongoing concern that police officers
may be improperly allowed to retire early and thus might be seen
as avoiding a disciplinary hearing. However, there is often a
lot of misunderstanding about the purpose of police disciplinary
hearings. Their purpose is to examine allegations that the
officer has not done his or her job properly as a police
officer. If the officer has not, there is a wide range of
punishments available, including a caution, reprimand, fine,
reduction in salary, demotion, requirement to resign as well as
outright dismissal. As you will see from this, dismissal or
requirement to resign is the heaviest punishment which can be
awarded by disciplinary hearings, for the very worst offence
which an officer could have committed. As a result, it is
difficult to argue that an officer should not be allowed to
retire on ill-health grounds, whenever disciplinary proceedings
are outstanding. In any case the most serious complaints against
police officers involve criminal offences which cannot be evaded
by resignation.

     As I said in my last letter, I am afraid it would not be
proper for me to comment on the particular case of
Mr. Duckenfield. Decisions as to his medical retirement would
have been for the local police authority and not for the
Government.

     What the Government has done, in response to the initiative
by the House of Commons Select Committee on Home Affairs, is to
take steps to remind chief officers of police of their powers to
make sure that officers, when the reality of their illness is in
doubt, do appear before a disciplinary hearing when called on to
do so. If the medical evidence that the officer is too ill to
appear is not good enough, the hearing can go ahead without him.
This should be a considerable help in making sure that officers
are dealt with under discipline wherever appropriate.

       I know that the Prime Minister fe e ls the deepest sympathy
for all those whose relatives and friends were caught up in the
Hillsborough disaster. Nevertheless most of the decisions which
are of such concern to you are not ones for Ministers and I do
not think any useful purpose would be served by a meeting. You
may be aware that the whole matter was discussed in the House of
Commons as recently as 14 January and I enclose a copy of the
record of that discussion in case you have not already seen it.




                        HARK ADAMS




Mrs. Doreen Jones
