MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:       5 December 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith



VISIT TO SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


I attach the following material which I brought back from my visit to the South Yorkshire
police archive in Sheffield on Wednesday -

        *        a full list of those who died, with body numbers (may possibly be useful)

        *        an ‘action record print’ about the theft of two videos from the Hillsborough
                 ground on the night of the disaster. We were told that this crime was
                 unsolved, but you asked me to get the report of the investigation. This
                 apparently is it. It confirms that the tapes were not found and no collars were
                  felt. It is pretty useless, but I am struck by DCI Tope (WMP’s) comment that
                 press and fans had ‘virtually unrestricted access’ to the stadium. Despite the
                  overall chaos I do not think that is true of the club security room at the time
                 the tapes would have gone missing.

        *        a note about police deployment on the day, which tells us that a total of 1,383
                  officers were involved in policing the match and the ensuing post-disaster
                 work. This consists of 1,122 officers who were originally down to work on it -
                  including officers who went nowhere near the stadium, such as specially
                  deployed traffic police and officers who covered the town centre - and 261
                  officers pulled in from other work on Operational Support when the balloon
                  went up.

        *        statements from JOLLY, O’KEEFFE and OYITCH, all spectators who passed
                  out in the pens but survived. You asked for these a little while ago, along
                  with similar statements from other people to whom this happened - 1 can
                  arrange further searches for those if you like. I researched Gary OYITCH’s
                  statement in a little detail. He mentions Inga Shah and Marianne MacCabe,
                  both of whom were killed ( and whom he knew). The archive holds gruesome
                  press photos of them being pushed up against the wire, in which Gary Oyitch
                  can also be picked out. His statement is on both of their ‘body files’, he


A:\S-S\036.DOC
                 gave evidence at the main inquest, and he was mentioned in the mini inquests
                 on both Mrs Shah and Miss MacCabe.

         *       we discussed the photos I picked up in Sheffield.


 I have also given you the letter from Professor Scraton which arrived this morning.




C F BONE




A:\S-S\036.DOC
