                                                     hA&yjb              ^
                                               (Lr            H   '/ r
hs.8.9/bushlcc.dm                              *              /^J


Siiimnayv note of conversation with Mr Norman Bush
Liverpool City Council; Hillsborough Inquiry - Interim Report

1.     Mr Bush telephoned on 9 August.   His main purpose was to
request a copy of the Home Office circular sent out last Friday
but which he had not received.   I promised him a copy (now sent).
He said he would also write to us about the Interim Report.

2.   In Mr Bush's view, whilst not critical of the       Report in
total, it was a little "over the top".  Two issues in   particular
concerned him.     The first was recommendation 2         requiring
reassessment   of  standing   capacities   in  "pens"    and then
arbitrarily reducing that figure by 15% was wrong he     felt, and
illogical.

3.   The effect of this recommendation in the case Anfield and
Goodison Park would be as follows:    Anfield kop would be reduced
from 21,500 to 16,000; Goodison Park would be reduced from 14,000
to 9,000.   In the case of Artfield about 1,000 of this figure was
taken up by a new arrangement whereby the club and the local
authority had agreed a "safety corridor" between the terracing
and   thepitch.  Even so the reduction was severe.

4.     Mr Bush told me that he had many years of experience in
sportsgrounds safety dating back to before the Safety of
Sportgrounds Act 1975.     Thereafter the now defunct Merseyside
County Council used his Department to certificate the Liverpool
grounds.    In his opinion a safe packing density on the terraces
was 58 per 10 square metres (the underlying assumption here was
that the ground conditions justified that such a high density).
Recommendation 2 had a double effect therefore in that the
existing capacities would have to be reduced firstly to 54 per
10 square metres     (as recommended  in the Green Guide)     and
thereafter reduced by a further 15%.     In Mr Bush's opinion to
reduce much below 58 per 10 square metres was unnecessary because
the fans chose to stand tightly packed and anything up to an
estimated 65 per 10 square metres behind the goal.    In his view
they preferred to be tightly packed and a reduction in the
overall capacity would simply mean that there would be larger
gaps on other parts of the kop.

5.   I explained that Lord Justice Taylor had made clear that his
recommendation to reduce standing capacities was a temporary
measure and that the 15% was intended to be an additional margin
of error for safety. The recommendation had been accepted by the
Home Office as a temporary measure but we would not in any event
subscribe to a packing density of higher than 54 per 10 square
metres as stated in the Green Guide.     I explained that in our
view, subject to the 15% cut, that was the maximum density at
which a terrace should be calculated.    I acknowledged his point
about the problems of distribution of spectators on the terrace.
6.   Allied to the cut in     spectator capacity Mr Bush felt that
the police might have some    anxiety over what to do with anything
up to 5,000 spectators who,    as a result, might have to be locked
out of Anfield from time to   time.   I offered no solution to this.

7.   Mr Bush's second point related to police responsibility. He
felt that the Inquiry had not helped matters and if anything had
worsened the situation. His view, which he had expressed to both
the Liverpool clubs, was that it was they who had responsibility
for safety within their ground and not the police.   He felt this
was a view shared by the police.  I did not dissent from this but
drew his attention to the Inquiry's findings a position which
existed at Hillsborough; and if it were accepted by all parties
that the police had no responsibility within Goodison Park or
Anfield it should perhaps form the basis of any written agreement
between the clubs and the police.

8.   An interesting side issue arose in the conversation about
the desire by the Liverpool Club Chairman for Anfield to convert
to all seater.   If I understood Mr Bush correctly the club were
in the process of costing not just the capital expenditure but
also the revenue implications which might mean an increase of
25-30% in admission prices for the kop.     Even so the idea was
still thought to be tenable.




                                          D J MOULD
                                          G2 Division

9 August 1989



cc   Mr Greenwood
     Mr F Smith, F8 ^
