                                   G w ent Am bulance Service
                        Headquarters: Mill Street, Caerleon, N ew port, Gw ent. NP6 1XG
                                                                 Administration: 0633 421521
                                                                      Operations: 0633 420283
                                All correspondence should be addressed to: Chief Ambulance Officer.



Our ref   LP/LMK                      Your ref                                                Date
                                                                                    19 April 1989

The Right Honourable Mrs M Thatcher
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
Whitehall
LONDON

Dear Prime Minister

I am saddened by the disaster which occured at Sheffield last Saturday.
Under the circumstances the treatment afforded the casualties was carried
 ut by volunteers and members of the public, and without wishing to
Comment on the value of such treatment I feel that the attendance of
professional staff would greatly enhance the availability of specialist
treatment.

There should be a statutory obligation for the professional ambulance
service to provide resources to treat casualties at a minutes notice,
both inside and outside the premises.

Additionally the ambulance service should carry out training for football
stadium staff in basic life support resuscitation techniques. My own
service regularly train junior doctors, nurses and members of the public
in such techniques, throughout the year at a minimal cost to the Health
Service.

 I can well understand the difficulties in reaching conclusions following
 such a disaster by sifting through the evidence of the enquiry.

 I have not had the opportunity to study the final report following the
 Bradford Football Fire Disaster, but note that no recommendations or
 legislation was forthcoming regarding the attendance and treatment of
 casualties should such a disaster occur again.

 I feel it is essential that this matter is brought to the attention of
 the appropriate Health Service Minister. I am writing a separate letter
 to the Chairman of the Football Association.

 The proposals outlined in this letter are my own personal thoughts, but
 I will ensure that the matter is brought to the attention of both the
 Regional Ambulance Officers' Committee and the Secretary of the Association
 of Chief Ambulance Officers'.

 Yours faithfully



          "        J-

 L Porter
 Chief Ambulance Officer

                                                                                           til j f
                           GmxnthbMAidmily
