                                                      YCdsP>
                                                                    '(uX j i


From          HRS 6 I MOODY             cc.   Mr Le Vay
              F2 DIVISION
              273 2621
              2 August 1991


Mr Brown
FI Division

HILLSBOROUGH DISCIPLINE PROCEEDINGS

Thank you for your note of 29 July about whether the funding of
legal representation for Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray would attract police grant.

2.   The issue of who pays for officers' legal representation at
disciplinary proceedings has a long history.     We have always
resisted paying such costs, save for ACPO ranks where their
seniority and the possibility of political persecution by their
police authority makes payment out of public funds appropriate.
In particular, the Federation has just been trying hard to
persuade the Home Office to pay the costs of officers whose
disciplinary proceedings have been directed by the PCA. ^ It is
clear therefore that this is not a trend we would wish to
encourage and I am content with the terms of your proposed reply
to South Yorkshire.
3.   I am however aware of the difficulty involved.     While the
Federation   have    large   funds   at   their   disposal,   the
Superintendents'   Association has not.           As a result,
Superintendents normally insure themselves against the risk of
being involved in litigation.       I understand that these two
officers took this precaution, but have already used their
insurance in being represented before the Taylor Inquiry.       I
have   discussed the     issues both with Mr Wall         of the
Superintendents' Association and with Miss Maureen Oades of the
South Yorkshire Police Authority.       It seems that the Police
Authority, despite the terms of Home Office Circular 77/87,
decided that the officers ought to use their insurance to cover
the cost of their being represented before the Taylor Inquiry.
It is because of this that they are in some difficulty in funding
their representation before the disciplinary proceedings.       I
pointed out to Miss Oades that, while disciplinary proceedings
did not come within the terms of Home Office Circular 77/87, the
officers would not have needed assistance had their insurance not
been used up before the Taylor Inquiry, which did come within the
terms of the Home Office circular.       Were South Yorkshire to
allow the officers the cost of their representation before the
Taylor Inquiry, they would have no difficulty over being legally
represented at their disciplinary tribunal.


                                      MRS G I MOODY

GIM-578.000
