                     With Compliments
                       N. A. NAGLER

Finance Division ;
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT

Tel:   01-273-3472                      &
                                             cc.   Mr Nagler
                                                   Mr Sandiford


Mr Malone-Lee


CONTINGENCY FUNDS

Thank you for your note of 4 May seeking advice about holding a
contingency reserve.

The Prison Department has on a number of occasions considered the
possibility of creating such a reserve. We have always come down
against seeking to do so because, by definition, it was not
possible to determine how much should be put aside. Moreover,
had we decided to do so, the sum that could have been made
available without prejudice to other Prison Service activities
would have been so small that it would not have made a
significant contribution to a sizeable bill for an emergency.
There would also be difficulties in administering a contingency
fund. There would always be those who could make a good case for
additional expenditure and it would be a difficult judgement mid­
way through the financial year whether to hold back expenditure
for a possible emergency or to spend the money on pressing and
deserving projects. Moreover, to hold such a fund goes against
the grain of delegated budgets and budgetary control.

As you indicated in your note, the Prison Department has had
considerable experience in meeting unforeseen expenditure.   We
have generally been able to cope by re-ordering priorities from
within the building programme to deal with repairs and
replacement of equipment following a major riot. Police cells,
too, have often given rise to unplanned expenditure and in some
years it has been possible to meet these costs by re-ordering our
priorities. That said, when we have found it impossible to cover
the additional costs and have made a bid for a Supplementary
Estimate we have, on the whole, found the Treasury receptive. We
suspect this has been so because we have been able to demonstrate
to their satisfaction that we have made every effort to reduce
the call on the reserve by enforced savings. Generally, we take
the view that the Treasury would expect us to absorb additional,
unforeseen, expenditure up to about i% of the voted provision
which, in the case of the Prison Department, amounts to around £5
million.  But we examine each case on its merits and the
decisions taken are clearly very much dependent on the time of
the year when the need arises.




                        MISS C J STEWART
                           22 May 1989
P9 Division
732 Cleland House
217 6303
