                                                    Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                    Chief Executives Office,
                                                    Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                           Municipal Buildings,
                                                    Dale Street,
                                                    LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                    Telephone: 051 - 2£5 2 3 3 4 /3
                                                    Fax: 236 2047
                                                    DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                    Your ref

                                                    Our ref

                                                    Date   10th November, 19S9,

The Secretary,
Hillsborough Inquiry - Part II,                                'M"
Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON                                                                         fk*J^ 'TV'lc*—   si
SW1H 9AT.


Dear Sir,

I enclose herewith this Hillsborough Working Party’s submission to your
inquiry.  A complete list of appendices will be forwarded today to supplement
this communication.

I should be grateful if you would register your acceptance of the enclosed
submission by return post and I apologise for the delay in forwarding our
own recommendation.

Yours sincerely,




Cllr. H. Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working Party.
F R O M .LEADERS   O FF.   L'FOOL                        1 1 . 1 3. 1 9 8 9   11*37      F. 2




                             L I V E R P O O L    C I T Y                C O U N C I L




                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY'S LiU mi. S3 1ON TO


                               PART II OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


                                    INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




                                                 -oOo-




            NOVEMBER 1989




            XR1AAR
FPflM i FQDFPC;   flFF.   I 'Pfini                         11.1!^ . 1 Q R Q   11! R                      p   ^




                                                   I N D E X




            Contents:

                                                                                                    Page:
                     (I)         INTRODUCTION AND SUBMISSION


                   (II)          GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES              ..................         1


                  (III)          THE GREEN GUIDE     ...........................               ,,    !_4


                   (IV)          FENCING AT FOQTDALL LEAGUE GROUNDS,                  ..........    4-6


                    (V)          THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' B I L L ..................                6


                   (VI)          THE PROPOSED FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY ..                 ,,    6-7


                  (VII)          POLICING, ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMMUNITY
                                  CONSULTATION ..................................                   8-9


              (VIII)             ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO FOOTBALL ..                 ..    9-10




           XR1AAT
F R OM   LEADERS   OFF.   L'POOL                11.13.1989   11:39             P .   4




          INTRODUCTION
                                            i
                    Liverpool City Council det up its Hillsborough
              Disaster Working Party on 26th April 1989.   As the Local
              Authority in the City connected with the Hillsborough
              victims we recognised our duty was to play as full a role as
              possible in, firstly, uncovering the truth of what occurred
              at Hillsborough on 15th April 1989; and, secondly, to
              contribute to the learning process arising from the lessons
              of the disaster.

                   The Working Party is constituted of councillors
             representing both the ruling Labour Group and opposition
             members and is supplemented by a research team employed to
             service the Working Party's terms of reference (see Appendix 1)

                    As a major Ground Safety Certificating Local Authority,
              responsible to two of the most prestigious football stadiums
              in the country, this Working Party believes that Liverpool
              City Council's record to its Safety Certificate respon­
              sibilities and obligations is of the-high-est order and will
              continue to be so in the light of recommendations 13-17 of
              your Interim Report.

                     Since Hillsborough, this Working Party has
              communicated with many official bodies, including the game's
              administrators, many local authorities, Football League
              ciufcs ana many other organisations and individuals involved
              m football, including ordinary fans.

                   It is the committed intention of this Working Party to
             play a positive role in helping the 'national game'
             generally face the future in safety.



         THE SUBMISSION

                   As Part I of the Hillsborough Inquiry dealt with the
             events culminating in the tragedy and its aftermath, this
             submission covers those recommendations (see Appendix 2) as
             presented in the Chair of this Hillsborough Working Party's
             Interim^Report into the stadium disaster and thus forms our
             submission to Part II of the Hillsborough Inquiry.


                                           -oGo-




             XR1AAX
GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATES

  1.1: Given your Interim Report's detailed account and
  interpretation of the disaster at what was a neutral venue
  F.A. Cup Tie, we formally request your Inquiry consider
  advising the Football Association and Football League to
  hold future neutral venue fixtures at grounds pre-designated
  as acceptable venues possessing Special Ground Safety
  Certificates.  (Such grounds should have a regular
  attendance rate of 75% and be subject to a necessary capital
  investment programme to elevate their safety facilities and
  spectator provision for fans who are 'visitors' to a
  'foreign' stadium). Where such stadiums are pre-designated
  as having 'neutral venue status' the relevant Local
  Authority Ground Safety Advisory Group(s) meet, in advance,
  to assist that authority in exercising its functions and
  Safety Certificate obligations.

  1.2: This Working Party recommends that the Home Secretary
  be advised to consider designating the drawing up,
  monitoring, supervision and accountability for each local
  authority's General Safety Certificate responsibilities and
  obligations be administered by certificating authorities'
  Technical Building Service Departments. The powers and
  duties of such bodies must present regular reports to
  certificating authorities' full Licensing Committees -
  including amendments to ground Safety Certificates and
  requests for Special Safety Certificates - to include
  informing and briefing, where relevant, Local Authority
  Ground Safety Advisory Groups.


 HOME OFFICE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
 (THE GREEN GUIDE HMSO, 1986)

   2.1i It is of the utmost concern to this Authority that the
   provisions of the Green Code must become mandatory for all
   First and Second Division Clubs.   Whilst the wisdom of your
   Inquiry, on technical evidence, may consider elevating
   sections of the Green Code to the aforementioned status, we
   outline below our own submissions and reasoning on this
   subject.


  2.2: The 'poor performance' of Sheffield City Council to
  its certificating obligations at Hillsborough, coupled with
  its complete failure (pre Hillsborough) to licence the
  Bramhall Lane Stadium, indicates the urgency of making the
  Green Guide's provisions mandatory to overcome inconsistent
  application of its guidance and to remove 'minimal'
  interpretations of the guide. Whilst we would welcome
  extending mandatory provisions to all four English League
  divisions, the financial consequences to many clubs in

                                -1-
  XR1AAX
                                                     11.10.1989   15:13          P .   2
F R tm   LEf i DERS   OFF.   L'FOOL




                  Division Three and Four would, based on attendance figures,
                  make this impractical and unnecessary. For all Third and
                  Fourth Division stadiums a specific 'Place of Safety
                  Certificate' should be introduced to supplement the existing
                  Ground Safety Certificates.


                  2.3: A new and distinct chapter on 'Turnstile Facilities'
                  should be introduced to the Green Guide. Given the essence
                  of the Hillsborough tragedy was identifiable in the 'crisis
                  at the turnstiles' we consider the introduction of a
                  specific section covering turnstiles is essential to prevent
                  a repetition of a crisis caused by the convergence of a
                  large number of people on a small number of turnstiles. Had
                  more turnstiles been in use at Hillsborough the tragedy may
                  have been averted.

                        At every League ground the general inadequate ratio of
                  turnstiles to supporters is unacceptable and should now be
                  regarded as intolerable.

                        We wish to express our concern that the location and
                  design of many English League grounds makes the provision of
                  extra turnstiles impractical and the introduction of a
                  compulsory membership scheme - even if the technology were
                  available - will actively reinforce the existing dangers of
                  turnstile congestion. As the Green Guide already states
                  'there should be no 11funnel ling” effect causing people to
                  converge on a narrower means of access or egress' (p.23).
                  We consider the added congestion inherent in such 'access'
                  areas as proposed in the Football Spectators' Bill to be a
                  just reason, amongst others, for the withdrawal of Part I of
                  the Football Spectators' Bill.


                  2.4: The problem of overcrowding and localised over­
                  crowding on terracing and at access and egress points is not
                  capable of being remedied by a single solution. We suggest
                  that clear and comprehensive instructions as to the
                  prevention or crisis management of overcrowding and crowd
                  (flow) congestion be introduced into the Green Guide and
                  made mandatory in Divisions Three and Four through the Place
                  of Safety Certificate (see 2.2).


                  2.5: Although it is not this Working Party's intention to
                  discuss the issue of soccer hooliganism, we refer to Mr.
                  Justice Popplewell's attempt, in his Final Report, to
                  account for its causes and continuing containment to
                  highlight the complex nature of the problem. We believe the
                  'hooligan problem' has been elevated to the status of a
                  moral panic with its attendant sledgehammer solutions. As
                  documented in this Working Party's own Interim Report

                                               -2-

                  XR1AAX
                                                                                 P.   4
                                                1 1 . 1 0 . 19S9   12:21
FROM   LEADERS   OFF.   L'POOL




                 documented in this Working Party's own Interim Report
                 (Appendix 2, pp 7-11) we believe your interpretation of the
                 police operation at Hillsborough indentified a fundamentally
                 flawed police operation and constitutes a damning and
                 unequivocal indictment of the manner in which thr South
                 Yorkshire Police operation at Hillsborough was planned, led
                 and administered, identified a fundamentally flawed police
                 operation.  From the experiences of football fans generaly,
                 and from the grievances listed by the Football Supporters'
                 Asanrdation in relation to policing at football matches, we
                 recognise the contextual nature of soccer policing policy in
                 relation to the South Yorkshire Police operation at
                 Hillsborough.

                       The official Hillsborough Interim Report identified
                 the inherent dangers of public order (control and
                 disciplin©) approaches to public safety in a
                 controlled football setting, Evidence based on the
                 contemporary history of Hillsborough as a "premier venue”,
                 allied to the variability of police operational practices
                 and culture at League grounds, compromises spectator safety
                 at many clubs.

                       In consequence of the lamentable performance of the
                 South Yorkshire Police and the inconsistency of police
                 operation culture and practices throughout the country at
                 football stadia, this Working Party strongly stresses that
                 Chapter 14 of the 'Green Guide' covering 'Crowd Control' be
                 redrafted on the basis that its guidelines concentrate too
                 much on the prevention of hooliganism (a concept possessing
                 no legal, formal or working definition) at the expense of a
                 definitive programme of spectator safety.   In essence,
                 crowd safety must dominate crowd control strategies without
                 compromise.


                 2.6: One of the unheeded lessons of the Bradford City fire
                 disaster, highlighted by Hillsborough, is the detrimental
                 effect caused to crowd safety by denying 'legitimate' access
                 to a pitch area in a potential/actual emergency situation.
                 The inconsistent^ approach by certificating local authorities
                 to pitch access as a 'means of escape' must be ended.    The
                 controlling and disciplining aspect of pitch perimeter
                 fencing must not be allowed to deny pitch access in the
                 light of a relevant emergency.

                       This Working Party requests that the Inquiry recommend
                 to the Home Secretary that all relevant pitch/playing areas,
                 covered by the Safety At Sports Ground Act, 1975 and as
                 documented in the 'Green Guide', be identified as a primary
                 means/route for evacuation in a relevant emergency and
                 becomes recognised in the 'Green Guide' as a legitimate
                 'means of escape'. We contend that at every stadium where

                                              -3-

                 XR1AAX
  fencing exists (or continues to exist in the light of your
  Final Report) no pitch area should remain inviolate in a
  relevant emergency.


FENCING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

  3.1* Given the centrality of fencing to the Hillsborough
  disaster (and as part of this Working Party's research into
  safety and crowd control policy in English football)/ we
  conducted a survey of all First and Second Division English
  League clubs requesting responses to questions on individual
  approaches and attitudes to both pitch perimeter and
  radial/segregatory fences, similar to those in use on
  Hillsborough's West Terrace.   (Enclosed in Appendix 3
  is the raw questionnaire which invited an open-ended
  response from all clubs, along with a complete set of
  replies.)

         The questionnaire was sent to 40 clubs and we received
   33 replies,   The most notable exceptions amongst the big
   clubs were Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur - the
   former we do know have maintained their fences complete in
   the light of the Hillsborough tragedy, whilBt Spurs have
   removed their pitch perimeter fences since Hillsborough.

         Currently, officers of tl- 1 Working Party are
   researching a comprehensive r€     t on fencing to include a
   survey of Scottish Premier Lea-.. . Clubs and certificating
   authorities covering all First and Second Division
   League clubs.


   3,2: Pitch perimeter fencing first began to be erected
   during the early to mid 1970's following several well
   publicised pitch invasions at St, James' Park (Newcastle)?
   Old Trafford (Manchester United) ,* and White Hart Lane
   (Spurs). Respondents from our sample overwhelmingly
   indicated that the installation of pitch perimeter fencing
   in particular was rarely the result of any specific public
   order problems/pitch incursions.

         The majority of respondents claimed that pitch
   perimeter fences were installed upon requests from police
   and/or local authorities.   A small minority of clubs also
   cited EUFA guidelines as their reason for the erection of
   such fences.   EUFA guidelines do allow a dry space/moat
   construction as a legitimate barrier to uncontrolled access
   to the pitch, a concept developed and practiced by th* s
   Authority, post-Hillsborough, so allowing the complete
   removal of pitch perimeter fencing at both Anfield and
   Goodison Park football grounds.   It would be incorrect to
   claim that EUFA guidelines demand pitch perimeter fencing:

                                 -4-

   XR1AAX
                                                                                P.   5
                                                1 1 . 10. 1989   12:24
FROM   HEADERS    OFF.   L'POOL




                 they merely state that a 'barrier' must be in place to
                 restrict spectator access to the playing area.

                       Some eight clubs claimed specific incidents caused
                 them to introduce pitch perimeter fencing, whilst five clubs
                 stated there were no specific incidents causing their
                 installion of pitch fencing.

                       It is the contention of this Working Party that the
                 hysteria surrounding 'foutbaii hooliganism' in the past two
                 decades has led to a number of clubs installing pitch
                 perimeter fencing without recognising the inherent conflict
                 between containment and legitimate 'traffic paths' which
                 tragically at Hillsborough meant the pitch was inviolate to
                 all spectators.


                 3.3: The rise in popularity over* the last two decades of
                 radial segregatory fencing, such as at Hillsborough's West
                 Terrace, has mirrored in many ways the move towards and
                 rationale behind pitch perimeter fencing. On terraces
                 the introduction of such radial fences has increased a
                 club's "flexibility” to contain and segregate opposing
                 sections of support and, in some cases, to ease 'traffic
                 flow'.


                 3.4: This Working Party is unequivocally opposed to all
                 pitch perimeter fencing.   All fencing may be beneficial to
                 those advocates of the deterrent principle in anti-hooligan
                 fixtures to prevent pitch incursions, but fences, as proven
                 at Valley Parade, and Hillsborough, severely compromise
                 safety. W© urge a major rethinK on the desirability of
                 fences given there are numerous means of preventing
                 uncontrolled pitch trespass without resorting to such
                 draconian structures.  Furthermore, fences restrict the
                 ability of emergency services access to casualities on such
                 terraci          amo.

                       Equally, our Working Party opposes the continuation of
                 terrace sections such as the West Terrace at Hillsborough.
                 They create the potential danger of overcrowding in
                 'popular' areas (e.g. behind a goal).

                       We therefore call for the removal of all radial
                 segregatory fences apart from those dividing distinct
                 sections of a ground, whilst recognising the need to
                 continue to provide separately accessed, egressed and
                 serviced enclosures for 'visiting' supporters forming a
                 'self-contained area' and certificated thus.

                       The costs of the above proposals would for many clubs
                 be prohibitive.   However, whilst we totally oppose any

                                              -5-

                 XR1AAX
                                                     11.10.1989   1 2 i 25              P .   6
FROM   LEADERS    OFF.   L'POOL




                 centralised move to all-seater stadia we consider the best
                 course of action, under current circumstances, for improving
                 spectator safety on terraces such as the West Terrace at
                 Hillsborough, and the West Terrace at Loftus Road (Q.F.R.);
                 the Wltton End (Aston Villa); the Scoreboard End (Manchester
                 United) and the Park End (Everton), amongst, many others, to
                 be a conversion of such sections to all seater areas.


                 3.5: We recognise not one death has occurred as a result of
                 a pitfih invasion.  pit oh invasions, though u n d e a i m b l e and
                 indefensible, are rare.    At Hillsborough, a combination of
                 pitch perimeter and radial fencing clearly contributed to
                 the scale of fatalities on the West Terrace.

                       The horror story and carnage of a Hillsborough cannot
                 be allowed to be replicated.   We contend that Hillsborough
                 must change the face of British Football for evermore.   Yet
                 it cannot progress in the right direction positively if the
                 lessons of anti-hooligan fencing are not learned from this
                 tragedy.



          THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS * BILL

                 4.    As a full and detailed report on this working Party7*
                 interpretation of the technical and deterrent principles of
                 this legislation is currently being prepared, we agree fully
                 with the submission of the Football Supporters' Association
                 (FSA) to your Inquiry on this legislation.     Without
                 elaborating upon our opposition in the light of
                 recommendation 19 of your own Interim Report, we believe a
                 compulsory national football membership scheme is not only
                 impractical, labelling all fans as potent 1*7 hooligans, but
                 compromises the aforementioned recommendation.

                       Thus, on the basis of recommendation 19 of your
                 Interim Report, we request you recognise the futility of a
                 compulsory national membership scheme (as outlined in Part I
                 of the Government's Bill) and recommend to the Secretary of
                 State for the Environment its withdrawal.


           FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

                 5.1» Under the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) (as
                 detailed in the Football spectators' Bill which becomes law
                 in November) the Government has taken powers to close
                 grounds, introduce all-seater stadia and impose upon
                 football measuris as It sees fit:. Indeed, one senior
                 football official describes the proposed FLA as Ma
                 flOVernwftnf t«ik®ov«r of football,"

                                                  -6-

                 XR1AAX
                                                   11.10.1989   12:26               P .   7
F R OM   LEADERS    OFF.   L ' POOL




                         Prior to the Hillsborough disaster, the FLA was a
                   minor der.ftii in a conttuversial Enabling Bill.   That
                   disaster acted as a catalyst catapulting the role of the TLA
                   to centre stage.     From an original overseeing role, the FLA
                   after Hillsborough allowed the Secretary of State for Sport
                   to claim the moral high ground by highlighting
                   football's erratic, if not appalling, record on spectator
                   safety.

                         Immediately post Hillsborough, the Bill's terms of
                   reference were extended to include "safety" and a fully
                   fledgad quango waa proposed to supervise the full operation
                      the compulsory football membership scheme and the
                   additional responsibilities of ground/spectator safety.

                         The powers of the FLA are draconian.   Clubs will
                   require a licence from the FLA to operate under the auspices
                   of the FLA's own inspectorate.   The powers of the FLA
                   include the capacity to suspend or revoke licences and heavy
                   fines can be imposed on 'offending' clubs.


                   5.2: What deeply concerns this Local Authority, with an
                   excellent record on ground safety, is that the FLA has the
                   power to override any certificating authority by imposing
                   national standards with the added power to cancel a local
                   authority Ground Safety Certificate for a stadium.
                   Moreover, in the words of the Bill, "The Licensing Authority
                   may, at any time, by notice to the licence holder, vary the
                   times and conditions of the licence." The implications of a
                   centralised body with a board of between four-eight members
                   (with only one representative from football) are patently
                   apparent.

                   5.3: We request your Inquiry to advise the Secretary of
                   State for the Environment to withdraw the proposals for the
                   FLA outlined in Part I of the Bill with a view to
                   introducing separate and distinct legislation on the subject
                   of spectator safety and spectator facilities at football
                   grounds, pending meaningful and genuine negotiations with
                   representatives of all relevant certificating local
                   authorities and their Advisory Groups, including fans'
                   representatives.  Furthermore, the existence of the FLA, as
                   proposed, would clearly undermine the role of th© Ground
                   Safety Advisory Groups set up as per recommendation 17 and
                   usurp the provisions of recommendations 13-17 as in your
                   Interim Report.

                         Far from facilitating the involvement of fans,
                   relevant local authorities, and the emergency services, the
                   proposed FLA will leave responsibility for ground safety in
                   the hands of a detached bureaucratic quango in Whitehall.

                                                 -7-
                   XR1AAX
POLICING. ACCOUNTABILITY AND COMMUNITY CONSULTATION

  6.1: Since 1979, the debate over police accountability and,
  in particular, police/community relations has been of major
  significance.    This period of controversy is in marked
  contrast to the previous fifteen years, since the passing of
  the 1964 Police Act, during which time little was published
  or researched on the matter.    The inner-city disturbances
  in Southall 1979, St. Paul's 1980, and in other major cities
  during 1981 changed the level of debate.    Throughout the
  late seventies, Lhtsxe had been much discussion of the Devon
  and Cornwall model of community policing and its potential
  for other areas.



  6.2: Two major factors emerged from the period of
  controversy, research and publication of the early 1980's.
  First, the police made it quite clear, via the Association
  of Chief Police Officers (A.C.P.O.) that on 'operational
  matters' involving force strategy, practices and priorities
  the Chief Constables' decision was absolute.   The 1964
  Act's brief to police authorities to provide an 'adequate
  and efficient' police force would not extend to operational
  policies or practices. This has become the accepted
  convention. Second, following Lord Scarman's Report,
  community consultation hecame governed by statute in the
  1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act, Scarman had called
  for effective consultation and not 'talking shops'.
  Consequently, all force areas have some form of direct
  consultation through forums, panels or committees.

        The problem has been that in the organisation and
  administration of community consultation the police have
  retained absolute discretion on agenda itemc, information
  giving and decision to act on matters raided. In so doing,
  Chief Constables have invoked the principle of operational
  matters, and thus consultative groups have no effective
  powers to influece policies or practices, nor do they have
  the right to procedures of accountability concerning agreed
  changes in policies or practices.  It is against this
  background of debate and controversy over the effectiveness
  of procedures for police accountability that any proposal
  which suggests an eKtension of community involvement in
  policing must be placed.


  6.3: In your Interim Report, you discussed at some length
  the relationship between club management and the police in

                                -8-
  XR1AAX
  establishing responsibility for crowd management inside the
  ground.  It is your position that the primary responsibility
  lies with the police both outside and inside the ground
  which enables the official interim Report to conclude that
  the main reason for the Hillsborough disaster was the
  failure of the police to control the crowd.  In coming to
  this conclusion, you establish a catalogue of mistakes and
  errors o£ judgment from the police briefing through to their
  operational response to the first indications of trouble.
  It would appear to be appropriate to establish effective
  procedures for consultation between the police and all other
  interested parties.


  6.4i In line with Lord Scarman's recommendation that the
  police should establish close links with the community, we
  propose an extension of these links to include regular and
  major sports events.   Existing Advisory groups on Ground
  Safety offer an appropriate forum for such consultation to
  take place. Their membership includes local councillors,
  club officials, fire officers, St. John's Ambulance, the
  ambulance service, the Football Supports' Association; and
  the Supporters' club. We propose that the police present an
  operational programme, including planned responses to all
  foreseeable circumstances, to the advisory group pre-season.
  The agreed programme should be reviewed at subsequent
  meetings during the season with reports on any issues of
  substance. The police should respond to comments and
  assessments from other members of the Advisory Group. They
  should inform the Group of any special arrangements planned
  for major fixtures.   At the end of the season, there should
  be a report issued to the Group by the police which should
  evaluate the agreed programme and its operation.

        The local councillors on the Advisory Group should be
  able to refer issues of concern to the Police Authority for
  its consideration.    In that sense, the policing of football
  and other events would be brought under the Police
  Authority's        to maintain an adequate and efficient
  police force.   It would also respond to the spirit of Lord
  Scarman's recommendations on community consultation.



A ROYAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO FOOTBALL

   7.1i  Following the scale of mismanagement, complacency,
   neglect and misplaced priorities detailed within your
   Interim Report, we believe all aspects of the football
   industry should be subject to a Royal Commission of Inquiry.
   This is particularly warranted given that pre-Hillsborough
   the Police, F.A., Sheffield City Council, and Sheffield
   Wednesday Football club all considered their respon-

                                -9-

   XR1AAX
                                                                                                P . 10
                                                                1 1.10.1989   12: 30
FROt f   CEf l DERS   OFF.    L'POOL




                  sibilities adequately discharged for a prestigious
                  Bemi- final.

                  Clearly, if Hillsborough was an example of the best football
                  can offer, then the football industry requires a complete
                  review of its operation.


                  7,2: A Royal Commission of Inquiry should be recommended,
                  with the following terms of reference, to investigate -

                              (i)      the financing of professional football;

                             (ii)      the administration of professional football;

                        (iii)          policing and public safety at football stadia;

                             (iv)      medical, emergency and wider spectator facailities
                                       at Football League grounds; and

                              (v)      the issue of effective fans' representation within
                                       football clubs and in the governing bodies which
                                       administer the game of football.




                                                         —oOo-




                  Officer Contact:

                        Mr. T. Smith,
                        Hillsborough Working Party Research Officer
                        051-225 2333




                                                         -10-
                  XR1AAX




                                                                                        **+END***
,lt*&
                                                     Hillsborough Working Party
                                                     Chief Executives Office,
                                                     Room 5,

 LIVERPOOL                                           Municipal Buildings ,
                                                     Dale Street,
                                                     LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                     Telephone: 051- 225 2 3 3 4 /3
                                                     Fax: 236 2047
                                                     DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                     Y o u r ref

                                                     O ur ref

                                                     Date     10th November,   1989. ‘



  Secretary,
  Hillsborough Inquiry, Part II,
  50 Queen A n n e 's G a t e ,
  LONDON
  SW1H 9 A T .



^feear Sir,

  With reference to our faxed submission of Friday 10th November.  Please find
  enclosed a complete list of appendices which supplement the submission of
  this Hillsborough Working Party.

  Yours sincerely,




  Cllr. H. Chase,
  Chair, Hillsborough Working Party.




   When calling or telephoning please ask fo r
                   APPENDIX 1




TERMS OF REFERENCE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY
                             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY
                                      26th April 1989




PRESENT    :   Councillors H. Chase, W. Edwards, A. Jennings, Mary Johnston,
               S. Ledwich, Peter Millea, K. Noon, F. Roderick and Jacqueline
               Smith.



               Councillor F. Ruse also attended.




1.   Appointment of Chair

     Resolved that Councillor H. Chase be appointed the Chair of this
     Working Party.



2.   Terms of reference of Working Party

     The Working Party considered its terms of reference in the light of the
     decision of the City Council of the 19th April, 1989.

     Resolved that -

          (i) the revised terms of reference be approved, viz:-

               1.     To ensure the submission    of proper evidence to the   Taylor
                       Inquiry on behalf of the   people of Liverpool;

               2.     To assist in finding out  the truth of what occured at Hillsborough
                      including the preparations made in advance and to enable the
                      Council to comment thereon.

               3.     To enable the Council to respond to any issues arising from the
                      tragedy and to make observations generally.

               4.     To cause a report on the tragedy to be made to the City Council
                      via the Finance and Strategy Committee as soon as practicable.

        (ii)    the Working Party would urge all football supporters to give their
                evidence to the Official Enquiry but, in the case of those supporters
                who do not wish to be interviewed by the police officers appointed
                to assist the Inquiry, the Working Party wishes to provide facilities
                for such evidence to be taken by the City Council. All unsolicited
                submissions so far received by the City Solicitor or Council members
                will be held to establish whether those who have made them wish them
                to be forwarded to the Inquiry team. The Working Party has asked the
                City Solicitor to obtain from Lord Justice Taylor his views on whether
                he would be prepared to -

                (a)     accept evidence from this Working Party on behalf of persons
                        who do not wish to give their evidence to the Police;

                (b)    provide copies of submissions made to his Inquiry to this
                       Working Party.
     (iii) the City Estates Surveyor and the City Solicitor be requested
            to find premises for a working office for this Working Party
            as a matter of urgency;
     (iv)   the Leader and Deputy Leader of the Council, in conjunction
             with appropriate Chairs, be requested to be made available
             appropriate staffing and administrative support forthwith
             to ensure the proper workings of this Working Party;

    (v)     the City Solicitor arrange for all existing Council reports
             which have been prepared covering the arrangements for safety
             at football grounds to be made available forthwith to all
             Members of the Working Party;
    (vi)    the attached letter from the Football Association relating to
             ground safety be noted and the City Building Surveyor be
             requested to report to an early meeting of this Working Party
             upon the terms of the letter;
    (vii)   an early meeting be arranged between this Working Party and
             the Football Supporters Association so that consideration can
             be given to making available facilities by the Council to
             assist football supporters generally in the submission of
             evidence to the Taylor Inquiry; and

    (viii) facilities be made available for discussions to take place
            with Sheffield City Council as soon as practicable.




K

4
                          APPENDIX 2




THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY'S INTERIM REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS
                      LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL




               HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER WORKING PARTY




                   I N T E R I M    R E P O R T




         September 1989




KC1ABR
                                  INDEX


                                                           Page:


H.W.P.    Response to L. J. Taylor's Report        ....    1-14

H.W.P.    Interim Recommendations

           Introduction     .........................      1 - 4

PART II

           Liverpool Supporters7 at 'Away7Matches          4 - 6

           No Conspiracy       ...................... 6 -      7

PART III

           The Conclusions     ......................      7

           The Police      .............................7 - 1 1

           The Football Association ..                    11-12

           Sheffield Wednesday F.C................1 2 - 1 3

           Sheffield City Council         .............   13

PART IV

  L.J.T.     Interim Recommendations         ..........   14-16

  H.W.P.     Conclusions      ......................      17

  H.W.P.     Interim Recommendations         ..........   18-19




                                - o 0 o -




KC1ABR
The Chair of the Hillsborough Working Party has prepared an Interim
Report on the findings and recommendations contained in Lord Justice
Taylor's Interim Report of Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster of 15th April 1989.

                              - o 0 o -

   "As you look around Hillsborough you will appreciate why it
   has been regarded for so long as the perfect venue for all
   kinds of important matches."

            Bert McGee: Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday F.C.,
            from the match programme for 15th April 1989.


        Members will be aware that Phase I of the Inquiry
   concentrated on identifying the causal factors, their
   influence and significance, that led to the death of 95
   Liverpool football supporters and over 730 injured on and
   about the central sections of Hillsborough's West Terrace.
   L.J. Taylor's findings led to 43 interim recommendations of
   which 28 were required to be implemented before the 1989/90
   Football League programme commenced.

        The Hillsborough Interim Report was published by the
   Home Secretary on 4th August 1989. The limited scope of the
   Report's proposals constitute a 'holding exercise' and may,
   in the light of evidence submitted to Phase II of the
   Inquiry, be subject to amendment or withdrawal in the full
   report which should be published in early 1990. The second
   phase of the Inquiry, based in London, will consider wider
   issues relating to post-Hillsborough football including: the
   needs of crowd control and public safety at sports events;
   membership schemes; identity cards; all seater stadia; super
   stadia; ticketless fans; ticket touts; and other specific
   matters such as excessive pre-match drinking.

        L. J. Taylor, 59, was appointed a High Court Judge in
   1980 and has been an Appeal Court Judge since 1987.   He
   prosecuted in the John Poulson corruption trial and led the
   prosecution team at the 1979 trial of Jeremy Thorpe, who was
   cleared of conspiracy and incitement to murder.

        During the course of the Inquiry, clear evidence of
   thoroughness, commonsense and a sensitivity to the way the
   football industry operates has characterised an approach
   commensurate to the task in hand.

        The Hillsborough tragedy was the fifth post-war soccer
   disaster involving multiple deaths.  (The others were at
   Bolton, Ibrox, Bradford and Heysel.) Each possessed three
   indisputable ingredients; human failings; inadequate stadia;
   and flawed pre-match planning. What distinguishes each
   disaster is the fatal mixture of these ingredients.


   KC1AB0
                             - 2 -

     The Taylor report concludes:   the worst disaster in the
history of British football directly happened because pens 3
and 4 on Hillsborough's West Terrace became 'grossly
overcrowded' and was subject to fatal crushing upon the
opening of Gate C, to ease the unrelieved pressure at the
seven West Terrace turnstiles, sometime after 2.52 p.m. The
failure of the Police to block-off the central tunnel
accessing pens 3 and 4, combined with an absence of
monitoring to these pens and control to the numbers entering
them, allowed a series of fatal surges to occur through
poorly laid out crash barriers leading to the collapse of
two sections of barrier 124a in pen 3 after 2.52 p.m.

     At the heart of the disaster is human failing.   L.J.
Taylor's document grimly identifies and documents human
failing on the day, in pre-match arrangements, and in the
supervision of Hillsborough's General Safety Certificate. A
combination of these wholly avoidable failings led to the
deaths of 95 people at a stadium declared a 'premier venue'
by the Football Association.

     Throughout the document, L. J. Taylor applies the term
'piecemeal' to describe his view of the impact of enforced
and voluntary changes to Hillsborough and the management of
human traffic at football matches. This can be extended as
a living metaphor for an industry - and its practices -
which, as it enters the 21st century, can accommodate live
satellite transmissions of its product under conditions that
starkly contrast private affluence and public squalor.

     The piecemeal way Football's vested interests have
accommodated successive judicial representations for change
in safety practices is underpinned by Governmental
indifference.   Safety should no longer be subject to
arbitrary targetting and the hidden hand of the market.
Government's responsibility should no longer be shirked.

     The conditions prevailing at Hillsborough on April 15th
neither occurred in a vacuum nor in isolation. The poverty
of official thinking and institutionalised (mal)practices
within the football industry remains undiminished less than
two weeks into the new soccer season.  In many ways
Hillsborough is football in miniature. The fundamental
malaise that afflicts the English game, condensed into the
events of that one afternoon, illuminates the task in hand.

     At a Press conference prior to the Inquiry's
preliminary hearing, L.J. Taylor stressed his investigation
would not be about apportioning blame. Yet the course and
contents of the Inquiry's account of the events led him to
conclude: "The main reason for the disaster was the failure
of Police control."



KC1AB0
                              - 3 -

     On August 5th, the day after the Report's publication,
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield, the officer
commanding, was suspended on full-pay. Moreover, the only
people yet to be dismissed for their conduct arising from
the disaster has been a civilian Press officer with the
South Yorkshire Police, and a junior ambulanceman.

     With 801 officers under Duckenfield's overall command,
to control a crowd of some 54,000, the collapse of effective
leadership compromised the lives of many people in the small
turnstile enclave on Leppings Lane and, with fatal
consequences, the lives of innocent spectators corralled
into pens meant to secure their safety. A similar number of
Police Officers were deemed necessary to prevent some 500
'hippies' assembling at Stonehenge intent on celebrating the
summer solstice. That spring afternoon, at a Hillsborough
bathed in sunshine, British football reached its lowest
point. It has yet to creep out of its Victorian sewer.

     The Taylor document uniquely places a multi-agency
crowd management and decision-making process under the
microscope. Weeks of planning, years of experience and
decades of neglect are copiously examined. Taylor's verdict
on the events (of that spring afternoon on April 15th) forms
a blistering catalogue of the bankruptcy of thoughts and
deeds that characterise the culture and procedures of those
self-regulating 'interested parties' who administered,
policed and licenced the Hillsborough Stadium.

     In unravelling the complex chain of events and
influences at Hillsborough, L. J. Taylor highights four
salient factors which can be replicated across football:-

1.   The extent to which judicial recommendations are
     compromised by reason of cost, indifference and
     complacency;

2.   many of the 'Green Guides' safety provisions are
     defined in general terms and are consequently subject
     to minimal interpretations.   Guidance must become
     mandatory and be subject to a regular, annual review,
     based on a clearly defined 'report-back' process;

3.   the degree to which 'hooligan hysteria' permeates deep
     into the occupational culture and operational
     practices of major police forces at football matches
     places safety consideration to the vagaries of security
     and segregatory practices effectively promoting a
     cavalier disregard for football spectators as citizens
     and consumers;

4.   the need for what Lord Hailsham - the creator of the
     post of Minister of Sport in 1962 - called "a coherent
     body of doctrine, perhaps even a philosophy of govern­
     ment encouragement."

KC1AB0
                                - 4 -

       From the statements gathered by the Hillsborough
  Working Party and those advanced to this office from the
  F.S.A., (Football Supporters7 Association) a clear picture
  emerged quite quickly in our reading of fans eye-witness
  accounts. Coupled with a review of the Inquiry's, 3,800
  plus pages of transcript, the reports findings are
  consistent with our evaluation of the oral, written and
  visual evidence available to the Hillsborough Working
  Party.

       L. J. Taylor's reconstruction of events and causal
  interpretation is wide-ranging and comprehensive given his
  terms of reference.   Consequently, Parts I and II of his
  document should be considered an authoritive and stimulating
  account of the tragedies long-term, short-term and immediate
  causes. However, issue is taken with two points of
  interpretation identifiable in paragraphs 205-207 and 208.
  Wider observation and criticisms of Parts III and IV form
  the remainder of this Working Party's Interim Report.

       Phase I of the Inquiry lasted a total of 34 days
  including the preliminary hearing and final submission from
  Counsel.  174 witnesses gave evidence, 65 of whom were
  police officers.  From its inception and beyond genuinely
  held fears and misgivings were expressed as to the
  objectivity, fairness and reliability of a departmental
  inquiry.  Fear of an Establishment cover-up, given the
  lamentable performance of South Yorkshire Police, and more
  pertinently, concern with a victim-blaming backlash,
  personified in the Chief Superintendent's original account,
  reinforced many people's fears. These understandable
  anxieties were quickly dispelled in the course of the
  Inquiry and in its published findings.



Liverpool Supporters at 'Away' Matches:

        In paragraphs 205-207, L. J. Taylor briefly summarises
   and discusses a dossier, produced by South Yorkshire Police
   and presented as evidence, claiming to identify a pattern of
   ticketless fans, some with forgeries, in attendance at
   Liverpool 'away' matches.    Though Taylor rightly dismisses
   the claim that at Hillsborough this was a causal factor in
   the build-up to the disaster, his persistent and underlying
   logic throughout is that to attend or attempt to attend an
   'away' fixture without a ticket constitutes deviant,
   troublesome behaviour.    The assertion that ticketless fans
   are a problem, which is to be dealt with in Phase II of the
   Inquiry, involves a misleading understanding of the issue.

        The incidence of ticketless fans at major football



   KC1AB0
                            - 5 -

matches is a product of a number of variables and is not
reducible to a single causal influence.   Indeed, those
people who point their finger at fans, including the F.A.,
have much to gain from locating blame with the fans alone.

     The dossier does not constitute the 'whole history7 of
this particular problem nor does it offer a reliable account
of its incidence and causation.   As an account of
ticketless activity amongst Liverpool supporters it is a
fundamentally flawed argument and document.

     A brief non-comprehensive list of influences underlying
the problem are listed below:-

1. Liverpool F.C., like a number of major English clubs,
draws support from all over Britain.   Beyond the
impracticalities of purchasing tickets for fans living
outside the Merseyside region the market for Liverpool
tickets, especialy all-ticket games, is often
over-subscribed.   With Liverpool's huge following in the
Capital demand is always inflated when the Club play in the
London area. Games such as those detailed by L.J. Taylor
are often advertised in Liverpool as being sold-out, when in
fact seasoned fans know 'cash payment7 gates are usually
available. And there are obvious difficulties for fans
outside of Liverpool.

2. The success of Liverpool has led to a corresponding
inflation in demand for tickets at all Liverpool games which
the Club cannot cope with given the capacity at Anfield (a
situation aggravated by the 15% cut in terrace capacities at
all grounds).   Existing stadia, including Wembley, cannot
accommodate peak demand, a fact exploited by ticket touts.
With all seated-stadiums and a compulsory football
membership scheme on the Government's sporting agenda,
stadium capacities will be further reduced.   It is the
Clubs7 failure to invest, long-term, in its fixed assets
(i.e. stadia) that has created the situation.

3. The issue, moreover, from an 7away7 fans perspective is
one of inconsistent ticket practices and plain exploitation.
Many clubs operate dual pricing regimes for visitors and
home spectators.   The F.A7s humble turn-around, following
Hillsborough, on allocation policy did not happen from any
sense of justice.   It is cynical exploitation and
inherently unfair practices which fuels the problem.

4. The decision to attend an 7away7 fixture is often
spontaneously taken with the practical knowledge that
legitimate entry can be gained to a match that is ticketed.
At Luton, on Saturday, August 26th, some 1,000 Liverpool
fans attended a ground which had unilaterally banned 7away7
supporters. As members of this Working Party have already



KC1ABO
                               - 6 -


   drawn attention to this issue in relation to L.J. Taylor's
   examples (para.206),  it should be stated that it is not a
   criminal activity to attend an 'away7 match ticketless, nor
   is it indicative of bad behaviour.

No Conspiracy:

       In football semi-final and final matches are, for the
   spectators, tense but festive occasions.   All are 'away
   fans', strangers for the duration of the game. Both
   ticketless fans and fans the worse for drink tend to be more
   noticeable at such neutral venue games. Considering the
   amplification of the problems associated with football and
   alcohol misuse in sections of the print-media it is a
   phenomenon not unknown to the authorities, least of all the
   Police in their operational planning.

       Given the incidence of multiple deaths in British soccer
   stadia and the intensification of social control efforts in
   the post-Heysel period, it is incumbent on the Police, more
   so at matches where all spectators are strangers to a venue,
   to legislate for every eventuality based on known criteria.
   Thus every crowd management regime must take into account
   all problems that are likely to arise.

        Paragraph 208 of the report clearly states that groups
   of ticketless 'fans' and a 'minority' who had drank too much
   "certainly aggravated the problems faced by the Police."
   Of all the ingredients at a turnstile facility, prone to
   congestion, which contained 23 turnstiles for 24,256
   ticket-holding spectators, the most predictable are the
   a forement ioned.

       What aggravated 'the problem faced by the Police' was
   not this most foreseeable of problems but rather the
   ruthless fixation of the South Yorkshire Police to keep
   rival spectators apart causing the closure of 12 North Stand
   turnstiles on the Pennistone Road, which had the resultant
   effect of exacerbating numbers accessing the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles, thus impairing the efficiency of the turnstiles
   devoid of a controlled filtration operation.

       However, disconcerting for people like John Carlisle,
   M.P., there was nothing noteworthy in the behaviour of
   Liverpool fans at the turnstiles area and within the ground
   on the day. What the Police did not legislate for was the
   likelihood that their operation could so compromise basic
   safety that it could lead to a disaster.

       It needs to be clearly stated that to the allegations of
   'mass drunkenness', and the looting of the dead's



   KC1AB0
                              -7-

  possessions, L. J. Taylor is frankly blunt:  "Not a single
  witness was called before the Inquiry to support any of
  these allegations, although every opportunity was afforded
  for any of the represented parties to have any witness
  called whom they wished."


PART III - THE CONCLUSIONS:

        The degree to which the Hillsborough Report determines
   responsibility is of some concern.   Four organisations are
   clearly blamed for the tragedy yet L. J. Taylor's
   allocation of blame results in comparative marginalisation
   of the roles and obligations of the F.A., Sheffield City
   Council and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.    All were
   causative agents.

       The slow accumulated effects of complacency,
  mismanagement and piecemeal deterrent led safety strategies,
  coupled with operational blunders on the day, compromised
  human safety to the point of indifference.   The findings of
  the Hillsborough Report and interim recommendations mirror
  that fact.

        The basic element of a first-class football match is
   that predictable, even identifiable numbers of people will
   assemble at a clearly defined location over a specific time.
   On such an irreducible fact, each Saturday, during the
   football season, varying concentrations of people enter into
   human traffic control systems based on the principles and
   the spirit of the Safety At Sports Grounds Act, 1975, and
   the voluntary provisions of its supplementary 'Green Guide'
   (Home Office Code for Safety at Grounds).   In theory, via a
   multi-agency approach, spectators access and take a position
   in a certificated controlled environment.   This supposedly
   structured approach to spectator safety has developed on the
   basis of lessons claimed to have been learned from the
   Bolton disaster onwards.   However, its application to all
   92 league clubs was not effected until the Popplewell Review
   of 1985.

   The Police:

       A remarkable feature of the document is the forthright
   manner in which Taylor demarcates responsibility.   His
   findings constitute a damning and unequivocal indictment of
   the manner in which the South Yorkshire Police operation at
   Hillsborough was planned, led and administered.   Even in
   their evidence to the Inquiry, L.J. Taylor conceded (para.
   279).   "Sadly, I must report that for the most part the
   quality of their evidence was in inverse proportion to their
   rank.11




   KC1AB0
                            - 8 -

    Trained solely for a public order response, Police
operational orders on the day and the de-facto influence of
social control perceptions of safety compromised the lives
of 95 people and injured many others.   The document
testifies to L.J. Taylor's frustration in his most revealing
remark in the whole text (para. 285): "It is a matter of
regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the
South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede that
they were in any respect at fault in what occurred ....It
would have been more seemly and encouraging for the future
if responsibility had been faced."

     It is this attitude of mind, deeply engrained in the
operational culture of many major Police Forces in the
policing of football matches - highlighted in the terms and
conditions of the Operational Orders of the South Yorkshire
Police for April 15th which breeds a siege mentality and a
siege approach to spectator safety.   The Police, in effect,
have become the front-line for a Government slavish in its
advocacy of repressive football regulations.   On any other
terrain such a strategy would stimulate a national outcry.
How bitterly ironic that most major football stadiums now
resemble a Gulag.

     The Hillsborough Report's findings graphically detail
the dangers of a public order approach rather than a public
safety approach to crowd control by the Police. Taylor,
because of his strict terms of reference, is unable to
investigate whether this approach to crowd control is
adopted by most of the other Police Forces. Evidence based
on the contemporary history of Hillsborough as a premier
venue endorses the claim that crowd safety is not only a
patchworth quilt of half-measures but, in the hands of many
Police Forces, has become a hit-and-miss affair.  Indeed,
with some irony, it is the South Yorkshire and West Midlands
Police Forces that head the F.S.A's complaints list.

     L. J. Taylor's assertion that South Yorkshire Police
"have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully" -
(para. 270) at a large number of football games and during
coal and steel strikes, is an interpretation - not a fact.
It is a misleading statement. One has to ask: Sensitivity
and success - by whose standards?

    A review of Hillsborough attendance figures for all
first-class matches over the last decade raises serious
doubts about operational experience and expertise against
a backcloth of average gates that fall far short of
capacity.  Semi-final ties provide the only consistent full
capacities at Sheffield Wednesday F.C., who on average have
less than one capacity gate for each season. A clear
example of the effect this has on safety strategy is



KC1ABO
                            - 9 -

discernible in the dual policy of 'filling the terraces.'
The practice of letting fans 'find their own level'
(para. 171) - within a terrace regime that mirrors a maze -
is borne out of inexperience and a disregard for the people
populating those terraces.

    The collapse of operational leadership occurred under
conditions that were entirely foreseeable.    Under such
circumstances, how can internal monitoring of Police control
strategies for football be continued given the extent to
which the findings of the Hillsborough Report castigate
almost every feature of the Police operation?

     The Police operation at Hillsborough was the product of
an attitudinal approach formulated over recent years.   It
was, on the basis of the evidence, not the result of events
on the day. In total, the Hillsborough disaster was the
product of mistaken priorities and a mentality which
reflects the erosion of consensus over use of Police power
over football spectators.   This erosion, a development of
the 1980's, had its catalyst in the Heysel disaster.  Its
product has produced, amongst many senior and junior Police
Officers, a negative stereotyping of soccer supporters.

     When a group/category of people are viewed as a problem
to be restrictively and strongly policed, based on a
negative reputation, then correspondingly negative notions
of suspicion dominate interactions with spectators (ask any
'away' fan!). This suspicion, on a practical level
compromises quite radically the facility of 'benefit of
doubt'. On pens 3 and 4 on 15th April 1989, many people
were denied any benefit of doubt. That suspicion,
institutionalised and accumulated over the recent past, has
so permeated operational culture and practices that the
capacity of the Police not just to recognise suffering but
to understand and comprehend it, led to such a delay in
their response to the crisis confronting them in pen 3 and 4.

    Four specific points on Police tactics deserve to be
illustrated

1. On the basis of Police operational orders for 1989, as
influenced by the 1988 fixture, L. J. Taylor summarises the
response of the Police to the immediate crisis on pens 3 and
4 thus: (para. 246) "Accordingly that prohibition (pitch
access) was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order by
being put into capital letters. The combination of no
instructions as to overcrowding and a strong prohibition on
opening the gates was likely to make Police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant."

    This reductionist interpretation is later qualified:
(para 248) "Naturally one would hope that common sense and



KC1AB0
                            - 10 -

humanity would make some officers cut through the rules and
open a gate if fans were clearly in distress." This, of
course, was the logic initially behind the request for Gate C
to be opened in the face of unrelieved pressure to the West
Terrace turnstiles. But common sense and humanity are so
constrained by Police rules and regulations and attitudinal
appraisals of football fans that, even when confronted by a
tragedy of epic proportions, the inadequate belated response
of officers was to call for fans to move backwards to ease
congestion at the front of the pens.

     Well in advance of the kick-off, spectators within the
West Terrace and the North Stand were signalling to Police
Officers and amongst themselves to the difficulties on the
central pens as early as 2.45. The Police were made aware
of the developing and increasing fears of fans well in
advance of their recognition and response to the situation
as an actual emergency.

2.   Through a public address system, video cameras,
personal radios, and a bank of television monitors - all
manned - the flow of the disaster was unheeded.   From an
elevated Police control box - crammed with audio-visual
equipment - events unfolded unrecognised.   L. J. Taylor
remarks: (para. 244) "... attempts could have been made to
alert Officers on the perimeter track to watch for
overcrowding and report their observations.   In the event,
pens 3 and 4 became more  and more crowded, surges took
place, fans were showing  and signallying distress. None of
this was seen or recognised in the (Police) control room."

3. The refusal to delay the kick-off was a decision left to
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.   At the corresponding
fixture for 1987 (Leeds United -v- Coventry City) the Police
delayed the kick-off because of the late-arrivals. This
fact, not available to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield,
raises questions about what did and did not influence Police
operational orders and their subsequent (non)amendment.

4.   On the 1988 fixture and the subject of policing tothe
Leppings Lane turnstile approaches, L. J. Taylor comments
(para. 24) "There was a very large and consistent body of
evidence that, on the day, the Police in Leppings Lane
conducted an efficient filtering exercise, designed to keep
away those without tickets and control the flow of fans
towards the ground."   However, opposition from the Police
to this claim forces L. J. Taylor to conclude: (para. 215)
"I think, be that whilst the policy may have been no
different, in practice the policing in 1988 was more
efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a
year later."




KC1AB0
                               - 11 -

       With all the resources available to the Inquiry Team,
  we find it very surprising on the basis of 'consistent
  evidence' that L. J. Taylor can only provide an opinion and
  cannot clarify whether there was a major policy difference
  between policing at the Leppings Lane in 1988 and 1989.

The Football Association:

       The F.A. escape relatively unscathed in the Report.
   Lord Justice Taylor criticises the choice of grounds and
   believes the F.A. in future will be more sensitive and
   responsive to reasonable representations about their choice
   of grounds for semi-finals.

       The F.A. received many complaints about the ticket
   allocation in 1988.   Their response in 1989 was to do
   exactly the same as in 1988, displaying considerable
   contempt for both Liverpool F.C., who made representations
   and their supporters.

       On the basis of Hillsborough's recent safety record, the
   F.A.'s belief that it was, prior to April 15th, a 'premier
   venue' defies belief.   As the Games Governing Body and as
   the designators of the match itself, their failure to
   acquaint themselves with Hillsborough's safety certificate
   is a startling failure of duty.   Post-Hillsborough, both
   the F.A. and the Football League have not introduced a
   mechanism to collate, assimilate and evaluate information on
   safety management at Football League grounds - nor do they
   intend to.   This is a dereliction of responsibility in the
   light of the Hillsborough findings.

        If Hillsborough personifies the best English Football
   can offer, then it says little for the standards and
   expectations of the F.A. at Hillsborough and all other
   League grounds.  Standards of safety, comfort and spectator
   facilities are Dickensian compared to many other fixed
   leisure venues, especially as football constitutes the
   country's national game. Hillsborough should never have
   been chosen again as a neutral venue location on the basis
   of its pre 1989 safety record.

        The West Terrace has long been criticised by supporters
   on Merseyside because of crushing problems and also the
   restricted views due to fencing.   Whilst those criticisms
   may not have reached the ears of the F.A. certainly the
   events at the 1981 semi-final between Spurs and Wolves did,
   when many Spurs fans were injured in a crush at the West
   Terrace.   On the next occasion (1987) the ground was used
   for a semi-final tie between Leeds and Coventry and this
   provoked complaints from Leeds fans who were allocated the
   West Terrace and experienced crushing problems. The



   KC1AB0
                              - 12 -

  kick-off at that game was also delayed due to the late
  arrival of supporters at the stadium.

       The issue, primarily for L. J. Taylor, on the choice of
  venue, ends, and the unfairness of the F.A.'s decision to
  play the semi-final in Sheffield for the second consecutive
  year was validated in the report on the basis that the 1988
  fixture "had been considered a successfully managed event” ,
  (para. 270).   Clearly, the Liverpool fans present at that
  fixture had not been privy to these considerations.   At
  that match severe overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 caused many
  fans to evacuate the terracing via the West Stand.   When
  this became uniform, a little before kick-off time in 1988,
  the Police moved in to close-off the central tunnel.   The
  pictures of fans being hauled up into the West Stand, on the
  Inquiry's video, were similar to the 1988 incidents.


Sheffield Wednesday Football Club:

       L. J. Taylor's evaluation of the performance of the
  Club is brief but scathing.   Whilst there is little to
  dispute in Taylor's remarks, the inconsistencies and
  failures highlighted reinforce the point that Hillsborough
  should never have been chosen as the venue for any game
  involving two 'away' sides.   This is not to be wise after
  the event; clearly, Hillsborough, on past performances,
  alone was not a suitable venue given the problems associated
  with the West Terraces.  If the Football Association had
  bothered to inspect the General Safety Certificate for
  Hillsborough, in discussion with the Club, the problems with
  the Certificate would have been identified.  Indeed, it is
  remiss of the F.A. not to have done this as a matter of
  course following the 1981, 1987 and 1988 incidents.

        The Club's failure to provide meaningful, clear and
   distinct signposting is indicative of the neglect
   surrounding the Safety Certificate and the absence of
   effective critical monitoring.

        The crisis at the turnstiles was rooted in the lack of
   turnstile facilities in an enclave incapable of coping with
   the demand placed upon it. Congestion at turnstiles has
   become the norm in football, and the authorities have, in
   consequence, become immune to the inadequate ratio of
   turnstiles to customers.   It is intolerable that this
   situation should continue.

        The performance of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in
   respect of its ground safety should have been known by the
   F.A.   L. J. Taylor is unequivocal:
   "The Leppings Lane end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to
   admit the numbers invited.”



   KC1AB0
                             - 13 -

  Sheffield Wednesday's piecemeal attitude to safety
  management on the West Terrace was influenced by cost and
  South Yorkshire Police's power of influence.


Sheffield City Council:

        The poor performance of the local authority is
  more than "inefficient and dilatory".  (para 286). The
  former Licensing Authority's failure (South Yorkshire County
  Council) take account of the 1981 and 1985 alterations -
  which created the 'fixed' conditions of the disaster - was a
  serious breach of its responsibility to update the
  Certificate. That breach, and others, were compounded in
  the transfer of certification to Sheffield City Council.
  The failure of the local authority to review the history of
  the Certificate, certify the necessary amendments and
  enforce its responsibilities effectively negated the value
  of the Certificate. The failure to amend the Certificate
  on one point alone (i.e. proper maximum figures for each
  distinct pen) rendered the Certificate worthless.


       That the relevant authorities were fully informed by
  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club of notifiable ground
  alterations without effect to the Certificate reinforces the
  collective failure of responsibility between both
  certificating authorities.  In effect, the transfer of the
  Certificate involved a transfer of attitudes and practices.

       The failure of the local authority to diligently and
  effectively monitor and enforce their obligations through
  its statutory powers within the Certificate and in other
  areas meant a pro-active, constructive and structured
  approach to safety was lost from the outset.    The
  accumulative effect was to allow the South Yorkshire Police
  to effectively dominate the safety agenda.   Ironically, on
  the issue of the West Terrace's capacity, the Police
  appeared to be the lone voice of dissent within this ethical
  basement.




   KC1AB0
                                - 14 -

PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS

        In the preamble to the 43 recomendations, L. J. Taylor
   identifies the specific matters to be dealt with in Phase II
   of his Inquiry.    He dedicates the bulk of this section to a
   rationale for delaying a decision on pitch perimeter
   fencing.   This is a mistake and cannot be justified on the
   basis of an appeal for "The need to consider further expert
   evidence." His selective quotation, from the F.S.A. (para.309)
   submission, is not the position of this Working Party and it
   is based on a falsehood; perimeter fences are not necessary
   for crowd control.   If they were, why have at least three
   major first-division clubs, pre Hillsborough, not erected
   pitch perimeter fences?

          The claim that fences, especially high perimeter
    fences, deter hooliganism is a fiction. What they do is
    contain people in a fixed area and their undesirability in
    the event of a disaster is well documented.

        During the Standing Committee stage of the Safety at
   Sports Ground Act (1975) it was recognised that a pitch
   provided the safest and easiest means of evacuating an area.
   It needs to be stressed that the Hillsborough fence goes
   against recommendations delivered in Popplewell's full
   report.   Indeed, in January 1986, Popplewell recommended
   and stressed "the importance of allowing full access to the
   pitch where this is likely to be used as a place of safety
   in an emergency."   At Hillsborough, the Police had
   determined that the pitch was inviolate.

         L. J. Taylor does not require further evidence to
    influence his thinking.   Following the Popplewell Report,
    the Institute of Structural Engineers set up a Report
    Committee, including a D.O.E. representative, to look into
    sports ground safety. Three years after its inception, the
    Institute's Report, originally to be subject to final
    approval of the draft on 9th May 1989, still awaits the
    Institute's acceptance. The Institute is due to compare and
    contract its own findings with those of the Taylor Interim
    Report on September 14th next, and the full document will be
    the subject of a seminar on October 26th next.

        The Government's public pronouncements on safety at
   football matches appears somewhat hollow when applied to its
   response to the Institution's request for funding to speed
   up the research project.

         Based on corroborated leaks to professional 'trade'
    journals, the findings of the Report constitute a clear
    rebuke for pitch perimeter fencing and expresses "strong
    reservation against the present design strength of crash



    KC1ABR
                            - 15 -

barriers."   The Report also examines the issue of 'traffic
control'.

     Quite clearly, the evidence currently exists to
challenge the continuation of pitch perimeter fencing at
football stadia. As Liverpool and Everton have shown, a
dry-moat is but one of the available means to improve
spectator safety in the event of a disaster.

     All of the Hillsborough reports feasible and sensible
proposals are to be welcomed. L. J. Taylor's grasp of the
events at Hillsborough is discernible in his
recommendations. This can only be seen as encouraging.

     Recommendations 13-17 are clearly attributable to the
lamentable role of Sheffield City Council.   L. J. Taylor
advocates not only a review of existing practices and
procedures but introduces a new layer of checks and balances
in the form of an Advisory Group. That Group should have an
"effective procedure" which requires "regular visits to the
ground and attendance at matches." It is incumbent upon this
authority to accommodate these recommendations with the
proviso that we can never be over-vigilant with spectator
safety.

     From the F.A. and F.S.A's submissions to the Inquiry,
L. J. Taylor has adopted a number of the proposals advanced
by these organisations.   One proposal, by the F.A. for a
20% cut in terrace capacities was in fact moderated to 15%.
The F.A. had hoped that L. J. Taylor would make a positive
statement on travelling ticketless fans. But the only
football-led initiative he chose not to incorporate in his
report was that ticketless fans should not be allowed into
an all-ticket match.

     The test of quality and practicality in the 43
recommendations lays in their application. The response of
clubs so far, and other interested parties, is not
encouraging. Hillsborough's lessons are already being
ignored. By the season's opening day, all the clubs,
including Sheffield Wednesday, had satisfied their local
authorities that they met certification requirements in the
wake of the Hillsborough Report. Yet many clubs, including
Liverpool, are without a crucial Taylor recommendation: a
written agreement between club and Police, identifying
responsibilities for crowd management. Although at both
Liverpool Clubs, all other relevant recommendations have
been or are being carried out, the picture from around the
country is not so encouraging. According to one survey,
only 12% of grounds had a doctor and only 49% had cutting
equipment.




KC1ABR
                            - 16 -

     Already some clubs are prevaricating on the remaining
measures.   Prior to the season's opening day, the Secretary
of Manchester United, Ken Merret, is reported as saying:
"In our opinion, these were recommendations - we didn't
consider them mandatory.”   From the country's richest club,
recently involved in a successful £20 million take-over,
these are prophetic words.

     A loophole exploited by many clubs is contained in a
Home Office circular to clubs following the publication of
the Hillsborough Report.   On implementing the Taylor
recommendations, it stressed "before the start of the new
season or immediately thereafter."   Voluntary
recommendations are already being voluntarily ignored.    For
all the pious words and sincere proposals advanced by
Taylor, they are worthless unless backed by legislation.




KC1ABR
                              - 17 -


INTERIM CONCLUSIONS:

       The Hillsborough Report is not a radical document.   It
  offers a forthright account of the Hillsborough tragedy and
  includes findings and recommendations which reach far beyond
  the Hillsborough tragedy.   Its proposals deserve to be
  taken seriously by the Government and everyone connected
  with the game.

       On the evidence of the first two weeks of the 1989/90
  football season, this may be somewhat premature:  afterall,
  Lord Justice Taylor identifies his proposals as the "minimum
  necessary."   (para 315).

       The terms of reference for Phase II of the Inquiry may
  well disappoint many fans of the game who genuinely felt the
  observable scale of official failure at Hillsborough should
  have warranted an inquiry with broader terms of reference.
  The promise of better things to come is not inspiring as the
  Football Spectators' Bill looms ever nearer.

       The disaster at Hillsborough is located in 66 years of
  official neglect.   As the lessons of the Popplewell review
  were compromised at Hillsborough it serves well to recount a
  passage from page 10 of Justice Popplewell's full report:


     "History of previous Inquiries:

        When my Interim Report was published, it might have
     been thought by some that the suggestions which I set out
     had only recently been considered.    It was said to be
     unfair to expect the football clubs to have taken earlier
     steps to arrange their affairs.    It was urged that they
     should now be entitled to more time and more money in
     order to deal with the problems of crowd control and
     safety at their grounds.   The problems of crowd control
     and safety had, so it was said, suddenly arisen.   I have
     to say that almost all the matters into which I have been
     asked to inquire and almost all the solutions I have
     proposed, have been previously considered in detail by
     many distinguished Inquiries over a period of sixty
     years."




   KC1ABR
                             -18-


      HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS:

That -

la)   the provisions within the 'Green Guide' to safety at
      Sports Grounds become mandatory forthwith;

lb)   the 'Green Guide' identifies the pitch area as the
      primary means of evacuation in a relevant emergency and
      becomes, at all stadia, considered as a 'suitable place
      of safety';

lc)   chapter 14 of the 'Green Guide' ('Crowd Control') be
      redrafted on the basis that its guidelines concentrate
      too much on the prevention of hooliganism at the
      expense of spectator safety. Crowd safety must
      dominate crowd management strategies;

Id)   a new chapter be introduced to the 'Green Guide'
      specifically covering turnstile facilities and their
      provision;

le)   the provision of the Green Guide be annually updated
      and reviewed.


2)    All pitch-perimeter fences to be immediately withdrawn
      and suitable arrangements for controlled pitch access
      be introduced.

3a)   Following recommendation 19 of the Hillsborough Report,
      we request the Government recognise the futility of its
      proposals for a compulsory 'National Football
      Membership Scheme' (as outlined in Part I of the
      Football Spectators' Bill) and abandon this proposal.

3b)   We request the Government withdraw its proposals on a
      'Football Licensing Authority' with a view to
      introducing separate legislation on this subject,
      pending meaningful negotiations with all relevant
      certificating local authorities and their Advisory
      Groups including fans representatives.

4)    Police Operational Orders be subject to regular
      monitoring and scrutiny by the ground safety
      certificating local authority.

5)    Request the Police to review their whole operational
      procedures for football matches to include a public-



KC1ABR
                             - 19 -

     safety response built into the basic and ongoing
     training of all officers detailed for match duty.


6)   A Royal Commission of Inquiry be set up with the
     following terms of reference, to investigate:-

           (i) the financing of professional football;

          (ii) the administration of professional football;

         (iii) policing and public safety at football stadia;

          (iv) medical, emergency and wider spectator
               facilities at Football League grounds;

           (v) the issue of effective fans representation
               within clubs and on the governing bodies
               which administer the game.


     Following the scale of mismanagement, complacency,
neglect and misplaced priorities detailed within L.J.
Taylor's Interim Report, we believe all aspects of the
football industry should be subject to a Royal Commission.
This is particularly warranted given that pre-Hillsborough
the Police, the F.A. the local authority and the Club all
considered their responsibilities efficiently discharged for
the prestigious occasion.   Clearly, if Hillsborough was an
example of the best the various agencies could offer then
football needs a complete review of its operation.

     Following our call for a Royal Commission of Inquiry,
we intend to publish a "Fans' Charter" covering those areas
identified in the terms of reference and schedule outlined
in recommendation 6.




KC1ABR
                 APPENDIX 3




THE HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY'S GROUNDS FENCING SURVEY
                                                     Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                     Chief Executives Office,
                                                     Room 5,

 LIVERPOOL I ’                                        K      s t < B.u,ldin9S •
                                                                    L69 2DH
                                                      L IV E R P O O L
                                                     Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 2 5 2334/3
                                                     Fax: 236 2047
                                                     DX 14206 L IV E R P O O L

                                                      Y our ref   '

                                                      Our ref     HC/FEN/HWP

                                                      Date        24th August, 1989




 Dear Sir/Madam,

 Following the Hillsborough Disaster, Liverpool City Council set up it's
 'Hillsborough Working Party' to respond to any issues arising out of the
 tragedy, to include a comprehensive review of ground safety and crowd
^management.

 Currently we are examining the use of pitch perimeter and radial segregation
 fencing by means of a survey of all First and Second Division clubs.

I.We would be grateful if you would respond fully to the following questions

l' (i)' when was fencing installed at your ground?
  (ii) how much of the ground is fenced?
 (iii) why were the fences installed (ie, were there any specific incidents
        at your ground which led to the fencing or were there other reasons)?
  (iv) what has been your response to Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report
        in relation to fencing?
   (v) in the wake of Hillsborough, do you intend to keep the pitch perimeter
        fences?
  (vi) was the original decision to install the fences, down to the club, police
        and/or local authority? (please distinguish between pitch perimeter
        fences and radial fences/pens for visiting fans)
 (vii) if you have no fences can you explain the reasons why you feel they are
        unecessary, especially with regards to pitch perimeter fencing?

 Your help and co-operation in these matter will be very much appreciated.

 I hope to hear from you soon.

 Yours faithfully,



            va
 Cllr. Harry Chase,
 Chair Hillsborough Working Party.




    When calling or telephoning please ask for
             EVERTON FOOTBALL CLUB COMPANY LIMITED
             G O O D IS O N P A R K , L IV E R P O O L L 4 4 E L .




     29th August, 1989,




     Cllr. Harry Chase,
     Hillsborough Working Party,
     Chief Executives Office,
     Room 5,
     Municipal Buildings,
     Dale Street,
     Liverpool L69 2DH.




     Dear Cllr. Chase,

      I refer to your letter HC/FEN/HWP of the 24th August,                              The detail you
      request is as follows

      (i) & (ii)             No perimeter or radial fencing within self contained
       areas.
      (iii)                  N/A
      (iv)                   Perimeter and radial fence (one) removed
      (v)                    N/A
      (vi)                   N/A
      (vii)                  The perimeter fences have been replaced by a Safety
                             Corridor.   In the event of any future need to prevent pitch
                             invasions we would investigate an alternative type of
                               ollapsable" fences.




        ours sincerely,




      J. GREE^TOOD
      ■Cbearf'Executive.




                                                  TELEPHONE NUMBERS
                                               051-5212020      Administration
Secretary/Chief Executive:
                                               051-523 6666     Box Office
  J. GREENWOOD
        Manager:
                                               051 -523 9666
                                         TELECOM GOLD
                                                                NEC Facsimile
                                                                       TELEX
                                                                                        EVERTON 0 0       NEC
      C. HARVEY                          Box No. CJJ511          265871 (Ref. CJJ511)
                                              Reaistered Number 36624, England
■tW fl Wimbledon Football Club Ltd
                    49 Durnsford Road, Wimbledon S W 19 8 H G                                                   Telephone 0 1-9 4 6 6311




  Cllr. Harry Chase                                                                                                           30 August 198>
  Chairman, Hillsborough Working Party
  Chief Executives Office
  Liverpool City Council
  Room 5
  Municipal Buildings
  Dale Street
  LIVERPOOL L69 2DH




  Dear Sir

  Thank you for your letter of 24 August regarding pitch perimeter and radial
  segregation fencing.

  The answers to your various questions are as follows

  (i)                  the pitch perimeter fence at the visitors end of the ground was
                      installed in the Sunnier of 1984 and that to the home end in 1985;
                      the Police channel to divide the away end into two pens was
                      installed in the Sunnier of 1986.

   (ii)                 as a result of the works in (i), both terraced ends of the ground
                       are fenced; there is no fence in front of the North Stand and only
                       a 3' fence in front of the South Stand and the enclosure in front
                       of it.

   (iii)               the fencing was not installed because of any specific incidents, but
                       sections of the original 3' high fencing at both ends of the ground
                       did collapse on occasions when there were large crowds.

   (iv)               we have, in consultation with the local authority, installed two
                      additional gates in the pitch perimeter fence as a result of the
                      Lord Justice Taylor's interim report.

   (v)                we are intending to retain the pitch perimeter fencing.

   (vi)               the pitch perimeter fence was installed after discussions with the then
                       G.L.C. but was ultimately a club decision; the Police channel at the
                       away end was a requirement of Merton Council who had by 1986 taken over
                       the responsibility of issuing the Safety Certificate.

   Yoiirs faithf

   Adrian Cook, S e c r e t a r y ________________ —                                                           —       —
     Direc tors: S G R e e d C h a i r m a n .   JH Lelliatt D eputy .   S G N H a m m a m M a n a g i n g Director.   P e te r Cork.   PR C o o p e r .   N JD H a m m a m .

        . . . . .                                                   r                r . . . . . . .1   r .    0           A • -   0 n $00
            A S S O C IA T IO N
            F O O T B A L L CLUB
            L IM IT E D   (REGISTERED No. 4 3 1 1 6 ENGLAND)

            REGISTERED OFFICES A N D GROUND,
            ROKER PARK GROUND, SUNDERLAND, SR6 9 S W .
  e
            TELEPHONE NO. 091 514 0 3 3 2 , TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS: FOOTBALL, SUNDERLAND.'

Our Ref: GD/DLW

4th September, 1989

Councillor H. Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working Party,
Liverpool City Council,
Chief Executives Room,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
LIVERPOOL, L69 2DH.

Dear Sir,

We refer to your letter of the 24th August, 1989, regarding the use of
pitch perimeter and radial segregation fencing.

We do not have any perimeter fencing as we do not feel it is the correct
way to treat football supporters.

We have recently removed all but four radial fences in order to make
crowd flow easier and safer across the terracing. The fences which
remain are in the non-members and visitors area to enable some segregation
to take place.

This Club has never had a problem with hooliganism or supporters invading
the pitch. We believe that football fans are responsible people who will
act in a sensible manner if treated this way.

Should you require any further information, please do not hesitate to
give us a call.

With kind regards.

Yours faithfully,




General Manager/Secretary
-To*---
                                                                                           Wolverhampton
                                                                                           Wanderers F.C.
                                                                                           (1986)Limited
                                                                                            M olineux Stadium
                                                                                            W aterlo o R oad
                                                                                            W o lv erham p to n
                                                                                            WV1 4Q R
      KDP/DMW
                                                                                            Tel: W olverham pton (0902)
                                                                                            G en eral Office: 712181
      Cllr. Harry Chase,                                                                    C om m ercial D ept: 23166
      Hillsborough Working Party,
      Liverpool City Council,
      Room 5,
      Municipal Buildings,
      Dale Street,
      LIVERPOOL L69 2DH.                                  Yourref HC/FEN/HWP


      2nd September,1989.


      Dear M r . Chase,

      In reply to your letter dated 24th August, 1989 listed below are the
      replies to your questions

      (i) Commencement of 1987/88 season i.e. August,1987.

      (ii) One section only i.e. South Bank Terrace holding 15,750 supporters
           split into 11,000 home and A750 visitors.

       (iii)     To stop supporters encroaching on playing area following invasion
                 at last home game of the 1986/7 season.

       (iv) Exit gates clearly marked and now left open.

       (v)     Fences to remain.

       (vl)     Police and local Authority.

       (vll) Not applicable.

      Yours sincerely




       K.D. Pearson, A.C.I.S.,
       Secretary/Accountant.




President: Sir Jack Hayward OBE. Chairman: J. A. Harris Directors: D. M. Gallagher, H. P. D. Glaister, A.C. Gallagher.
                             Manager: Graham Turner Secretary: K. D. Pearson A. C. I. S
                          Company Registered No 1989823. VAT Registered No. 431485656
                 H2ADIQ2D CITYA.EC
                 Valley Parade



Our Ref: TFN/AJM                                                                      4th September 1989


Cllr Harry Chase
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executive's Office
Liverpool City Council
Room 5, Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH

Dear Sir

Thank you for your letter of 24th August.                                   The answers to your questions
are as follows

             1) When the ground was rebuilt in 1986

             2) Behind both goals

             3) When the ground was rebuilt on the recommendation of the
                Safety Team and the Police

             4) We have taken the gates in the fences off and have a
                policeman on duty in each gap in the fence.

             5) Yes - in their present form

             6) All parties

We trust this information will be of help.

Yours faithfully




T F Newman
Secretary




             Directors: J. C. Tordofl IC hairm tnl. J . T. Fountain      F.C.C*., f.c .m a . (Vict-C h»irm »n). D. Thompson F.CA /Financial Director).
             Administration'. T. F. N ewm an (S tcrtta ry).
             Bradford City A.F.C. I19B3I Ltd.. Valley Parade. Bradford. W est Yorkshire. BD8 7DY. Tel (02741 3 06 0 6 2 . Telex 5 1 4 4 9 CHAMCOM G
             R egistered No. 1 7 3 2 7 8 4 England VAT Registered No. 381 23 13 77
Norwich City Football Club
        Carrow Road Norwich NR11JE Tel 0603 612131




Cllr. Harry Chase
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executives Office
Room 5, Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH


                                     4th September, 1989
                                                  RC/fem


Dear Cllr. Chase

Thank you for your recent letter requesting details of
our perimeter fencing at Carrow Road.

Four days after the Hillsborough disaster, I gave the
order to remove the last of our fencing at a terraced
end of the ground.

Now, we have only a 1.1 metre fence around the pitch and
it is my wish that this situation continues.      1 have
never been in favour of 'caging' supporters and I am
putting my trust in our fans.

I hope this information is of sufficient use to you and
I wish the working party well with their objectives.

Yours sincerely          ■




Robert Chase
Chairman
                  >    7     J         g         l e         M                      t l t o            .


                  t)         {footballtLluo Cojti
                             Registered Office: CITY STADIUM, FILBERT STREET. LEICESTER LE2 7FL. ENGLAND
                             Telephone: (0533) 555000 Fax: (0533) 470585
                             Company Registration No. 157760 V.A.T. Registration No. 114 1482 09



Our Ref:    AKB/dvj

6th September 1989


Liverpool City Council
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executives Office
Room 5
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH




Dear Sir,

I am writing in reply to your letter of the 24th August and I am happy
to supply the following information:

1.   I am not sure of the exact date when fencing was installed at Filbert
     Street but know it was before I came here in 1979. I understand it
     was erected in the mid 70's.

2.   Following the introduction of club membership schemes fencing has
     been reduced to one end of the pitch and part of one side.

3.   I understand fences were first installed following crowd misbehaviour.

4.   Our fences are not of the normal type but are of a height of only
      6ft with no overhang. Spikes have been removed since the Hillsborough
     disaster and additional exit gates supplied since the Taylor Interim
      Report.

5.   It is the wish of our Safety Ccmnittee to retain the existing fences.

6.   Not known.

     Not applicable.

Yours/faithfully,




ALAN K BENNETT
General Secretary




                                 Manager: David Pleat. General Secretary: Alan Bennett. Commercial Manager: Peter Hitt
           i t0#
l%;5 » « «A**
                 ™:v4
            .te, .
                                              A¥C Bournemouth
iva    b « ^ \ as ^                           Bournemouth & Boscombe Athletic Football Club Co. Ltd
WALL TO WALL 7] t i i l l l n l i ^ JESB



                                              Telephone: (0202)35381             Fax: 0 2 0 2 3 0 9 7 9 7
     SHIRT SPONSORS
    TO T H E'C H ER R IES'                    Registered Office & Ground:        DEAN COURT GROUND
                                                                                 BOURNEMOUTH BH7 7AF

                                                                                                                           Company Reg. No. 137401 London
                                                                                                                           VAT Reg. No. 185 6563 26




                             DIRECTORS: J. P. Nolan (Chairman), P. W. Hayward (Vice-Chairman), Brian Tiler (Managing and Secretary),
                                  E. G. Keep, W. Oakley, G. M. Hayward, B. E. Willis, C. W. Legg. MANAGER: Harry J. Redknapp.
                                                                                                                                Reg. Officc:
                                                                         F O U N D E D 1865                                     C ity G ro u n d
'D irectors:'                                                                                                                   N o ttin g h a m N G 2 5FJ
M . R ow orih (C h a irm a n )
F.T.C. Pell, F.C.A .. J.P. (V ice-C hairm an)
G .E . M a cp h erso n , J.P.
                                                    NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                                           Reg. in E ngland N o . 1630402
                                                                                                                               T e le p h o n e 8 2 2 2 0 2
F. Reacher
J.F. H ickling
!.!. Korn
                                                      Football Club Ltd.                                                       In fo rm atio n Desk 8 211 22
                                                                                                                               Pools O ffice 8 2 0 4 4 4

J.M . Sm ith
                                                                                                                                F a\ No. 4555X1
C . W ootton




Secretary:                                                             !r? \‘                                                   M a n a g e r:
P aul W hite                                                                                  Hi'- • .                          Brian H . C lough
                                                                                                V
                                                                                                 t*'


                                                                                M P.
           Our      Ref:          PW/PMS




          Cllr H. C h a s e
          Hillsborough Working Party
          Chief Executives Office
          Room 5
          Municipal Buildings
          Dale Street
          Liverpool L69 2DH                                                                                          1st      September                1 989



          Oear        Sir

          Further            to       y our      letter      of 24th            August,              I reply    as     follows:

                (i)       Fencing               was i n s t a l l e d d u r i n g s e a s o n            1977/78.

               (ii)      All          of o u r      terraced areas               are      fenced.

           (Hi)          The f e n c e s w e r e i n s t a l l e d               to c o m p l y          with    E UFA
                         recommendations.

               (iv)       In r e s p o n s e          to L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s            Interim          Report,               our
                          f e n c i n g has           r e m a i n e d in pla c e .

                (v)       In the w a k e of H i l l s b o r o u g h ,                   we           intend    to k e e p      the p i t c h
                          p e r i m e t e r fences.

               (vi)      The o r i g i n a l           d e c i s i o n to i n s t a l l the f e n c e s was down to
                         the C l u b a n d             r a d i a l f e n c e s w e r e l a t e r r e q u e s t e d bu the
                         Pol i c e .

          (vii)           Not         applicable.

          I tp<j~si>. this m e e t s                  with    your        requirements.

          Yours ^fai j.p'ful ly


                 I (X-v
         P. W h i t e             /
         Secretary

     cp

    European Cup: 1978/79, 1979/80; Football League Division I: Champions 1977/78, Runners-up 1966/67, 1978/79; Football League Cup: Winners 1977/78, 1978/79,
            io?Q/Rn: l inln-nnrts Cun: Winners 1988/89: FA. Cup: Winners 1898, 1959: Anglo-Scottish Competition: Winners 1976/77; Sim od Cup: Winners 1988/89;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   « :w r3 « w a » B !*S B rrs w *:'
I                                                                                 Newcastle United Football Co. Ltd.
I?                                  R e g is te re d O ffic e • ST. JAMES’ PARK • NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE • NE1 4ST • TELEPHONE: (091) 232 8361 • FACSIMILE: (091) 232 9875
t                                                                                 R e g is te re d in E n g la n d No. 31014                        R. CUSHING • G e n e ra l M a n a g e r & S e c re ta ry


-J                                                                   RC/MEC                                                                                                                      5th September, 1989.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ».
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '•TfJ’S 'l >' V :
                                                                     Councillor H. Chase,
                                                                     Liverpool City Council,
                                                                     Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                                     Room 5,
                                                                     Municipal Buildings,
                                                                     Dale Street,
                                                                     Liverpool, L6S 2DH.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ; •• ' ;
                                                                     Dear Sir,

                                                                     We acknowledge receipt of your lette r of the 24th August, 1989.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   '
                                                                     You have asked for our response to a number of questions, and




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                     we set out our replies below:

                                                                      (i)                       Fencing was installed at St. Jam es1 Park in the 1983/84
                                                                                                season.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   »-«nt«srr.r»-.v»r-v< •, (•:
                                                                      (ii)                      One side and both ends of the ground were fenced.

                                                                      (iii)                     The fences were erected to comply with UEFA Regul­
                                                                                                ations and also to assist the Police with crowd control.

                                                                      (iv)                      The pitch perim eter fence at St. James' Park was
                                                                                                removed (bar a small section in front of the visiting fans
    i. j . » * s t -t u .-i v i "




                                                                                                area) immediately after the Hillsborough Disaster.    This
                                                                                                was under the instructions of the Local Authority.

                                                                      (v)                       See above.
    ra sr-v f




                                                                      (vi)                      Club decision.

                                                                      (vii)                     Although our perim eter pitch fencing has been removed,
                                                                                                and in the long term we would favour this remaining
                                                                                                the case, there is no doubt that perim eter pitch fencing
                                                                                                was most useful to the Club and the Police in terms
                                                                                                of crowd control management.

                                                                      We await with interest Lord Justice Taylor’s final recommendations
                                                                      and report.



                                                                      R / CUSHING
                                    i=r                               General Manager/Secretary                                                                                                                                            _ ..
                                     D i r e c t o r s - W . G . M c k e a g ( c h a i r m a n ) - u . h . V o r b e s ( v ic e c h a i r m a n ) ' S . S e y m o u r •   J.   R u s h a -F .c .- S ir G e o r g e B o w m a n j. p .   P. C.   M a l l i n o e r -H . t o u n g
A sso cb tig jfjg tb P 11Club P.L.C.                                                                                                 (Incorporated 1946)
Team Manager
Company Secretary - F. Broughton

Registered Office and Sports Stadium -BOOTHFERRY PARK, HULL HU4 6EU
Telephones (0482) 5 1 119/5637 50.
Fax No. (0482) 565752

VAT No. 166 9496 08. Registered No. 4 1 0 0 5 3 in England
Members of the Football League
Football Association
Central League
Northern Intermediate League                                                                        7th September, 1989

          Your Ref. HC/FEN/HWP
          Our Ref. FB/HB


          Councillor Harry Chase,
          Hillsborough Working Farty,
          Liverpool City Council,
          Chief Executives Office,
          Room 5 Municipal Buildings,
          Dale Street, LIVERFOOL L69 2DH.


          Dear Councillor Chase,

               Further to your letter dated 24th August, 1989, the replies to your
          questions are as follows

                           (i)        Fencing was installed at Boothferry Park, Hull in 1985 •
                          (ii)       The Ground is fenced at the two ends behind the Goals
                                      plus a short continuing area on the North East Corner
                                      of the Stadium which houses the Away Supporters overflow.
                        (iii)        The Fences were installed after discussion with the Local
                                      Police Services and the Council Technical Services, relative
                                      to the advice in the Green Paper.
                          (iv)        The Hull City Club is following all the recommendations of
                                      Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report in conjunction with and
                                      the approval of, the local Emergency Services and Council
                                      Technical Services.
                            (v)       Fences at Boothferry Park are still in situ and again constant
                                      contact on Ground Safety Measures is maintained and agreed
                                      with the Police and Technical Services.
                          (vi)        The original decision to install Fences was passed, again with
                                      discussions with the Local Authority and Police relating to
                                      the issue of the Safety Certificate.
                                                                               Yours sincerely.,



                                                                                          Trank Broughton
                                                                                          Company Secretary




                     Directors   DON ROBINSON - Chairman, T.C. WAITE F.I.M.I. M.I.R.T.E. - Vice Chairman, G.H. NEEDLER B.A. F.C.A.
                                 J. JOHNSON B.A. D.P.A., R H . CHETHAM, C.M. THORPE LL.B., M.W. FISH F.C.A.     ^ ^ H ucheS
             SW INDON ruWiSi rOO f BALL DU . l i                                                                                y,
                         Team
                          7 0 / / ! Manager:
                                    iT ia iia y c i.                                             Registered Office:
                            ittXMS&MX Oss-ce krdiles                                  COUNTY GROUND, SWINDON, WILTS. SN12ED
            Administrative Manager!Club Secretary:                                                    Registered No:
                           D. G. King                                                                 53100 England
                                                                                                        Telephone:
                     Commercial Manager:
                                                                                                  (0793) 642984 (5 Lines)
                         D. Buswell
                                                                                                          Fax No:
                Accountant/Company Secretary:                                                (0793) 642984 Ext 35 9am -5pm
                             VtZXBftttKr                                                     (0793)36170           after 5pm




               4th September 19£9

               Mr.H.Chase
               Liverpool City Council.
               Room 5
               Municipal Buildings
               Vale Street
               Liverpool
               L69 2VH

               Our Rerf: VGK/m/0409


               Dear S'ir,

               In reply to your questlonalre regarding the. ’Hillsborough Working Party’ .
               I hope you iind the fallowing information useiul fa r your study.

               1. Thz perimeter fencing that was Installed at thz Stratton Bank end oi
               thz County Ground i t oi thz most recent typz In thz Country and thz installation
               was completed la s t November.

               2. Thz oxzas bzhlnd both goals are ienced and also thz area reserved far thz
               Visiting Supportzrs, [plzasz iind enclosed a map oi thz ground with thz aria
               cleaAly marked).

               3. Thz iences wzrz Installzd a t thz clear instigation oi thz Safety Tzam.
               Thz members ofi thz tzam incorporate thz fallowing, Police, f ir e and Ambulance,
               authorities, WHtshVie County Council and Thamesdown Borough Council.

               4. We have fallowed thz Instructions as recormended by Lord Justice Taylor's
               interim report. The perimeteA fance gates are painted In luminous coloured
               paint [identical to the colour displayed on the Police vans.) during each
               match they are l e i t open,but tape Is placed across the entrance oi each gate
               at knee and waist height, so as not to cause visual obstructions.

               5.    Unless instructed by the Safety Team they w ill remain.

               6. There was iencing%befare the decision oi the Saiety Team, to extend and
               modernise fallowing the Implications oi the recent soccer disasters.

              7.     Not applicable.
   trr
Division Four Champions:-1985/86. League Cop Winners: 1969. Division Three Runners-up: 1962/63& 1968/69. Division Three Play-off Winners: 1986/87
V0uA6 6i.YlC,QAQl.Lj




V.G.King
SECRETARY




EncZ.
                                                                 STERILE

                          AREA T.8                               AREA T.7   AREAS T . 5 & 6
                          ( 5 , 180)
-E x it 7

              7 U   7 7 7 7 ^   M         7 ^       r    n




                      VISITORS ENCLOSUkE


Green
                                                                                      STERILE
                      PERIMETER FENCING
— Exit                                                                               AREA T:4




   ^llow

   Exit       *U

                                                                                zr
( 5 , 062 )   JZ
                                                                                       Exit 5
                                                                                CL




    Exit
                                                                                     AREA         T.2
  Orange                                                                             ( 4 , 190)




    Exit

  Blue

                                 ^Coynty^Ropd p o w p ) | n d /             ^

— Exit 1                               AREA T.1
                                       ( 3 , 220)                                      Exit U

              • Exit 2                                  Exit 3
    * IPSWICH TOWN FOOTBALL CLUB CO. LTD.
        REGISTERED OFFICE                    PO RTM AN ROAD              IPSW ICH IP1 2D A    ENGLAND        TELEPHONE IPSW ICH 2192U               FAX IPSW ICH 226835


             D irecto rs:                         M a n ag er:                          l-IPSWICH"n           M em b ers o f:
                                                                                                              T h e Football A ssociation
                                                                                                                                               H o no u rs:
                                                                                                                                               FA Cup W inners 1978
             Patrick M C obbold (Chairman)        J P D uncan
                                                  S ecretary:                                                 Suffolk County Football A ssn    UEFA Cup W inners 1981
             K H Brightwell
                                                                                                              T h e Football le a g u e        Football le a g u e Div 1 C ham pions
             J Kerr MBE                           D C Rose
                                                  S ales St P ro m o tion s M anager:                         T h e Football Com bination      1961-62
             J Kerridge
                                                                                                              M ercia Y outh le a g u e        Division 2 Cham pions
             J M Sangster                         M A Noye
                                                  C olours: Royal B lue/W hite                                S o u th East C ounties League   1960*61 1967*68
             D R Sheepshanks
                                                                                                                                               Division 3 So u th Cham pions
             H R Sm ith                           VA T R e gistratio n N um ber:
                                                                                         t T O W N • F *Cl                                     1953-54 1956-57
                                                  102 3660 21
                                                  C om pany R e gistratio n N um ber:                                                          FA Y outh Cup W inners
                                                                                                                                               1972-73 1974-75




                                                                                                                                5th September 1989
                                                                                                                                Your ref: HC/FEN/HWP
                                                                                                                                Our ref: DCR/PG
                                  Clr. H. Chase
                                  Chairman
                                  Hillsbrough Working Party
                                  Chief Executives Office
                                  Room 5, Municiple Buildings
                                  dale Street
                                  Liverpool L69 2DH



                                  Dear Sir,

                                  Thank you for your letter of the 2Hth August regarding the Working
                                  Party set up by the Liverpool City Council.

                                  I feel I am unable to help you with the information that you have
•   c    -
                                  requested.   We are quite happy to give information to the Commission
                                  headed by Lord Justice Taylor, but I do not wish to get involved with
                                  any other organisation.

                                   Yours faithfully,



                                   Secretary.
Queens Park Rangers
F ootb all and A thletic Club Ltd
Registered Office                                         Registered No 60094 England

Rangers Stadium Shepherds Bush
London Wl2 7PA
Telephone 01-743 0262
F a x 01-7490994                                                                        7th September, 1989.




Cllr Harry Chase,
Chair, Hillsborough Working Party,
Chief Executive's Office,
Room 5, Municipal Building,
Dale Street,
Liverpool, L69 2DH.




Dear Councillor Chase,

Thank you for your letter of 24th August.

Rangers Stadium does not have perimeter fencing in the true sense of
the word and have been opposed to the idea for a number of years as
the club feels that this would be a potential hazard in the event
of an incident such as that which occurred at Hillsborough.

The police share our views although they did ask the club to erect
a small fence behind each goal which stands approximately one and
a half feet above the perimeter wall. This merely acts as a deterrent
to spectators who may wish to encroach onto the field of play but
in an emergency they would be able to climb over the fence, albeit
with some assistance as the height from ground level is approximately
5' 5".

 I trust the above will be of assistance in your study.

Yours sincerely,




Miss S.F. Marson
Secretary




Corporate Directors: R .C . TH O M PSON (Chairman)
                    C.B. BERLIN B .A .(Hons) (Managing)
                     R.B. CO PU S, M.A .A .C .A .
Secretary: MISS S.F. M ARSON
The Millwall Football & Athletic Company (1985) pic
                         The Den New Cross London SE14 5RH
                                        Telephone 01-639 3143/4



                                                                                7th September, 1989

 Cllr. Harry Chase,
 Chair Hillsborough Working Party
 Liverpool City Council,
 Chief Executives Office
 Rocm 5,
 Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street,
 Liverpool, L69 2DH


 Dear Cllr. Chase,

           Further to your letter dated 24th August,                                    please find below the
 answers to your questions:

    (i)     Fencing was installed at our ground approximately14 years ago.

   (ii)     All of the perimeter of the pitch is fenced.

  (iii)     The fences were installed due to crowd problems.

   (iv)     There has been no change in relation to fencingas a                                      result   of Lord
             Justice Taylor's Interim Report.

    (v)     In the wake of Hillsborough we do intend to keep the pitch perimeter
             fences.

   (vi)     The original decision to install fences was downs to the police and
             the club.

  (vii)     Not applicable.

                                                      Yours sincerely.




                                              Chief Executive/Secretary



      Directors: R.I. BURR Chairman, P.W. MEAD Vice Chairman, J.D. BURN1GE, B.E. MITCHELL, Clr. D. SULLIVAN
                        Manager: J. DOCHERTY        Chief Executive/Secretary: GJ.S. HORTOP

                   I                                   I tobrfong with the community

              Company Registered in England No. 1924222        VAT Registration No. 437 2571 46
                         Registered Office: The Den New Cross London SE14 5RH
      Brighton & Hove Albion Football Club                                                              LIMITED



      Goldstone Ground       • Hove • East Sussex             BN37DE
      Telephone Brighton (0273) 739535 Fax (0273) 21095


          RP/JS

          7 September 19B9

          Cllr. H. Chase
          Chairman Hillsborough Working Party
          Chief Executive Office
          Dale Street
          Liverpool

          Dear Mr. Chase,

         I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 24 August.
         The ansuers to your questions are as follows:

                  1.        1977


                  2.        Approximately one-third.

                 3.         Fencing was installed following the game with
                            Tottenham when referee Turvey stopped the game
                             and we were then ordered, following the F.A.
                             inquiry^ to install fencing around the whole of
                            the perimeter track.

                  4.        Following this report the fencing is now only
                             in front of our non members area in the North
                            Stand and the Visitors area in the South East
                            Corner.
                            There are no gates in the fencing.       These
                            have been removed and people can gain access
                            directly on to the playing surface.

                            At the moment of time - Yes.

                            Answered in 3.

                            Not applicable.

         Trusting              bove assists.

         Yours si




C f
      Directors: Chairman D C Sizen Vice-Chairman J L Campbell G Appleby BSBedson R A Bloom BE Clarke PFKent F Shannon fca G A Star
      Manager: B D Llovd Chief Executive: R A Pavev Secretary: S A Rooke
                                                                                             Registered o ffic e :               Company Secretary:


                                     souTHnmPTon                                             T h e D e ll, M ilt o n R o a d ,
                                                                                             S o u th a m p to n S 0 9 4 X X
                                                                                             tele phon es:
                                                                                                                                 Brian Truscott




                                     FOOTBALL
                                                                                                                                 Team Manager:
                                                                                             (0 7 0 3 ) 2 2 0 5 0 5 (5 lines)
                                                                                                                                 Chris Nicholl
                                                                                             fa csim ile :
                                                                                              (0 7 0 3 ) 3 3 0 3 6 0                Commercial Manager
                                                                                             t ic k e t , m a tch enquiries         Bob Russell
                                                                 Founded 1885                 (0 7 0 3 ) 2 2 8 5 7 5 (4 lines)




       7 September                     1989


       Yr Ref:               HC/FEN/HWP


        Cllr. H a r r y C hase
        H i l l s b o r o u g h W o r k i n g P art y
        Chief E x e c u t i v e s Office
        L i v e r p o o l C ity Council
        Room 5 Municipal Buildings
        Dal e Street
        LIVERPOOL
        L69 2DH


        D e a r Sir

        W i t h r e f e r e n c e to your letter of the                                                            24     August,     we     set         out
        b e l o w the answ e r s to the que s t i o n s :

         1)       1981
         2)       One end o n l y - A r c h e r s Road V i s i t o r s ' E n c l o s u r e
         3)       The fence was i n s t a l l e d to p r e v e n t        v i s i t i n g s upporters
                   i n v a d i n g the p i t c h
         4)       The f e n c i n g wil l re m a i n in p l a c e and exit gates               to the
         5)       p i t c h p e r i m e t e r w i l l be open d u r i n g the game and m a n n e d
                   by p o l i c e off i c i a l s
         6)         The o r i g i n a l d e c i s i o n was a joint one m a d e by the Club
                   and the Police.



         Yours           faithfully




         BRIAN TRUSCOTT
          Secretary




                                                                                                                                           V A T Reg. N o : 3 3 0 1 8 1 2 0 8
D ire cto rs:   F .G .L . A s k h a m , F C A (C h a irm a n ), K . St. J. Wiseman (V ice C h a irm a n )
                Joh n C o rb e tt, E .T . Bates, I.L . G o rd o n , B .H .D . H u n t.                                                            Reg N o : 5 3 301 E ngland
n      a      m       a    im       r   v   iM            M           M    M         a    m

Our re f:         MJD/CE

7th September 1989

Councillor H arry Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working P a r ty ,
Liverpool City Council,
Chief E xecutives Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale S tre e t,
L iv erp o o l.
L69 2DH

Dear S ir,

I am in r e c e ip t of your l e t t e r of 24th August 1989 and have pleasure
in responding as follows to th e questions r a is e d :

1.         The fencing on a ll four s id e s of the ground was in s ta lle d in
           1982.

2.         The only are a now fenced is in th e v i s i t o r s terracin g section.

3.         Yes th e fences were o rig in a lly in s ta lle d following a crowd d istu rb a n c e .

4.         The fencing at the v i s i t o r s end has s i x 2.2 metre e x its leading
           onto the p itc h which a re ste w ard ed in the event of evacuation.
           No gates are at the p re se n t time i n s ta lle d although th e Public ^
           Protection Committee r e s e r v e the r i g h t to re-exam ine the position
           as to w heth er gates should be in s ta lle d a f te r the f i r s t 6 games
           of th e season.

 5.        Yes

 6.        The o riginal decision to i n s ta ll th e fences in 1982 was taken
           by a d i r e c t i v e from th e Football A ssociation.
           More rec e n tly th e r e -in tro d u c tio n of th e fencing on th e v i s i t o r s
           end was at th e s p e c ific re q u e st of the P olice.

 7.        There is no p e rim e te r fencing in any Derby County a re a as
           the two sid e s a re com pletely co ntrolled b y m embership and
           the t h i r d s id e the Police and th e Club are s a tis f ie d th a t our
           own su p p o r te r s p a tte r n of b ehav io u r in recen t y e a r s has not
           w arranted the fencing being r e - i n s t a l l e d but should th e re be
           any future encroachment on th e playing a re a by our su p p o rte rs
           i t has been s ta te d p u b lic ly th a t th e p e rim e te r fencing will
           re tu rn .




     Registered Office of Derby County Football Club PLC • The Baseball Ground • Derby DE38NB
     Registered in England No. 49139 • Telephone Derby (0332) 40105 Grams: FOOTBALL DERBY
                                        c ^~ ~ i M r * . * nooo ooor-i a
                                       -   2   -




I t r u s t t h is is th e information you r e q u ire and should you r e q u ir e
any f u rth e r d e ta ils then p lease do not h e s ita te to contact me.


Yours f a ith fu lly ,




     \

Michael J . Dunford
S ec retary
                                                              Founded in 1886



      PLTHOUTH ABflYLE FOOTBALL COLTD
                    Registered Office HOME PARK . PLYMOUTH PL2 3DQ                           Tel Plymouth 569597




                                                                          l'..        Vo— -  j i




                      I                 *    *         r




            Iy




                                     V.A.T. Reg. No. 143 8293 59      Registered No. 110819 England
Directors: P. D. Bloom (Chairman), R. Burroughs A.R.I.C.S., S. W. Dawe, D. R. Forshaw, C. Hartley, B. Hooper, G. E. Jasper, J. E. C. Kent.
                                  Company Secretary - Graham Little       Team Manager - Ken Brown
                                                      A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S T O BE A D D R E S S E D T O T H E S E C R E T A R Y




’ /                   WEST HAITI LiniTED FOOTBALL CO. LTD.
               C H A IR M A N                                                                                                                            HONORARY C ONSULTAN T
             L. C . C E A R N S                                                                                                                                   B R I A N A. R O P E R
                                                                                                                                                                  m .a ..b .m . , f .r .c .s .
              D IRECTORS
            W . F. C E A R N S
                                                                                 R E G ISTE R E D   O FFIC E S:
             J . PETCHEY
                                                                                                                                                              MEDICAL O F FIC E R
      M. W . C E A R N S A . C . I . B .                                    BOLEYN G R O U N D                                                                DR. G O R D O N B R I L L
   C . J . W A R N E R M .A ..N O TA R Y .
                                                                            GREEN STREET                                                                       L .R .C .P.,L .R .C .S.

              SECRETARY                                                     U P T O N PARK
               T. M . F I N N
                                                                            LONDON • EI3 9 A Z                                                              AD M INISTR ATION /
                                                                 te le p h o n e :                           F A C S I M IL E NO.                         COM M ERCIAL MANAGER
                                                                01-472 2740                                  01 - 4 7 ! 2 9 9 7                                    BRIAN B L O W E R


              MANAGER
             LOU MACARI



Yo u r Ref:                       HC/FEN/HWP                                                                       7p.gg»r?Pn n r ^ |
Ou r Ref:                         TMF/LG                                                                            r 11 SEP wsq
                                                                                                                  j D L_!             -- ^ ^ _
                                                                                                                                      |


#h  lr. H. Chase,
  h a i r H i l l s b o r o u g h W o r k i n g Party,
L i v e r p o o l C i t y Council,
H i l l s b o r o u g h W o r k i n g Party,
Ch i e f E x e c u t i v e s Office,
R o o m 5,
Mu n i c i p a l Buildings,
E^ale Street,
Liverpool,
L69 2DH.                                                                                                                            6th September,                              1989



De a r Mr.                Chase,

I w r i t e w i t h r e f e r e n c e to y o u r l e t t e r w h i c h we r e c e i v e d on 2nd
S e p t e m b e r c o n c e r n i n g the use of fenc i n g at football l e a g u e grounds.

I detail                  b e l o w the a r r a n g e m e n t s                       i n f o r c e at U p t o n P a r k : -

Perimeter Fencing

U p t o n P a r k does not         possess any p i t c h p e r i m e t e r fencing.      The p i t c h is
s e p a r a t e d f r o m the t e r races by means of a b r i c k          wall s o m e three feet
h i g h f r o m the p i t c h side.        This has a total of s i x t e e n gates w i t h i n
it to a l l o w for access to the var ious areas.

It is not for us to say t hat p i t c h p e r i m e t e r f e n c i n g is u n n e c e s s a r y in
g eneral b u t w e h&ve fought s t r o n g l y over the years to r e s i s t s u c h an
i n s t a l l a t i o n at U p t o n Park.  This has b e e n s u p p o r t e d b y the P o l i c e
on the basis t hat f e n c i n g w o u l d make access to the t e r r a c e m u c h more
d i f f i c u l t for t h e i r officers in the event of c rowd disturbance.                   It
also of c o u r s e p r o v i d e s an easy exit route to a p l a c e of s a f e t y i n the
e\£ent of a n emergency.

We h ave c o n s t a n t l y r e m i n d e d o u r s upporters of the fact t h a t the absence
of s u c h fences is a p r i v i l e g e and that c o n s t a n t p i t c h i n v a s i o n s w o u l d
l e a d to this b e i n g r e m o v e d and f e n c i n g b e i n g installed.                 This t h e y
have respected, the               onl y t r a n s g r e s s i o n onto the p l a y i n g s u r f a c e b e i n g
the t r a d i t i o n a l one     at the end of the last home game of e a c h season.

                                                                                                                                                   C o n t d / ........

                     nrrr:ir:xr:R''n IN 'T.'.10 "•VP V’O                                     Pf;1irvv ^ n                   CTP"PT             >.-■>.vi;;>r-.y.
                                                       -2-




Radial     Elences
             i
There exists on the S o u t h Bank T e r r a c e at U p t o n P a r k t h r e e radial
fences w h i c h s p l i t this s e c t i o n i n t o four pens thus a l l o w i n g us
f l e x i b i l i t y in terms of the amo u n t of t e r r a c e we can a l l o c a t e to
v i s i t i n g supporters.

The first t w o fences w e r e i n s t a l l e d in 1986 f o l l o w i n g c o n s u l t a t i o n s
w i t h the local Police.                   A n a dditional fence was i n s t a l l e d in the last
close s e a s o n as it was felt that furt h e r d i v i s i o n of the t e r r a c e was
n e c e s s a r y to a s s i s t the Police w i t h crowd control arrangements.                              The
C l u b w e r e i n full a g r e e m e n t w i t h the d e c i s i o n s taken.               T h e r e are four
openings i n e ach radial fence to a l l o w for l a t e r a l m o v e m e n t and
a l t h o u g h t h e s e do not hav e gates eac h p o s s e s s e s a metal b a r w h i c h can
      slid across to f orm a b a r r i e r once the d e c i s i o n to c lose a p e n has
p e n taken.            C o n s e q u e n t to Lord J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s I n t e r i m R e p o r t the
openings hav e b e e n p a i n t e d in an i l l u m i n o u s g r e e n co l o u r i n o r d e r to
i d e n t i f y t h e m as exits.

I s h o u l d add t hat the Po l i c e r e a f f i r m e d t h e i r o p p o s i t i o n to p i t c h
p e r i m e t e r f e n c i n g at the A d v i s o r y Group M e e t i n g c a l l e d to disc u s s the
r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s c o n t a i n e d w i t h i n the I n t e r i m Report.

I trust this i n f o r m a t i o n will s u f f i c e but if yo u r e q u i r e any addi t i o n a l
i n f o r m a t i o n p l e a s e do not h e s i t a t e to c o n t a c t me.

Yours sincerely,




T. M. F INN
SECRETARY
              SELHURST PARK STADIUM ; LO N D O N SE25 6PU ; TEL: 01-653 4462 FAX: 01-771 531 I


Cllr. Harry Chase
LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL
Room 5
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool                                                                                       September 1989




Dear Councillor Chase

I am not going to answer your questions individually in your letter of 24th Augjjst, but I will
place cn record my Club's views.

Every pitch perimeter fence is worth 100 policemen and the Hillsborougfi Report which stated that
perimeter fence gates should remain open whilst terraces were occupied is not acceptable to my
Club and if carried out would enable any determined group of fans to create a pitch invasions
at their whim.   We are requesting that perimeter gates remain closed but stewarded so they can
be opened imrBdiately in an emergency and also there will be adequate gates for the number of
spectators to egress cn to the pitch within a reasonable time.

We have fences cn all sides of our ground but they are not higjn so the fans do not get the feeling
of being caged in and we have erected 5' fences where the police wanted 8' fences.

We have since had an incident when Birmingjnam City visited us which vindicated our policy.
Hillsborough has made no real difference to our thinking cn fences in respect of crowd control,
safety and segregation, and the events of Hillsborough were down to inefficiency, bad organisation
and chaos by inconpetent individuals, and the danger is there will be an over reaction at every
ground in the country where a Hillsborough could not happen and their restrictions will be brougjnt
into affect which will be more detrimental than those existing at those grounds now.    Having fence
gates open during a game is an indication of what I mean.,

We also now have perfectly good areas limited artifically and other areas packed with fans who
see the space adjoining and wander why they are not allowed to      move. Fences are vital but so are
gates in them for emergency exists to the pitch, and every safety team      should view thepitch as
a means of escape from the Stand rather than atterrpting to have all the emergency exits going back
througjn the Stand.

 The only area where fences may not be required is in front of stand seating and pecple should
 not be expected to view the game througjn fences therefore some different designs may be required
 depending on local circumstances.




 R.G.Noades




                           Club President: Stanley Stephenson, Chairman: R.G. Noades, Manager: Steve Coppell
        Directors: B. Coleman, A.S.C. DeSouza, G. Geraghty, S. Hume-Kendall, M.E. Lee, P.H.N. Norman, K.A. Sinclair, B.O. Umunna
        ___________________________ rn m n n n v qer-m tarv A .1 le a th e r Club Secretary: M.A.G. Hurst
LIVERPOOL FOOTBALL CLUB
                              I m         AND ATHLETIC GROUNDS P. L.C.
                                          AIMFIELD ROAD, LIVERPOOL L4 OTH
                                                   0 5 1 -2 6 3 2 3 6 1 /2
    O fficial S p o n s o r              Telex 627661 LFC G                                       Fax 051-260 8813
                                                                      R e g is te re d No. 3 5 6 6 8 . E ngland
                                          M a t c h In fo rm a tio n S e r v i c e O nly   M a t c h T i c k e t O ffic e . E n q u ir ie s O nly
                                                     0 51-260 9 99 9                                      0 5 1 - 2 6 0 B 68O



Your Ref: HC/FEN/HWP
Our Ref:  PBR/MG



Cllr. H. Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working Party,
Liverpool City Council,
Chief Executive's Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale S t reet,
Liverpool,
L 69 2DH.                                                                     18th September 1989

Dear Cllr. Chase,

        We thank you for your letter of 24th August and would
reply as follows

        Perimeter fencing was erected in front of the standing
area at the Anfield Ground in 1977.

        The decision to instal the fences was taken by
the club as a result of strong recommendations by both
U.E.F.A. and The Football Association that suitable protection,
i.e. security fences on dry moats, should be provided to prevent
spectators encroaching on the field of play.

        Following the Hillsborough Disaster, the perimeter fencing
was removed and a safety corridor has now been provided at the front
of the Spion Kop Enclosure, which is the only remaining standing area
at the Anfield Ground.

                  Trusting that this is the information you r e q u i r e .

                                                       .Yours sincerely,




                                        Chief Executive/General Secretary




I             m
                  *  m              K M. O ALG LISH. M.B .E .                                 p.B. ROBINSON
                                    PLAYE R/TEA M m a n a g e r                               c h ie f e x e c u t i v e /g e n e r a l s e c r e t a r y
Registered Trade M arks
                                                   T E L E P H O N E N o. 0 6 1 -2 2 6 1191/2                        T E L E G R A P H IC A D D R E S S : "F O O T B A L L M A N C H E S T E R 14-
                                                   FA X N o. 0 6 1 -2 2 7 9 41 8




                                                   M     a n c h e s t e r                        C    ity       F    o o t b a l l                        C     l u b             plc
                                                   REGISTERED IN E NG LAND                                REGISTERED NUMBER 4 0 9 4 6

                                                                                                                                                      REGISTERED O FFIC E & G R O U N D

                                                                                                                                                      MAINE                      ROAD
WINNERS EUROPEAN CUP WINNERS CUP 1970
                                                   Chairman:      P.J. SWALES                                 Vice-Chairman: F. PYE                   MOSS                         SIDE
W I N N E R S F. A . C H A L L E N G E C U P
           1 90 4. 1934, 1956. 1969                Directors:     I.L.G. NIVEN,      C.B. MUIR,       M.T. HORWICH,      W.C. ADAMS                   MANCHESTER
F I N A L IS T S F .A . C H A L L E N G E CUP
            1926. 1933, 1 95 5, 1901                              A. THOMAS,          G. DOYLE,       W.A. MILES,      B. TURNBULL                       M I4 7W N
LEAGUE (l*T D IV I S I O N ) CHA M P IO N S
                   1937, I9 6 0
                                                                  J. GREIBACH
     RUNNERS-UP 1 9 0 4 , 1921, 1977
WINNERS FOOTBALL LEAGUE CUP 1970.1976
                                                   G EN ER AL
LEAGUE (2 « P D IV IS IO N ) C HA M P IO NS                                                                                                           SECRETARY
                                                   M ANAGER
    1099. 1903.1910. 1920. 1947. 1966
          RUNNERS-UP 1 0 9 6 , 1951                JIMMY FRIZZELL                                                                                      J. B. HALFORD
    C ENTRAL LEAGUE CHA M P IO N S
                   1970. 1907                      MANAGER
     WINNERS FA .YO U TH CUP 1906
FULL MEMBERS CUP FINALISTS 1906                        MEL MACHIN


         Our         ref:            J B H .BH

         31st            August                 1989

         Cllr Harry Chase
         Chair H i l l s b o r o u g h Working                                   Party-
         Chief Exec u t i v e s Office
         Ro om 5
         M u n i c i p a l Building
         Dale Street
         L IV E R P O O L
         L69 2DH

          Dear           Cllr            Chase

          I wish to a c k n o w l e d g e youi• letter of the 24th instant
          b el ow the answ e r s to the c[uestions you have ra ised :

            i.                 1978
           ii .                The whole of the pitch perimter
          iii .                UEF A r e q u i r e m e n t s
           iv .                We have adhered to the Report
            v.                 Yes
           vi .                It was down to the Local Aut h o r i t y                                              and P o l i c e .
          vii .                Not applicable.

          Trusti ng                   this in f o r m a t i o n                is of a s s i s t a n c e                to you .

           Your s sincerely




   ^ P j B HALFORD
    V SEC R E T A R Y
                                           "The fm tfy Club"
                 Bramall Lane, Sheffield S2 4SU Tel: 0742 738955 Fax: 0742 723030




         DC/MAC

                                                                               21st September 1989


         Your Ref. HC/FEN/HWP

         Hillsborough Working Party,
         Liverpool City Council,
         Chielf Executives Office,
         Room 5, Municipal Buildings,
         Dale Street,
         LIVERPOOL L69 2DH


          Dear Sir,

          I apologise for the delay in replying to your letter of the 24th August and
          set out below the information you require

          1.   Approximately 10 years ago.
          2.   3 sides of the ground is fenced.
          3.   No specific incidence led to the installation of the fences as far
               as I am aware.
f         4.   The Local Authority has decided that fences should reamin at our
V              ground but that Pitch Perimeter Gates should be removed.
          5.   See above.
          6.   All decisions to install fences, whether radial or pitch perimeter
               have been made at the request of Police and Local Authority.
          7.   Not applicable.

          I trust that this information is of use to you.

          Yours faithfully,                            „


          DAVID CAPPER,
          COMPANY,: SECRETARY.




    Directors: R.J. Brealey (Chairman), D. Dooley (Managing Director), A.H. Laver, M.A. Wragg, R. Wragg, P.G. Woolhouse
                Company Secretary : D. Capper,        Team Manager : D.T. Bassett,      England Reg. No. 61S64
                Stoke City Football Club Limited
                                                                             FOUNDED           1863

TE LEPH O N E : S T O K E -O N -T p E N T 4 1 3 5 1 1 /3 L IN E S          FAX: 0782 46422                 TELEG RAM S     : FO OTBALL,         S T O K E -O N -T R E N T


                                                                                                                         REGISTERED OFFICE :
DIRECTORS
      P . C O A T E S , C H A IR M A N                                                                      VIC TORI A G R O U N D
      Ed. W EETM AN             V I C E - C H A IR M A N
                                                                                                            STOKE-ON-TRENT
     G . L. M A
              HNi NNmIiN' i vGa ,    tM
                                      vi..dB .,. , C h B ..*.
               F . R .C .S .E d .,    F .D .S .R .C .S .        (E n g )                                    STAFFS.                         S T 4            4 E G
      M . NIELD                                                                                                 R E G IS T R A T IO N   N o , 99885 E N G L A N D

      K. A. HUMPHREYS                                                            1^ U N IX * h ^ tT 5r |
                                                                                                                      Secretary : M. J. POTTS
      J. M. LOFTUS
                                                                                                            All communications to be addressed to
 MANAGER                                                                                                                the Ground
      M, D. MILLS M.B.E.


       MUP/CPIJ

       28 September 1989

       Councillor H. Chase,
       Chairman of the Hillsborough Working Party,
       Chief Executives Office,
       Room 5,
       Municipal Buildings,
       Dale Street,
       LIVERPOOL L69 2DH.


        Dear Councillor Chase,

        Further to your letter dated 27th September, 1989, I have set out below the
        information requested:-

        (i)               1979/80
        (ii)              The whole of theground is      fenced.
        (iii)             To comply with our SafetyCertificate (There was no specific incidents
                           at our ground which led to the installation of fencing).
        (iv)               It was agreed at a meeting with our County Council that the fencing
                           would remain until Lord Oustice Taylor's final report is received.
         (v)              No 4 applies.
         (vi)             Local Authority.
         (vii)            Not applicable.

        I trust that this information meets your requirements.

        Yours sincerely




        M 3 F
        Secretary
 ^gvENTRYCfj-y^
                     COVENTRY CITY
                     FOOTBALL CLUB
                    COVENTRY CITY FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED
                    REGISTERED OPFICE AND GROUND                                                    Ufe President:    DERRICK R ROBINS
                                                                    F.A. CUP WINNERS 19B7           C hairm an:       J. POYNTON
                     HIGHFIELD ROAD STADIUM                                                         V ice C hairm an: EJ. SFOCKER, Q&E.
                     KING RICHARD STREET                            ESTABLISHED 1683
                                                                                                    Directors:         GW. CURTIS (M an ag in g)
                     COVENTRY C V 2 4FW                             MEMBERS OF FOOT8ALL LEAGUE                         M.F. FRENCH, FCA
                                                                    AND CENTRAL LEAGUE                                 1FW. REASON
                                   pVENTRY 257171
                     TELEPHONE: COVENTRY                                                                               aw . RICHARDSON
  POOTBALLCUm        TELEGRAMS: OTYITY FOOTBALL COVENTRY           VAT REG. NQ 272 4005 B7
                     TELEX: 312132 I                               COMPANY REG N Q 94305 ENGLAND    Secretary:         GP. HOVER




G PH/ J D H


28th September,               1989


C o u n c i l l o r H. Chase,
Chair of the H i l l s b o r o u g h Work i n g Party,
Liv e r p o o l City Council,
R o o m 5,
M u n i c i p a l Buildings,
Dale Street,
Liverpool,
L69 2DH.


Dear Sir,

I r efer to your letter d a t e d 27th                               September,                  1989    and          would
a n s w e r your q u e s t i o n s as follows

   (i)        1984
  (ii)        3 sides
 (iii)        o r d e r e d by the F.A.,                   following c rowd d i s t u r b a n c e
  (iv)        leave alone
   (v)        yes
  (vi)        Club
 (vii)         N/A

Y ours    faithfully,




 G.P. Hover
 Secretary
                     Blackburn Rovers
                     Football & Athletic PLC
1ARTE E f LABOR EI


REGISTERED OFFICE
EWOOD PARK                           BLACKBURN BB2 4JF
TELEPHONE: 55432                     FAX No. 0254 671042                           REGISTERED NO. 53482 ENGLAND



                                                                                           j          -W|. ».■!»,   __,_
             Your Ref:- HC/FEN/HWP..
                                                                                                ^ c u t i v t D
             2nd October 1989
                                                                                          -          - 4 OCT 1S83
             Liverpool City Council
             Chief Executives Office
                                                                                               CITY SOLICITORS
             Room 5                                                                              MAIL ROOM
             Municipal Buildings
             Dale Street
             Liverpool L69 2DH

             Dear Sir

             I am in receipt of your letter dated 27th September, and write to confirm
             that we have responded to all the local authority requests.

             Yours faithfully
             BLACKBURN ROVERS FOOTBALL & ATHLETIC PLC




             M r J HOWARTH
             Secretary
                                    Directors: W. Fox (Chairman), R. D. Coar, B.Sc., (Vice Chairman)
                                 T. W. Ibbotson, LL.B., K. C. Lee, I. R. Stanners, G. R. Root, F. C. M. A.
                     Manager: D. Mackay                                         Secretary: John W. Howarth, F. A. A. I.
                LUTON TOWN FOOTBALL
               AND >fTHLETIC CO LIMITED
                                                                                                            FINALISTS - FA CUP                1 9 5 8 /5 9
                                                                                                            C H AM PIO N S - DIVISION 3(S)    1 9 3 6 /3 7
                                                                                                            R U NN ERS -U P - DIVISION 2      1 9 5 4 /5 5
                                                                                                            C H AM PIO N S - DIVISION 4       1 9 6 7 /6 8
                                                                                                            R U NN ERS -U P - DIVISION 3      1 9 6 9 /7 0
               Kenilworth Road Stadium, 1 Maple Road, Luton, Beds. LU48AW                                   R U NN ERS -U P - DIVISION 2      1 9 7 3 /7 4
                                                                                                            C H AM PIO N S - DIVISION 2       1 9 8 1 /8 2
                  Tel: 0582 411622 Telex: 825115 (Ansa back: Bureau G)                                      FINALISTS - SIM OD CU P           1 9 8 7 /8 8
                                    Fax: 0582 405070                  ;                                     W INNERS - LITTLE W O O D S CUP   1 9 8 7 /8 8


               R egiste red O ffice : 1 M aple Road, L u to n , Beds. LU4 8A W R egistered N o j5 3 1 3 0




    Councillor H. Chase,
    Liverpool City Council,
    Hillsborough Working Party,
    Chief Executives Office,
    Room 5,
    Municipal Buildings,
    Dale Street,
    Liverpool,   L69 2DH                                                                           6th October 1989




    Dear Councillor Chase,

*        Apologies for the delay in answering your original letter of
    24th August 1989.   I am sure you will understand that the time
    needed in considering and actioning Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
    Report recommendations with our Safety Committee, Football
    League, and Football Association plus all the auxiliary services,
    to say the least, has been extremely demanding time wise,
    notwithstanding our busy League and Cup fixtures.

         Unfortunately the information you request is difficult to
    answer specifically as far as Luton is concerned, due to our 100&
    Membership Scheme.   On the introduction of our scheme four years
    ago, all perimeter fencing was removed, leaving only radial
    fences at our standing Kenilworth end.       However, we do have
    provision to add additional bolt on fencing in our visitors
    section for cup ties, though this season, at the suggestion of
    the Police and in light of Hillsborough, we did not use this
    operation at our Littlewoods Cup tie against Mansfield Town on
    October 3rd, 1989.   Until we have digested the final report, we
    will continue to review the situation on a match to match basis.

         Prior to our Membership Scheme, the decision on the
    installation of fences and Police walkways has and will continue
    to be the responsibility of our Safety Committee, who as you know
    comprises of the Police, the Local and County Authorities, the
*   Club and Fire Services.
                                                         -2 -

                   Our o n l y o b s e r vation, in r e s p o n s e to Lor d J u s t i c e T a y lor's
         I n t e r i m R e p o r t in r e l a t i o n to f e n c i n g , was; i n o u r v i e w t h e
         a m b i g u i t y of his r e c o m m e n d a t i o n n o .8 r e g a r d i n g |the g ates leading
         f r o m o u r r a d i a l f e n c e o n to t h e p i t c h .                It is c l e a r , w h e n
         t r a v e l l i n g to o t h e r clubs that a v a r i e t y of v iews h a v e b een t aken
         by e a c h club's S a f e t y Committee.

              I trust         you    find    the    above       to   be   adequate    information        for
         your s u r v e y .

         Y o u r s sincerely,




         BILL T O M L I N S
         Executive General Manager/Secretary




    i

    *




c




    ft


    *
                                                                                                     ASTON VILLA
                                                                                                     FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                                                                                                     Registered Office:
                                                                                                     Villa Park, Birmingham B6 6



                                       Aston Villa
                                                                                                     Telephone: 021-327 6604
                                                                                                     Telex: 334695 VILLA G
                                                                                                     Fax No.: 021-322 2107



              SMS/SFB


              10 Octo b e r        1989


              C o u n c i l l o r H Chase
              H i l l s b o r o u g h W o r k i n g P arty
              C hief E x e c u t i v e s Office
              Roo m 5
              Municipal Buildings
              Dale Street
              L iv e r p o o l
              L69 2DH


              Dear C o u n c i l l o r            Chase

              In r e s ponse to your letter of 27 September, 1989 I give
              b e l o w the i n f o r m a t i o n r e q u e s t e d as a c c u r a t e l y as possible.

              (i)       T here are no records a v a i l a b l e to c o n f i r m p r e c i s e l y
                         w h e n fenc i n g was in s t a l l e d at V i l l a Park.        It has
                         b e e n a con t i n u a l proc e s s of i n s t a l l a t i o n as and w hen
                         i n s t r u c t e d to do so b y the Po l i c e and Local
                         Authority.

              (ii)      P e r i m e t e r fencing in front of t e r r a c i n g at each end
                         of the ground.         Radial fence d i v i d i n g H o l t e End
                         T e r r a c e (capacity 19,210).

              (iii)     No s p e c i f i c reasons.

              (iv)      At the request of the Po l i c e we h a v e r e m o v e d radial
                         fences in awa y s u p p o r t e r s t e r r a c e , p r e v i o u s l y
                         d i v i d i n g terrace into three pens.

              (v)       Yes.        We are mind f u l of the reasons as to w h y the
                        p e r i m e t e r fences were i n s t a l l e d and do not feel that
                         t hose elements h a v e yet b e e n e r a d i c a t e d f rom some
                         s e c t i o n s of spectators.

              (vi)      Po l i c e      in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h L ocal Authority.

              Sho u l d yo u r e q u i r e any further              i n f o r m a t i o n do not h e s i t a t e
              to c o n t a c t the undersigned.

              Y ours   sincerely




              S M STRIDE
              SECRETARY

 C hairm an                        D ire cto rs                M anager               S ecretary           C om m e rcial M ana g e r
Douglas Ellis           Tony Alderson, Dr. David Targett     Graham Taylor           Steven Stride             Abdul Rashid
                                                          Telephone: 021-525 8888
                                                          Facsimile: 021-553 6634
                                                          Telegrams: Football Westbromwich

                                                          Registered in England No. 34292

                                                          Registered Offices and Ground:
                                                          The Hawthorns
                                                          West Bromwich
                                                          West Midlands B71 4LF




JJE/HT/7226                                               4th October,1989.

YOUR REF: HC/FEN/HWP.




Hillsborough Working Party,
Chief Executives Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
LIVERPOOL,
L69 2DH.


Dear Sir,

RE; INFORMATION OF FENCING:

Our replies to your questions are as follows

      i)    Fencing was installed in 1970.

     ii)    About 35% of our ground (i.e. both ends) is fenced.

    iii)    Fences were installed as a result of a general fear of
            hooliganism and of a possible pitch invasion. There was no
            specific incident here which brought about the situation.

iv) & v)    Our Club has kept its fencing, pending Lord Justice Taylor's
            final report, but we are attempting to improve access markedly.


With apologies for our delay in replying.



 Yours faithfully,




 DR. JOHN.
 SECRETARY
; Middlesbrough Football Club
, Ayr es om e Park
v Mi ddl esb rou gh
  Cleveland
  TS1 4PB
    Telephone: ( 0 6 4 2 ) 8 1 9 6 5 9 / 8 1 5 9 9 6
    Fax: ( 0 6 4 2 ) 8 2 0 2 4 4

       Our Ref:            KL/KN

       Y o u r Ref:        HC/FEN/HWP


       12th October,               1989


       C o u n c i l l o r H. Chase,
       C h a i r H i l l s b o r o u g h W o r k i n g Party,
       L i v e r p o o l C i t y Council,
       C h i e f E x e c u t i v e Office,
       R o o m 5,
       M u n i c i p a l B u ildings,
       D ale Street,
       Liverpool,
       L69 2DH.


       D e a r C o u n c i l l o r Chase,

«      With        reference          to you r lett e r s of 27th S e p t e m b e r              an d   24th
       A u g u s t c o n c e r n i n g th e f e n c i n g a r r a n g e m e n t s at our Ground,          we
       w o u l d i n f o r m y o u t h a t w e hav e r esponded,                 in thi s regard,         to
       i n i t i a t i v e s b y T h e T a y l o r Inquiry,           Th e F o o t b a l l A s s o c iation,
       Football            League      an d    Cleveland          County         Coun c i l    (our      own
       licencing a u t h o r i t y ) .

        In an a t t e m p t to r e t a i n s o m e o r d e r in t h i s matter,         we                                                                    would
        r e s p e c t f u l l y a s k y o u to r e f e r you r q u e s t i o n s to one of                                                                    t hese
        bodies.

        Y o u r s sincerely,




        K e i t h L a m b F.C.A.
        C hief E x e c u t i v e




                                             M i d d l e s b r o u g h   F o o t b a l l   &   A t h l e t i c   C o m p a n y   11 9 8 6 1   I i m i i e d
                                                                            &s?'
 1
                                                                   G
  V
                                                                       H
                                                                                                                                                  President:


                                            Chelsea
Directors:
  K.   W. Bates                                                                                                                                     G. M. T hom son
  C.   H utchinson                                                                                                                                Manager:
  Y.   S. T odd                                                                                                                                     Bobby C am pbell
  S.   S. T ollm an
                                        Football Club                                                                                             Club Secretary:
                                                                                                                                                    Ja n et W ayth

                                     Stamford Bridge London SW6 1HS
                                          Telephone 01-385 5545
                                          Facsimile 01-381 4831


                                                                                                              11th October 1989

      Cllr H Chase,
      Hillsborough Working Party,
      Liverpool City Council,


•
      Room 5 Municipal Buildings,
      Dale Street,
      LIVERPOOL L69 2DH




       Dear Cllr Chase,

  ♦ Thank you for your letter of 27th September and I apologise for the delay
  « in replying, having only returned to the office yesterday.

       Our perimeter fencing was installed during the 84/85 season and is an integral
       part of our safety and crowd management policies.

       At the present time the entire perimeter is fenced, although we have recently
       negotiated with our local Authority and Police to remove the fencing at
       our Members-Only Family Section area, with strengthened security into that
       part of the ground.

       We have no immediate plans to remove any further fencing.

       I trust this will be of assistance.

       Best wishes.


       Yours sincerely




  * Janet Wayth
  ^ Secretary




       Club Call:                                                        T icket News:                                                                         Ken Bates Hotline:
      0898 12 11 59                                                     0898 12 18 59                                                                            0898 66 46 66
                          C h e l s e a F o o tb a ll a n d A th le tic C o m p a n y Lim ite d R e g i s t e r e d No. 8 4 3 4 8 E n g l a n d
                                                                        Leeds United
                                                             Association Football Club Limited
                                                                                                    INCORPORATED 1920                              |

                                                                                      G R O U N D A N D R E G IST ER E D O FFICE

                                                       ELLAND ROAD • LEEDS LS11 OES
                                                TELEPHONE: (0532) 716037, FAX: (0532) 706560
                                          CLUB CALL 0898 * 12 * 11 * 80 TICKET CALL 0898 • 12 • 16 • 80



               Your Ref:


               Our Ref:        DJD/2 01 8 / N F                                                                                                              17 October 1989



               C ouncillor Harry Chase .
               Hil l sb o r o ug h Working Party
               Chief Execu t i ve s Office
               Room 5
               Municipal B u il dings
               Dale Street
               LIVERPOOL
„             L69 2DH

%r
«             Dear Councillor Chase

                I refer to your letter dated 24 August 1989 regarding issues arising
                from the H i l ls b o r o ug h Disaster.

                Please accept my a po l ogies for the delay in my reply but I am sure
                you can a ppreciate the urgent work created by the subsequent Justice
                Taylor Report.

                Pitch perimeter fencing was introduced at Ella nd Road during the 1 9 7 0 's
                upon the instru c t i on of the Football A s so c i a t i o n following crowd
                disorders.   The unruly element shifted their position and eventually
                the entire pitch pe r imeter was protected by metal fences.             In subsequent
                years, radial fences were introduced to pre v en t m o vement around the
                terraces by specta to r s and greater flexibility in s e gregation arrangements.

                In recent years, a great amount of work has been s u cc essfully targetted
                at improving the name of Leeds United, in particular, with regard to
                crowd disorders.       Al t h ou g h these problems occ u r r ed at away matches
                in the vast majo r i t y of cases, the improvement has led to changes at
                E l land Road.

                Since the end of the 1987-88 season, fences at Elland Road have been
                reduced both in number and in size.      Sy s t e m at i c a ll y (and without
*              publicity), the radial fences and the spikes on the top of pitch perimeter
i              fences have been removed.     A decision to remove the fence on the West
                Stand side of the G round at the end of the 1988-89 season had already
A              been taken prior to the H il l s borough Disaster.

                                                                                                                                                       c o n t i n u e d . ..


                                                        President: THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF HAREWOOD LL.D.
     Directors LESLIE SILVER. 0 8 E (CHAIRMAN). PETER J. GILMAN (VICE-CHAIRMAN). JACK W.G. MARJASON (DEPUTY CHAIRMAN). WILLIAM J. FOTHER8Y (MANAGING DIRECTOR).
                                          RAYNER BARKER M.C.I.T.. M.B.I.M.. MALCOLM J. BEDFORD. ERIC CARLILE. RONALD D. FELDMAN.,
                                                        ALEC HUDSON. G M AXW ELL HOLMES B.Sc (Econ). PETER RIDSDALE
     ■   .                   r ■• - c r    i ,   ...   y .      H O W A R D   W I I   K .'N S O N                    R E G O   N o   1 7 0 6 0 0                 LONDON         V   A   T   N o   1 7 0   8 4 9 2   S O
                                                   -   2   -




        F o l l o w i n g the Disaster, the policy already i n s t ig a t e d was accelerated
        with the West Stand fencing and spikes from the top of the fences in
        the remaining ter r ac e d areas being removed before any further gamep.
                                                                                            I
        With the p ub l i c a t i o n of the justice Taylor Report, the fences have'
        r e ma i n e d in position, but, as with all safety aspects, remain under
        co n st a n t review.

        The fences i n cluded pitch p e r imeter gates and on agreement with our
        local Safety Team, these gates have been removed.        Therefore, at the
        p re se n t time, pitch perimeter fences are in place on two thirds of
        the ground and include 17 spaces where gates were previously positioned,
        w i th each space now manne d by a police officer.

        It should be noted that in all areas at E l la n d Road, the pitch perimeter
        fence itself does not form the crush barrier.           A substantial load-bearing
        b a r r i e r with gates is positi on e d inside the pitch perimeter fence
        w h i c h also cre at e s a walkway for police officers, medical attendants etc.

        I trust the foregoing details are of some assistance, but should
        you require c la r i f i c a t i o n on any point, p l e a se do not hes i t a t e to contact
        me.




        Y ours sincerely
    *




        D J DOWSE
        Company Secretary




4

♦
4
I / OXFORD V
 v L UNITED A                 Oxford U nited F.C. pic
-c*



                              Registered Office: Manor Ground, Headington, Oxford 0X 3 7RS


      W                       Telephone: Oxford (0865) 61503 Fax: (0865) 741820
                              Registered in England, Registered N u m be r 470509
                              M em bers of Football Association, Football League, Football C om bination, South East Counties League




                                                                                                                                                      MILK CUP
                                                                                                                                                      WINNERS
      Councillor H Chase                                                                                                                                1986
      Chairman
      Hillsborough Working Party
      Room 5
      Municipal Buildings
      Dal e S t r e e t
      LIVERPOOL
      L69 2DH                                                                                             27t h O c t o b e r          1989



      M B / C B / 0 2 4 9M                                                                               Y o u r Ref H C / F E N / H W P



      Dear C o u n c i l l o r C h a s e

      A p o l i g i e s for not replying soon er to y o u r                                             letters.                 The information
      that y o u r e q u e s t e d is as follows

* i)              I  b e l i e v e that the first p i t c h p e r i m e t e r                                            f e n c e was    ins t a l l e d
 ;               at the M a n o r G r o u n d r oun d about 1983/84.

      ii)        A t the p r e s e n t time b o t h ends of the g r o u n d are fenced.

      iii)       T h e first fences that w e r e                                 i n s t a l l e d w e r e p r i m a r i l y put                 up
                  b e c a u s e of two reasons

                   a)      To p r e v e n t coins and o t h e r o b j e c t s b e i n g t h r o w n onto the
                   p i t c h p a r t i c u l a r l y at the p l a y e r s in the goal m o u t h area;

                   b)      B e c a u s e of a n u m b e r of p i t c h in v a s i o n s                                      and th e s u bsequent
                   f i g h t i n g of rival s u p p o r t e r s on the pitch.

                   Later, w h e n the c lub was d e s i g n a t e d f o l l o w i n g our rapid rise
                   f r o m D i v i s i o n 3 to D i v i s i o n 1 in s u c c e s s i v e seasons, the C i t y
                   C o u n c i l i n s i s t e d that all of the p i t c h p e r i m e t e r was fenced.

      iv)         F o l l o w i n g the L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r Report, the Public
                   P r o t e c t i o n U r g e n c y S u b - C o m m i t t e e of the O x f o r d s h i r e C o u n t y
                   C o u n c i l met.          F o l l o w i n g a r e v i e w of the report and its
                   r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , t h e y ag r e e d to i m p l e m e n t t h e m all w h e r e
                   a p p l i cable, w i t h the e x c e p t i o n of n u m b e r 8 w h i c h recommends
                   that w h e r e t h e r e are p e r i m e t e r fences, all g ates sh o u l d be
                   kep t f u l l y open.               The c o m m i t t e e d e c i d e d that the s a f e t y of

                                                                                                           Continued/.




                                                        PRESIDENT: The Duke of M arlborough
                                                        CHAIRMAN: Kevin M axwell
                                                        M ANAGING DIRECTOR: P.D. M cGeough FCA
                                                        DIRECTORS: G.E. Coppock, M iss G.N.M. M axw ell,
                                                        P.J. M orrissey, P. Reeves
        s p e c t a t o r s at the M a n o r w o u l d be b e s t s e r v e d b y h a v i n g the
        g a t e s c l o s e d but u n l o c k e d w i t h a s t e w a r d r e s p o n s i b l e for
        o p e n i n g e a c h g a t e in an emergency.

        I m u s t add o n this p oint that in the fence at the h o m e
        s u p p o r t e r s en d of the g r o u n d w e h a v e 10 gates in an area w i t h
        a c a p a c i t y of 3,570 (before the r e d u c t i o n s a s k e d for in the
        r e p o r t ) . A t the v i s i t o r s en d of the ground, w e h a v e 9 gates
        c o v e r i n g an area of a p p r o x i m a t e l y 15 y a r d s less t h a n at the
        h o m e e n d of the ground.              O n the two sides of the g r o u n d w e
        n e g o t i a t e d w i t h the p o l i c e and the C o u n c i l some two and a
        h a l f y e a r s ago that w e s h o u l d b e a l l o w e d to t a k e t h e s e fences
        d o w n in r e t u r n for our m e m b e r s h i p s c h e m e w h i c h co v e r s these
        areas.

v)      We    still   i n t e n d to keep our p i t c h p e r i m e t e r   fence.

vi)     T h e o r i g i n a l d e c i s i o n to install the fences w a s a joint
         d e c i s i o n of the c l u b and the p o l i c e and o b v i o u s l y onc e we
         w e r e d e s i g n a t e d that r e s p o n s i b i l i t y was the n in the hands of
         t he local authority.                  T h e o n l y radial fence s e p a r a t i n g
H       s u p p o r t e r s in the same area of the g r o u n d w h i c h f e n c e d off
 J      our f a m i l y t e r r a c e f rom the r e m a i n d e r of our m e m b e r s terrace
         has n o w b e e n remo v e d f o l l o w i n g the report.            This
*       u n f o r t u n a t e l y m e a n s w e do not n o w h a v e a t e r r a c e f a m i l y area
          at the ground.

vii)    Not   a pplicable.

I hop e this g i v e y o u an idea of the h i s t o r y of the fences h e r e at
the M a n o r G r o u n d and helps y o u in y o u r survey.

Yours   sincerely




M A Brown
Secretary




*
4
FROM   ...CJLJLG*        4      ..............


       •Cht^T..         <<590^0,..
                  U^rlo-rc^
       C/0 LEADER'S OFFICE,
       LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL

       TEL. NO    225-2319
       FAX. NO    236-2047




TO     .. ^f-cre^urx^.........                   t




       ,.4iocn<?. .CfficQ,,. .l©j^cW\
                                            liujl H   c< f U
NO. OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:-

DATE                         .......




                   o i - a~i3- st i go
                                             c M h o    Af-fOi
                                                   Cv^ “*:hX ^ _
                                                                   K1-

                                                                      /v \


                                          a fe ^ X e o l

(^ U      P i,   L U *iA l         (tc JffTvvr



     U ^                             -o°°-            '^*


                                                            1* C-'O

                                                              P>.
i-               V-------^J,
                                               t       ^ &k. h

       t U- l*
                             Pt-     17


                     92AcUx\^          c W sfl       hA

                     p ^ JVv^ 2 _          pCM^e^
This is the main paper and covering letter
submitted by the Intermediate Treatment Fund.
I have not copied the additional papers which
are as follows:-

Intermediate Treatment Fund Annual Report
1988-9.

City of Stoke on Trent paper on matchmates.

Football into the Nineties - an Initiative for
 Association Football in the south west.

liighfields Community Coaching Project.

Project by Stanfield Junior Football Club,
 Anfield, Liverpool.

If you wish to see any of the above, please let
me know and I shall copy them.




                         /Wl
