                hoc    Ms Dent                            11
                       Ms Craig                      -G MAR 1990
                       Mr Moriarty
                       Mr Chilcot
                      Mr Turney                   H o m e O f fic e
                      Mr Boys Smi^th             QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                      Mr Mower
                                                  LONDON SWIH 9 A T ^ \ .
                      Mr Goddar;
                      Mrs Reisz
                      Mr Bolton
                      Mr Taylor
                                                                 (2)
                                                 ^   March 1990




Vw .     U >,

You wrote to Martin Brandon-Bravo, the Home Secretary's
Parliamentary Private Secretary, on 13 February enclosing a letter
from Mr Hicks about comments attributed to the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star. The Home Secretary has had
a similar letter from David Alton and he has asked me to reply to
both.  I think that you know that my responsibilities at the Home
Office encompass both police issues and the safety of sports
grounds.
I have assumed that, in writing to you rather than to the South
Yorkshire Police Authority, Mr Hicks was not seeking to make a
complaint about the Chief Constable1s conduct to be investigated
under the police complaints procedure. That avenue is of course
open to him should he wish to take it.

I have read the comments which were attributed to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star. It seems to
me that, in the article, the Chief Constable has not questioned
Lord Justice Taylor's conclusions about the immediate cause of the
incident, but that he has said that he finds it difficult to come
to terms with the view that the drinking by fans had no effect^on
the events.  In this, he was not rejecting Lord Justice Taylor s
conclusions, but reflecting the views of some of his officers.

I would not wish to add to the controversy about the part which
drink played at Hillsborough. Clearly this is an occasion which
is fraught with grief and distress from every angle.  I think,
though, that it is proper to point out that Lord Justice Taylor's
interim report,•at paragraph 196, considered particularly whether
drunkenness among fans was a major factor in the crisis at the
turnstiles and that his conclusions on the causes of the tragedy
are summarised in Chapter 16 of the report.



                                             /I have noted....


Robert G Hughes Esq MP
    I have noted with interest the 6 objectives of the Hillsborough
    Family Support Group. Only 3 come specifically within the area of
    responsibility of the Home Office.  I am sure that Mr Hicks and
    his friends will already have seen that the Government has
    announced that it intends to act on each of them.

    The Football Licensing Authority, which the Government expects to
    appoint within the next few months under the Football Spectators
    Act, will be given the responsibility of reviewing the way in
    which local authorities carry out their responsibilities for
    safety at sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Act 1975.
    The Home Office already has in hand the revision of the "Green
    Guide" on safety at sports grounds to incorporate recommendations
    made by the Taylor Inquiry, and some other changes, and will
I   shortly be setting up a working group to consider the revised
    guide before it is sent out for wider circulation and comment. We
    shall also be considering an order under Section 15A of the Safety
    of Sports Grounds Act 1975 which will have the effect of requiring
•   local authorities to include specific terms of conditions in
    safety certificates.

    The question of "no fault" compensation is for the
    Lord Chancellor's Department, rather than for the Home Office.

    You said that Mr Hicks had approached you about the possibility of
    meeting with one of the Home Office Ministers.  If Mr Hicks would
    like to see me with representatives of the Support Group I would
    be happy to see him, and I suggest that he contacts my Private
    Secretary on 273 2468 to arrange a date and time.

    If that proves difficult to arrange, and since the particular
    objectives of the support group are already being addressed, he
    might find it helpful as an alternative to have a detailed
    discussion with the Head of the Division within the Home Office
    who has responsibility for taking these issues forward. His name
    is Mr Peter Bolton and his telephone number is 273 3322.

    I am sending a copy of this letter to David Alton.




                                  FERRERS
