          »




                                              Covering
                                              covering
                                             RESTRIC*
                                             RESTRICTED
    * •
              MR GINMAN                                     cc4*r
                                                            cc^Mr    Wasserman *
                                                               Mr    Aitken
                                                               Mr    Finlayson *
                                     *                    >    Mr    Tomlinson

                                         ^                     (*with copy of
                                                                 attachments)
                                                                    a1




              HILLSBOROUGH



              that   radio                         feature     i the         :        The




              repeated his request at 2.48 pm for gates to be opened but
              received no acknowledgement over his radio. There appeared to be
              some problems with police radio communication at that crucial
              stage".

              2.   We shall need to keep a watch on the inquiry as it develops,
              to see whether we need to commission further work. There is one
              area, where I remain uneasy, and this is the follow-up to the
              Popplewell Inquiry. Can I have a rather fuller note of what work
              was done by Swansea University and Racal, to what extent the
              police service were kept informed of the outcome, and how
              decisions were reached not to undertake further work in this
              area.




                                                                         L <-M


                                                            G E GUY
              17 May, 1989

              DIRECTORATE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
              Horseferry House



                                              Covering
                                             RESTRICTED                            (hills)




.
                                            cc.   Mr Guy ^
                                                  Mr Tomlinson




Mr Ginman

HILLSBOROUGH

I refer to Mr Tomlinson's report of 27 April regarding the radio
communications in use at Hillsborough.
On a point of accuracy, Mr Tomlinson states that the W15Us used
by the force for such occasions is not covered by the Depot for
maintenance under the MOU. This is incorrect. Kippax depot have
researched this matter further and now confirm that the W15 units
are covered by the MOU.
Kippax depot were recently asked by the force, on behalf of the
enquiry team, to check the W15U used at Hillsborough. Their
report, attached, indicates that there are no apparent faults
with the equipment.




                                        I Aitken
                                        Deputy Director




10 May 1989
                                               -C * £ u
                                                    -=M
                                                          VO\S



HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND


On 5 May 1989 a series of tests were carried out on the radio equipment
installed at Hillsborough Football Ground by Home Office Technicians
         and             PC I      I (South Yorkshire Police) was in
attendance.

1.     MAIN W15U CONTROL STATION

       This was checked using a Marconi 2955 test set and all
       parameters were found to be within the specified limits.

2.     COVERAGE TESTS

       Tests were then carried out between the Control Station and
       personal radios to check the coverage in and around Hillsborough
       Football Ground particular attention was paid to the Leppings Lane
       end of the ground, particularly the areas in and around Gangways
       2, 3 and 4. These tests were conducted both with and without the
       "talk through" mode in use. No problems were experienced at any
       time.

3.     STANDBY W15U

       This was tested as in 1. and identical coverage checks done as in 2.
       Again no problems were encountered.

4.     (a)    Further tests were then carried out to show that with the
              Control Station on "talk through" any transmissions by a
              personal radio will over-ride the Controller should he be
              trying to transmit via the hand-held microphone.

       (b)    In the course of these tests it was noticed that the quality
              of signal from the older BE470 personal radio was noticeably
              better than from the motorola being used by PC
              Possibly just a one off, but worth checking.

CONCLUSIONS

The radioequipment checks and the subsequent coverage tests didnot show up
any apparent problems with the radio scheme.




                                             J COTTjER
                                             8 May 1989
If'




                                  RESTRICTED



                                                                   - 5 MAY 1989

      Mr R Ginman
                                                                 Copy to:-
                                                                   G E Guy
                                                                Mr I Aitken



      HILLSBOROUGH



      In reply     to Mr Guy’s request      for information  on    the   radio
      communications in use at the Hillsborough football stadium I have
      investigated the situation and from the informal information available to
      date can report:-

      1.   There were too many radios in use on a single channel           given
           the situation that was likely to develop.

      2.   Only one of the four emergency channels was deployed.

      3.   The scheme was used on automatic talk trough.           (Talk through
           is only suitable for very lightly loaded channels)

      4.   It needs to be questioned if an experienced police        radio
            operator was deployed to control the radio channel and prevent
            the channel becoming blocked as the incident developed.

      5-   No effective solution can be devised to prevent excess use of
           radio communications crashing the channels in the absence of a
           radio controller.     U nder adverse conditions more than one
           person on a radio channel can block the use of the channel if
           normal discipline breaks down.

      Field Services - Equipment Aspects

      I have spoken to              1 Kippax Depot, and ascertained that the
      U HF scheme for the football ground uses an elderly W15U with a fixed
      aerial. The equipment is owned by the force and is not covered by the
      Depot for maintenance under the MOU.       There have been no known
      complaints about the coverage provided by this scheme when using the
      fixed aerial.  The hand held radios used by the force are Motorola
      HT600E with remote heads.     In addition some 100 Burndept 470 were
      loaned by the Depot fitted with in ear loudspeakers.   The base station
      W15U was changed at circa 14:10 hrs by the force. The force have their
      own trained personnel in attendance for this type of fixture and do not

                                  RESTRICTED
                           RESTRICTED

use the Depot technical support.         It is evident that the police personnel
were under the impression that ti e channel was breaking up and a change
of base station would clear the problem.         There can be little doubt that
what was happening was that the channel was becoming overloaded which
to the uninitiated could be mistaken for an equipment malfunction.

The scheme was operated on one of the four emergency U HF channels
and only one channel was used. All the pointers are to the scheme being
used on talk through.         In which case the scheme is arranged that the
controller can not talk on the scheme whilst any hand held set is
transmitting.      Under these circumstances the controller loses use of the
channel and this is almost certainly what happened as the incident
developed.        The talk through should have been deselected as the channel
started to     break up due to overloading - not as happened try changing
the base station.

There has     been some play made by Sheffield University in a        television
broadcast on channel 4 that the use of UHF is not satisfactory.       This can
be discounted according to the Depot as the aerial well sited         and the
coverage is good in the immediate vicinity.    The feeling being        that the
University expert is confusing local communication on UHF with         the VHF
wide area cover.

The control room that was in use along with all of the radio equipment
has been sealed pending inspection by the investigating team.

Poppelwell - Inquiry Submission

The Directorate in their submission on the Bradford football ground fire
stated that the U HF hand held radios used were old (Burndept singfc piece
sets) and that the crowd noise was too high for them to be effective.
Promises were made that subsequent purchases would be better in this
respect. Two special studies were commissioned with a view to improving
the performance of the Burndept radio.        Swansea University producing a
rubber guard for the microphone loudspeaker to shield the set from the
high level of crowd noise.        Racal were commissioned to study what
improvements could be made to the circuitry including the addition of a
noise cancelling microphone.    The findings of the Racal work proved too
difficult to implement.    Mr Owen briefed the inquiry that to the effect
that    replacement   setswould    have     a  better  noisy   environment
performance.     This has been achieved with better overload limiting and
remote microphone / loudspeaker accessories.

The Kings Cross submission echoed the Bradford submission.

Radio Communications Problems - Observations

The use of the radio channels for this type of public order incident is
problematical.    A half duplex arrangement is used on which many
officers listen to control on one frequency and each is free to transmit

                           RESTRICTED
                           RESTRICTED

on the another frequency back to the controller.                 This gives good
communication whilst disciplined use of the channel is maintained and is
adequate under normal circumstances.           As an incident starts to develop
more radio messages are sent by the officers to control.              The message
density increases until messages are in contention and clash with each
other.    When this happens no messages are received and unless those
wishing to speak resist the temptation to try and crash into control over
the top of their colleagues the channel becomes unusable.            Control would
then tell everyone to wait and solicit information from individual officers
in an      orderly fashion.     This effect is compounded if talk through is
selected as the automatic repeating of the incoming calls so that every
one is aware of what is going on inhibits the controllers microphone
effectively preventing the request to stop transmitting.
Because of the very real risk of loosing control of the radio channel the
use of talk through is only recommended by the Directorate for lightly
loaded     channels when they are quiet          ie in rural areas at night.   To
permit     the channel to remain on talk through for a football match would
not be recommended under any circumstances.


I am of the opinion that the use of the radio requires better deployment
planning and that this will be a sensitive issue to discuss with the force.
There is clearly a need for the force to exercise direct control of the
radio communications by designating a seasoned police operator to control
and co-ordinate the radio communications.      This entails either operating
the radio scheme from the normal force control room or from a
temporary control point at or near the football ground.    It could be said
that there is need for formal instructions for the deployment of radio
communications under conditions where channel overloading is likely to
lead to problems.




P M Tomlinson
27 April 1989




                           RESTRICTED                                                3
