        I^ENT I N S T I T U T E OF A RT & D E S I G N

    ^                7t^L                                                                 csO-T^x.                          ^1
$
        /L^inst                                            7r& * * p C 0 x '

                     r t*j4r<X*C'                                               i* * ^ 0                  "Tecl^ A ^AfAtt -


        £fcjL^UC*C*C

        y'f-xsfc^*


                                                                                                                                                Canterbury
                                                                                                                                                New Dover Road
                                                                                                                                                Canterbury
                                                                                                                                                Kent CT1 3AN
                                                                                                                                                Tel: 0227 769371
         your reference                                 our reference                                     date   £ 2                'P<9        Fax: 0227 451320




                                                           *            *




                                                                          0 1 * 0 4 * 0 * 'x ~ -e **~ a          7 /k u .                   ^

        JPi*ArC<sC                                     .
                               TA^Cl                                                4<+~C
                                                                                                                              0 ^   £fe>*yK

                                           ^               /iit<         ^                                          sistrT'

                                                               &€*-*+            0<~**          ^SsC-C


                      ,        /             4xe^C<^f^*.                     / A u * < - 4,        ***             ^

                          /pof-
                                                               ♦ T 5* ^c -^ y                                                        <£*-

                               %                                                     &0&C<si



         / *          jO^fe              ^ < ^ C Z c y .
                                                               /<9
                                                                        *         /KjPlS sA^*Jp(
                                                                                        fJL A stA s *?1>
                                                                                                         2 ^ -C ^                               Also at:
                                                                                                                                                Maidstone
                                                                                                                                                Oakwood Park
                                                                                                                                                Maidstone
                                                                                                                                                Kent ME16 8AG
                                         & U &                                                                                                  Tel: 0622 57286
                                                                                                                                                Fax: 0622 692003

                                                                                                                                                Rochester-
                                                                                                                                                upon-Medway
                                                                                                                                                Fort Pitt
                                                                                                                                                Rochester
                                                                                                                                                Kent ME1 1DZ
           Director: Peter Williams d f a (Lond)                                                                                                Tel: 0634 830022
           Assistant Director (Finance) and Head of Canterbury College: Roger Sales f c c a                                                     Fax: 0634 829461
    REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER 11 APRIL 1989




«




    The School of Architecture
    Canterbury College
    Kent Institute of Art and Design
    Canterbury
    KENT CT1 3AN
   REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER 11 APRIL 1989

   1.00 INTRODUCTION

  1.01 The disaster at the Leppings Lane end of the Sheffield
  Wednesday Ground at Hillsborough at 3pm on Saturday n April 1989
  was inevitable given the number of people trying to get into the
  ground at the stand end. There were too few turnstiles to enable
  the crowd to enter the ground safely.

   1.02 What happened at the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest FA Cup
   Semi-Final at Hillsborough could have happened in many grounds
   and could happen again.

     1.03 The dangers caused b y large numbers of people in a confined
^ ^ s p a c e are not only relevant to football grounds but include all
^ s p o r t s events where large numbers of people are likely.

   1.04 Also included are theatres, pop concerts, discos,
   exhibitions and station concourses such as London Underground.

   1.05 There have been other similar disasters to Hillsborough:

   ****** 1943 BETHNAL GREEN TUBE STATION 159 killed

   ****** 1946 BOLTON WANDERERS FOOTBALL GROUND 33 killed

   ****** 1971 jBROX GLASGOW 66 killed

   1.06 The Wheatley Report on the Ibrox Disaster led to the SAFETY
   IN SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975.

   1.07 This Act did not cover the grounds of Third and Fourth
   Division Clubs.

   1.08 "At about 3.40 pm on the afternoon of Saturday 11 May 1985 a
   fire started in block G of the main stand of the Bradford City
   Football Ground, at Valley Parade, in about five minutes the
   whole stand was in total flames. 56 people lost their lives, in
   addition many were seriously injured." Interim Popperwell Report
   Chap l para 1.1

   1.09 Bradford was a Third Division Club. The stand was built in
   1908. It was made of wood and did not have to comply with the
   Safety in Sports Grounds Act 1975 because Bradford was in the
   Third Division, ironically the match was being played to
   celebrate Bradford's promotion to the Second Division.

   1.10 Warnings had been issued about fire dangers in stands in
   the shortt Report 1924 following the first cup 'final at Wembley
   Stadium when thousands of people spilled onto the pitch due to
   overcrowding. Ho one in the Football Association took the
   slightest notice.
1.11 On the same day as the Bradford Disaster a wall collapsed at
Birmingham City Football Ground. A 15 year old boy was killed and
17 people were injured. Interim popperwell Report Chap 4 para
4.43

1.12 Just over two weeks later there was a riot at the Heysel
Stadium in Brussels shortly before the European Cup Final between
Liverpool and Juventus. "English Fans charged into Block Z of the
Terrace. As spectators struggled to get away there was a panic."
A wall collapsed; 38 people died and 400 were injured.  interim
popperwell Report Chap 4 para 4.43.

1-13 These disasters have not happened out of the blue, past
warnings in the words of popperwell have fallen on deaf ears.




                                t
  2.00 PUBLIC SAFETY

  2.01 There is no legal definition of Public Safety.

  2.02 There have been many previous Reports on safety deficiences
  in Football Grounds in the UK.

  (a )* * * * * *   SHORTT REPORT 1924

  This followed the first cup final at the new Wembley Stadium and
   it stressed dangers from large numbers of people. It asked for
  properly trained stewards, a co-ordinated centralised control
   system connected by telephone and warned against the great fire
  risks in the many stands in the UK. Shortt assumed the Football
  Association would put its own house in order even though it did
  not even attend the inquiry.
^^Final popperwell Chap 2 para 2.3

  (b )* * * * * * MOELWYN HUGHES REPORT 1946

  This followed the Bolton Disaster and reccommended inspections of
  enclosures, the scientific calculation of the maximum number
  allowed entry, the counting of those entering the ground by
  mechanical means and central co-ordination of the system, all to
  ensure the admission of a safe number of spectators.
  Final popperwell Chap 2 para 2.10

  (c )* * * * * *   CHESTER REPORT 1966

  This report said: "We have not been able to devote the time and
  resources to the study of this problem which its complexity
  deserves.”
  Final popperwell Chap 2 para 2.15

  (d )****** HARRINGTON REPORT 1968

  This report on Hooliganism was followed by another on the same
  subject.
  Final popperwell Chap 2 para 2.16

  (e)****** LANG REPORT 1969

  This reccommended closed circuit TV for Crowd Control.
  Final Popperwell Chap 2 para 2.23

  (f)****** WHEATLEY REPORT 1972

  This followed the Ibrox Disaster and led to the Safety in Sports
  Grounds Act 1975 and the Licencing of Grounds. It did not cover
  Third and Fourth Division Grounds. The report warned of fire
  risks in stands.
  Final popperwell Chap 3 para 3-6
 (g) * * * * * * McELHONE REPORT 1977

 This followed problems in Scottish Grounds. It reccommended:
 "That in the interests of crowd control and safety, separation of
 rival supporters at turnstiles should be carried out if the
 police in consultation with the club consider such a step to be
 necessary; that for matches where larger than average attendances
 are expected, sufficient turnstiles should be opened timeously in
 order to acheive speedy admission. ( Rec 13) The report also
 reccommends the use of perimeter fences not less than 1.8 metres
 high with access points to allow the pitch to be used if
 necessary for the evacuation of spectators in an emergency.
 (para 53)

 This report also talks of "The primitive conditions at football
 grounds" and that clubs must provide adequate toilet facilities

•for men AND women with generally improved conditions for
 spectators.
 Final popperwell Chap 2 para 2.36

 (h )* * * * * *   doe WORKING GROUP REPORT 1984

 This followed serious disorder at matches in Luxembourg and
 France in 1983 and 1984.

 (i)****** THE POPPERWELL REPORTS 1985 & 1986.

 These followed the disasters at:

 Bradford City 11 May 1985

 Birmingham City 11 May 1985

 Heysel Stadium Brussels 29 May 1985

 2.03 Each one of these reports deals with problems in a piecemeal
 fashion. A problem arises a committee reports. A disaster occurs
 and an inquiry is set up. It is in the nature of Public inquiries
 to do this because often the terms of reference are narrowly
 defined.

  2.04 In many instances each new report just repeats what has been
  said earlier, often to no avail: "The preceding safety measures
. cannot be secured without legislation. A Departmental Committee
  reporting on Crowds to a previous Home Secretary in 1924
  anaemically recommended that adequate provision for safety be
  left to the pressure of the governing bodies in sport. The most
  important of these was, of course the Football Association, which
  had not deigned to appear before the Committee...." Moelwyn
  Hughes 1946.

 2.05 The Shortt Report of 1924 that was being commented on
 concluded that: "We are assured that these governing bodies are
 only too anxious to secure that their sport is carried on under
  conditions which will promote the public safety, and we feel that
  at this stage it is safe to leave the matter to them."(para 47.)

  2.06 As Popperwell says in his final report para 2.13: " Mr
  Hughes' words fell on deaf ears."

  2.07 The disaster was avoidable and could have been prevented.
  The immediate cause of the disaster was the opening of a gate by
  the police in order to relieve the crush outside the ground. The
  crush was caused because there were insufficient numbers of
  turnstiles to allow safe entry by the spectators before the
  kick-off. There were only seven to admit 10,000 people

   2.08 The opening of doors to relieve the crush appears to be
   common place at football matches. One reason could be that the
^^police would rather the crowd was inside than outside. As the
i^Pbrowd wants this too it would at first sight seem sensible.
   However unless there is well understood co-ordination between
   those police outside the ground and those inside then a disaster
   is sooner or later inevitable with or without perimeter fencing.

  2.09 "At Question Time Mr Eric Illsey (Barnsley Labour) said that
  in February South Yorkshire Police instructed Barnsley Football
  Club to admit 2,000 spectators to an FA Cup tie one minute before
  the kick off without payment and without tickets." Guardian 26
  April 1986 p8 Parliamentary Report

  2.10 While there are Codes of Practice governing MEANS OF ESCAPE
  there do not appear to be any Codes on SAFE ENTRY especially
  where large numbers of people are concerned.

  2.11 An Act of Parliament on public safety is required. This act
  would have Codes of Practice on Public Safety covering Sports
  Grounds and other buildings where large numbers of the public
  assemble, it should be considered just as important to have
  regulations covering safe rates of entry to buildings as it is to
  have safe means of escape in case of fire.

  2.12 It would seem self evident that the Code should govern the
  rate of entry to a football match or any other event involving
  large numbers of people so that they gain entry safely before the
  event starts.

  2.13 Forty years ago people may have been prepared to stand on
  the terraces for an hour waiting for the match to start. Those
  days have gone. There must be some entertainment. Standing on the
  terraces waiting for kick-off on a cold winters day is not
  exactly pleasant. Sometimes it is not conducive to good
  behaviour.

  2.14 Today roads are more efficient at delivering people to
  matches than they were. More people have cars. In the past those
  seven turnstiles, which were considered surprisingly adequate for
  the World Cup in 1966, might have been adequate. Today they are
not. They caused the death of 95 innocent people, if there had
been a properly designed entrance for the 10,000 people trying to
get into the ground then they would be alive today. That point
cannot be made strongly enough.
   3.00 MEANS OF ESCAPE

   3.01 Codes of Practice relating to Means of Escape have been
   written after major fire disasters. The audience at a modern
   theatre accepts without question that they will be safe. They
   have every right to do so although this was not always the case.

   3.02 In the nineteenth century there was a series of terrible
   disasters caused by fire in theatres, in the Ring Theatre in
   Vienna and the Iroquois Theatre in Chicago over 1000 people died
   in two fires.

   3.03 After those fires there was a worldwide adoption of similar
   safety standards.

^ ^ * * * * * * safety Curtains

   ****** No naked lights onstage or in   the auditorium

   ****** properly designed alternative   escape routes

   ****** fixed seating with aisles. The number and spacing of seats
   were determined.

   3.04 Sadly Codes seem to be written only after the event, because
   money is often considered more important than peoples lives. In
   1973 wooden wedges were nailed to the floor in Summerland in the
   isle of Man. Those wedges were there to stop people getting in
   without paying. They were fixed under the fire escape doors. In
   the fire which killed over 50 people the doors could not be
   opened, in how many football grounds are gates and doors locked
   or even chained shut immediately the game starts? What happens if
   there is an emergency? How are people supposed to escape to
   safety? People nearly always try to get out by exactly the same
   route they came in. It is the only route they know.
4.00 FOOTBALL GROUNDS AND OVERCROWDING

4.01 The   last purpose built ground in this country was Wembley
Stadium.   This was used for the Olympic Games in 1948. Designed by
Sir Owen   Williams it was first used for the Cup Final in 1923.
Williams   also designed the Wembley Empire Pool.

4.02 On the occasion of the first Cup Final there was   such
serious overcrowding that the crowd estimated at over   150,000
spilled out on to most of the pitch. That incident is   often shown
in photographs of a policeman on a white horse trying   to clear
the pitch. (Shortt Report para 2.02).

4.03 In the past football crowds at ordinary club grounds were
far larger than they are today. For example in April 1945 there
 were 90,000 at the Southern Cup Final at Wembley and 130,000 at

•
Hampden Park Glasgow to see Scotland play England. In the
thirties crowds were even larger, 149,547 paid to watch England
and Scotland play at Hampden Park in April 1937. In November 1945
100,000 saw Chelsea play Moscow Dynamo and spectators stood on
the roofs of the stands to watch the match. Many people sat
around the edge of the field.

4.04 In 1985 the Chairman of Chelsea proposed putting electrified
fencing up at his ground even though it had perimeter fencing.
Those men and women and small boys who saw that historic match in
1945 would have been outraged at such sugestions.

4.05 The consequences of what could have happened to people in
that crowd in 1945 if there had been such concentration camp
devices do not bear thinking about.

4.06 Much has changed since the Second World War including
peoples minds. What is tolerated today in football grounds would
have been unthinkable in 1945 with all the overtones of Belsen.

4.07 The implication of what happened at Hillsborough on a sunny
Saturday afternoon when 95 men women and children were crushed to
death in front of helpless onlookers runs far deeper than who
opened a gate to relieve the crush outside the ground. That was
an entirely human reaction to an impossible situation.

4.08 If the gate had not been opened then this inquiry might well
have been set up to inquire about a disaster outside the ground
in Leppings Lane itself.
5.00 PEOPLE ARRIVING WITHOUT TICKETS

5.01 At most sporting events people turn up without tickets
because they know that they can buy them from ticket touts
outside the grounds. This happens at Wimbledon Lawn Tennis
Championships as well as Wembley. It no doubt happened at
Hillsborough.

5.02 In such situations the police are presented with a difficult
situation given the haphazard planning that has developed around
every football ground in this country.

5.03 Their only option is to throw a cordon or series of cordons
around the ground to filter spectators. These cordons need to be
some way away from the ground itself. They are however extremely
inconvenient for anyone who lives inside them.

5.04 In an ideal situation   these cordons would be situated with
the stadium in the middle.   This would allow entry points to be
equally spaced all the way   around the perimeter. Most UK football
grounds are not able to do   this.
6.00 ENTRY POINTS

6.01 Entry to football grounds and especially to the stands is
through turnstiles. Entry is slow and frustrating. Queues build
up.

6.02 If the turnstiles cannot cope with the rate of people trying
to get through them the   queues will create very dangerous
situations. This is recognised when police and club officials
open exit gates to let the spectators in. Some people may even
arrive in the hope this might happen, (para 2.09).

6.03 One reason for this build up is because there are not enough
turnstiles. At the Leppings Lane End at Hillsborough there are
seven in one bank plus another three. These have toserve the
standing enclosure as well as seating areas.

6.04 On the day of the disaster 10/000 had to pass through them
to gain entrance. This is the population of a small town.

6.05 If 5 seconds is allowed for each person to pass through a
turnstile it will take 125 minutes for seven turnstiles to clear
10,000 people. This assumes that everyone arrives in a steady
stream. This will never happen.

6.06 There are also two   gates which are opened at the end of the
match to let people out quickly.

6.07 On the day of the match one was opened to relieve the crush
outside. It was an extremely difficult decision to make.

6.08 Spectators have been criticised for arriving late at the
ground. It should be remembered that traffic conditions play a
part in this. The speed at which people pass through the
turnstiles is significant as is the number of turnstiles. However
should you arrive early and many people arrived well over an hour
before the kick off there is frequently nothing to do except
stand around often in the cold.
7.00 THE DISASTER.

7.01 Once the gates were opened some 3,000 people poured into the
space at the back of the stand. In front of them was the tunnel
leading to the centre portion of the stand. Through it the front
ones could see the field and the players. They surged through
with appalling consequences for the people already in this part
of the stand. They were totally trapped. So too were the
latecomers. No one guided this huge number of fans in safely into
the two outer enclosures flanking the centre enclosure. If they
had the disaster would not have occurred. Where were the stewards
and the police who were supposed to be there to marshall this
crowd? Were they ever there?

7.02 Many fans had arrived in good time. One spoke on Channel
(Four news in an interview with Robert Parker on Thursday 27 April
of the difficulty he and other people were having in breathing.
This was at 2.15pm. He was standing at the back of the centre
enclosure .

7.03 The front of the enclosure is formed by a fence. The sides
are enclosed by other fences. There is a small emergency gate at
the front of the enclosure in the fence. It can only be opened
from the outside.

7.04 The only way in and out of the enclosure is via the opening
at the back. The emergency gate in the fence at the front can
only let one or two people out at a t i m e .

7.05 At one point this emergency gate appears to have been
opened. Some fans had climbed out of the rapidly worsening
conditions in the enclosure. The emergency gate was opened to put
them back inside.

7.06 As the crush dramatically increased a crush barrier
collapsed under the strain. People fell and were trampled
underfoot. The crowd was so densely packed that some spectators
walked along on the heads and shoulders of people in the crowd.
They escaped by climbing over the fence. This can be seen in the
press photographs.

7.07 Other people were hauled up into the stands above t h e m .

7.08 Ninety five innocent men women and children died. The great
tragedy of Hillsborough is that they need not have died because
there was ample room to house them in the adjacent enclosures
either side. This to can be clearly seen on the Channel 4 ITN
News Report of Robert Parker.

7.09 Many people in the crowd appealed to   the police to let them
out of the enclosure. Mr Hicks who was in   the stand was the
father of two young girls who died in the   disaster. He could not
reach them and asked police to let people   out. He could see his
two daughters crushed against the wire at   the front. He received
an abusive answer. He had taken them to the match as a birthday
treat.

7.10 Mr Hicks was not alone in receiving such a reply. Guardian
and Daily Mirror Monday April 15 1989.

7.11 When the full horror of what was happening was realised by
those in some position to help it was too late. It was almost as
if there was a total suspension of belief by those watching only
inches away from trapped and dying people. This is not unknown in
disasters particularly in fires. In the Manchester Woolworths
Fire a man eating a meal was warned by staff to leave but he
insisted on staying to finish the meal he had paid for. At the
time there was smoke but he sat eating and died.
8.00 PERIMETER FENCES

8.01 Immediately after the disaster there were calls for instant
action.

8.02 Not unnaturally there was a great wave of public anger
against the fences which had prevented people escaping. Many were
taken down. A few clubs had never put them up in the first place.

8.03 In the piecemeal fashion in which these fences had been put
up following the McElhone Report of 1977 (para 2.02) there seems
to have been no national safety standard laid down. No doubt it
would have been quite legal for Chelsea to have electrified their
fence in 1985. However the disaster at Bradford City occurred

•
shortly afterwards.

8.04 There appears to be no regulation governing whether the
emergency gates can be opened from inside in an emergency, or how
many there should be or whether they should be m a n n e d . The whole
point about emergency gates and doors is that they must be
capable of being opened b y the people in danger . in that they are
little different to fire escape doors. There have been many
examples where there has been a conflict between safety and
security, in all cases security has been the priority and people
have died. (Summerland Inquiry Report 1974 paras 181-183)

8.05 Arguments have been put forward for the retention of fences.
Some continental grounds have fences which are effectively a
series of continuous gates with electrically operated releases on
them. In an emergency the whole perimeter can open.

8.06 Although this may seem a foolproof system at first sight no
one in charge at Hillsborough realised until it was too late even
though they were able to touch the people who were trapped.
People could still be trapped behind such a fence. They could die
just as others died at Hillsborough.
9.00 SECURITY MOATS

9.01 It was proposed by a former Minister for Sport that moats
should replace the fences. This too is a solution fraught with
problems.

9.02 Most British football grounds have insufficient space
between the touchline and the stands for moats to be safely
installed. There would be great danger of people being pushed or
falling into them with fatal results.
10.00 IDENTITY CARDS

10.01 The new Football Bill going through Parliament contains
proposals for a national ID card system for fans.

10.02 The introduction of ID cards would do little to speed up
the entry of fans to grounds. They will slow entry with all the
frustration and dangers this entails.

10.03 If it takes 5 seconds for a person to pass through a
turnstile it is likely to take 10 seconds for someone to show
their card, be identified from the photograph, buy their ticket
or show it and pass through.

10.04 It takes about two hours for 10,000 people to go through
the seven turnstiles at Hillsborough's Leppings Lane End without
ID cards. It could take four hours to process the same number
through with ID cards.

10.05 This creates danger.

10.06 What is needed at football grounds such as Hillsborough as
a matter of priority are more safe entry points.

10.07 If ID cards slow entry then what is needed are more
turnstiles.

10.08 If more turnstiles cannot be provided then people have to
be filtered and slowed down so that crushes do not build up. This
can only be acheived by means of cordons.

10.09 There are many other potentially dangerous areas which have
to cope with enormous numbers of people such as Underground
Stations. Kings Cross has 250,000 passengers pass through the
booking halls in one day. When evening matches are played at
Wembley then the crush is enormous and the escalators are
delivering passengers faster than they can safely pass through
the ticket barriers. The proposed new ticket barriers may well
cause more problems than they are designed to solve. They could
in certain circumstances cause a disaster.

10.10 Similar conditions occur in many other stations such as
Victoria. During the morning rush hours a situation builds up in
the underground booking hall where more people arrive from the
mainline station and buses than the escalators can safely deal
with. They cannot be cleared by the escalators. It is like the
Sorcerers Apprentice.

10.11 There is an urgent need for a Public Safety Act covering
Sports Grounds and elsewhere wherever large numbers of people
congregate in buildings.
11.01 COMMUNICATIONS

11.01 When the gate outside the ground was opened by the police
the effect it would have inside did not seem to be realised.

11.02 The ground is owned b y Sheffield Wednesday. The match to be
played was the Semi Final of the Association Cup. The police and
stewards of the club organised entry to the ground. The police
have jurisdiction inside and outside the ground. The police are
under the impression they are in overall control.

11.03 The very last paragraph ofthe Final Popperwell Report
raises this problem: "on the question of the relative
responsibilities of the police and stewards, the Group ( the
Working Group on the Green Guide) felt that the Guide ought to
make it plain that it was the CLUB'S RESPONSIBILITY TO CONTROL
AND MANAGE SPECTATORS IN NORMAL CIRCUMSTANCES and that the police
presence (if there was one) was to deal with the law and order
problems and provide support and leadership in emergencies. It
was noted that there now existed considerable material on the
training and deployment of stewards and staff likely to be
involved in emergency situations." Reccommendation 63 page 84.

11.04 However many men are employed in managing entry to the
ground unless they are properly and efficiently organised and
trained so that each realises the consequences of their actions
then then problems will arise. At the Heysel Disaster there were
3,000 police on duty. Their deployment was ineffective both
inside and outside the ground. The Adjutant commanding the
squadron assigned to sections X-Z had too few men to enable him
to undertake the onerous task placed upon him. Appendix D Final
popperwell page 74.

11.05 This question of liason inside and outside the ground was
raised in the 1924 Shortt Report on the first Wembley Cup Final.
It is raised in the Final popperwell Report about Bradford and
Heysel.

11.06 Radio Communication at Heysel was very poor due to the
condition of the radio and ambient noise levels. Popperwell found
similar problems in the UK. Final popperwell Chap 6 part A
Reccommendation 3 and Appendix D page 75.

11.07 In this day and age it should be possible for the police
outside the ground to have first class radio communication with
the command post inside. The fatal consequences of not having it
even though Popperwell drew attention to it have been graphically
demonstrated at Hillsborough.
   12.00 CONCLUSIONS

   12.00 With adequate foresight this disaster would not have
   happened. It was caused by a combination of bad organisation b y
   the stewards and police and so cramped an entry that 10,000
   people could not pass into the ground safely before the match
   started.

   12.02 Similar crowds have gone in in the past without being
   killed.

   12.03 As with The Herald of Free Enterprise Disaster and with the
   Kings Cross Fire the responsibility lies not with the actual
   people who did or did not do something in a given situation but
   with those who were responsible for the planning of this match.

^ ^ 1 2 . 0 4 No good will come of looking for individual scapegoats. I
     believe that the policeman who ordered the gate to be opened had
     no alternative. In the situation he was in he did the right thing
     because of the very grave danger to the people outside the
     ground.

   12.05 However those from the club who planned this event,   the
   police and the Football Association do bear a heavy
   responsibility.

   12.06 So too does the present Government and past Governments who
   have not enacted legislation to safeguard the public in Football
   Grounds. Instead they have created an situation where some people
   going to a football match are considered subhuman. They have been
   penned like animals with predictable results.

   12.07 Given the speed at which people pass into grounds then ID
   cards are irrelevent. They would not have prevented the disaster
   at Hillsborough as many people have pointed out including
   popperwell. They might well cause a worse disaster outside a
   ground as entry is slowed down.

   12.08 It would be difficult for this country given the state of
   our grounds to stage the world cup again. Private enterprise will
   not provide new grounds. None have appeared since 1923. We lack
   even a proper indoor sports arena. We could not stage the Olympic
   Games.

   12.09 In view of the importance of sport, the interest shown in
   it and the prestige attached to winning whatever the event is,
   then surely it is about time we had some proper stadia to match
   the best of those abroad. There should be at least six such
   stadia in this country. These have to be funded by the
   Government.

   12.10 There is a need for a National Compensation Fund which pays
   out at least £250,000 to the victims or dependants of someone
   killed or injured. This would save people having to go through
the harrowing ordeal of having to find someone to sue.

12.11 There is a need for a legal definition of Public Safety.
The people who entered Hillsborough did so in the belief they
were going into a safe environment. They had every right to do
so.

12.12 A fitting memorial to those innocent victims would be an
Act of Parliament on Public Safety with Codes of Practice for all
building types. As well as the obvious provision for Means of
Escape in Case of Fire it must deal with safe entry to buildings;
especially football grounds which attract enormous crowds of
spectators. If no one would dream of designing a theatre with
seven small and cramped turnstiles for entry then such a
situation should not be allowed at one of our largest and
apparently safest football grounds. If Hillsborough is one of the

♦
what are the worst like?




The School of Architecture
Kent Institute of Art and Design
CANTERBURY
May 8 1989
