From: Jim Bradley                                    cc      Home Secretary
      Police Resources Unit                                 David Omand
      Room 614                                              John Lyon
      273 2996                                              Sir David O'Dowd
                                                             Jonathan Duke-Evans
        23 September 1999                                   Richard Komicki
                                                             Pam Teare
                                                             Ed Owen
               Pc           \   .—fJ-'O—-                    Justin Russell

Mr Clarke

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE: HILLSBOROUGH ADDITIONAL COSTS

Issue

A reply to Clarence Swindell's (Chair o f the Police Authority) letter o f 10 September
to the Home Secretary (Annex A) requesting a meeting to discuss financial assistance
in respect o f their Hillsborough costs.

Timing

2.      An immediate response should be considered in view o f the sensitivity o f the
issues surrounding the Hillsborough disaster.

Summary

3.      The South Yorkshire Police Authority had earmarked £500,000 to meet the
legal costs o f the two former police officers (M r Duckenfield and M r M urray), who
are facing criminal proceedings in respect o f the Hillsborough disaster. They had
restricted support for the two former police officers to the end o f the committal
proceedings. N ow that both officers have been committed for trial at the Crown
Court the Authority expect further applications from the two officers to fund their
defence costs.

4.     In addition the Police Authority have exhausted their public liability insurance
limit o f £8.5 m illion and have had to earmark £5 m illion for additional liabilities,
which are expected to rise as claims are settled. They have also been advised o f the
need to set aside a further £2.6 million following the reassessment o f the life
expectancy o f two Hillsborough victims.

5.      Normally it is expected that costs arising from unexpected events, like those
for legal bills, would be met from within the force's budget and by using their
reserves. The established criteria for the payment o f a special grant are quite strict.
The additional costs incurred by the forces must be exceptional and o f a scale likely to
threaten the efficiency o f the force. However we have not adhered strictly to these
criteria in recent cases and four special grants have been approved this year. On the
basis o f the limited information provided, the South Yorkshire Police Authority will
need to set aside in excess o f £8 million for Hillsborough related expenditure. This
would be around 4.5% o f the force's current budget - a significant loss o f expenditure
that would otherwise be invested in policing. The Home Secretary, in a letter to Mr
Blunkett in June, indicated he would give any application from the police authority
careful consideration.

Recommendation

6.     We would recommend that:-

               (i)    you should agree to meet the South Yorkshire Police Authority,
                       and,

               (ii)   you reply as in the draft at Annex B.

Consideration

7.     The Hillsborough Families Support Group (HFSG) has brought a private
criminal prosecution against Mr Duckenfield and M r Murray. Earlier this year they
challenged whether the South Yorkshire Police Authority had powers to fund the
defence costs o f the two former officers. This resulted in the Police Authority
withdrawing financial support on legal advice. Consequently the C hief Constable
sought judicial review o f this decision, with the Authority's support.

8.      In M arch the Divisional Court ruled that police authorities did have powers to
meet the defence costs o f officers in private prosecutions, judicial review proceedings,
and any other type o f legal proceedings. The criterion was whether the payment in
question supports the function o f a police authority to "secure the maintenance o f an
efficient and effective police force for its area", as required under Section 6(1) o f the
Police Act 1996. It is therefore a matter for a police authority to determine whether
giving financial assistance in a particular case supports this function. The South
Yorkshire Police Authority decided they met this criterion and reinstated their
previous decision to meet the legal costs o f the two officers.

9.      In addition to the legal costs o f the two former officers for the Crown Court
proceedings in June next year, which the police authority is unable to specify at the
moment, they will also have to set aside at least £8 million to meet public liability
costs that exceed their insurance cover. These costs alone amount to 4.5% o f the
police authority's budget for 1999/2000 o f £173.3 million. This is a significant sum
that is not available for policing the South Yorkshire police area.

10.    This year £1.7 million o f police grant had been set aside centrally to correct an
underpayment to Derbyshire Police Authority for its pensions costs. The need to
make this payment has slipped to 2001/02 because o f the local government
procedures for correcting an error made in the 1998/99 funding for Derbyshire. The
grant set aside for 1999/2000 was not, therefore, allocated to the police authority.
This meant that this sum was available in 1999/2000 to be used for other pressing
needs. It has now been fully utilised for special grant payments to four other forces
which were approved by the Home Secretary. There is no scope to assist South
Yorkshire in 1999/2000. It is too early to say what the position will be in 2000/01 as
no decision has been taken on how to use the £1.7 million that will potentially still be
available next year. You and the Home Secretary, however, may wish to retain this
funding for applications for special payments next year.

Financial Implications

11.      There are obvious financial implications for the police authority. For the
Home Office to provide a special payment to cover most o f South Yorkshire's
additional costs would require taking money out o f the police grant pot. Top slicing
o f police grant for such purposes does not have the support o f ACPO or the APA.
Also, M erseyside Police Authority may have some difficulty with a top slice from
police grant that assisted South Yorkshire Police to meet their Hillsborough costs.
This disaster remains a very sensitive issue in Liverpool.

Handling/presentational issues

12.    None at present.




                                    Jim Bradley
                                                                                     A"*j   a/   £T>^   A-
      South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
      P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
      Barnsley, South Yorkshire S70 2PQ.
      Tel: Barnsley (01226) 772803
     Fax: Barnsley (01226) 772899
     Clarence Swindell, Chair

     Our ref:     CS/WJW/VS                                              S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E
                                                                                          P O L IC E
     Your ref:                                                                      A U T H O R IT Y

     Date.      10 September 1999




     The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Q    Home Office
     Queen Anne’s Gate
     Westminster
     LONDON SW1H9AT

     Dear                   .   $ \Ty v u u j   .

     HILLSBOROUGH

      I am following up a matter raised with you earlier this year by David Blunkett MP. He
     wrote in the context of the private criminal prosecutions brought by the HFSG, and the
     South Yorkshire Police Authority’s decision that, given the circumstances of this incident,
     it should properly meet the defence costs of the two former officers out of Police Authority
     funds. He suggested that there might be a case for Home Office to provide fundina to
     support the Authority’s costs.

    The Authority’s present decision to fund was restricted to the proceedings up to committal
    stage - July 1999. In view of the outcome, I envisage that the Authority will receive within
    the next month or so a further application for the two former officers to fund the defence
    costs for the trial itself, which is scheduled for June 2000.

    The case has implications extending beyond South Yorkshire. This was a central issue in
    the Judicial Review earlier this year which established that Police Authorities do have the
    necessary powers. The morale of the South Yorkshire force is at stake. However, as
    Chief Constable Mike Hedges has said publicly, it is vital that all police officers know,
    when they are faced with split second decisions to make in pressured circumstances, that
    their Police Authority will stand behind them and provide support if they act in good faith
    but things go wrong, as happened in April 1989.

    While the Authority was unanimous in its decision to support the officers in the committal
    proceedings, it was at the same time mindful of the financial implications. Expenditure to
    date has been met from reserves, but ultimately the costs will impact directly on policinq
    budgets or indirectly through the need to reinstate reserves.

    The Authority’s budgets are also being squeezed by Hillsborough costs from another
    direction. The public liability insurance limit of £8.5m was reached many years ago, but
    there remains a number of outstanding claims. So far the Authority has set aside in its
    accounts nearly £5m for additional liabilities which are likely to arise when claims are

                                                                         D eceived pv?
                                                                                14 SEP 1999
settled. Recently, our insurance advisers have informed us of reassessment of life
expectancies for two permanently incapacitated victims. These cases alone will require
the Authority to set aside a further £2.6m to meet potential liabilities. If this is raised via
the precept it could add around 13% to Council Tax.

I have given you the broad background to our situation. My purpose in writing personally
to you is to request a meeting with Home Office to discuss an application from this
Authority for financial support towards the costs it is facing on Hillsborough related
matters.

On hearing from you, I will arrange for a more detailed paper to be prepared by the Clerk
and Treasurer and the Chief Constable.

Yours sincerely




Clarence Swindell
Chair, South Yorkshire Police Authority
                                                                             ANNEX B

Draft letter for the signature of Mr Clarke to Clarence Swindell, Chair of the
South Yorkshire Police Authority




Clarence Swindell
Chair, South Yorkshire Police Authority
South Yorkshire Joint Secretariat
PO Box 37
Regent Street
BARNSLEY
South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ




Thank you for your letter o f 10 September to the Home Secretary asking for a
meeting to discuss the scope for financial assistance in respect o f Hillsborough related
costs.


I would be pleased to meet you, the C hief Constable and members o f the Police
Authority.    Could I ask that your office to get in touch with my Assistant Private
Secretary, Desmond Daniels (0171 273 2838), to arrange a date.


I am grateful for your offer o f a more detailed paper. It would be useful if your Clerk
and Treasurer could send it to Jim Bradley in the Police Resources Unit here in the
first instance.
