                                                                                  Colin PickthaU MP
                                                                                  Labour MP for West Lancashire
                                                                                  House of Commons
                                                                                  London SW1A OAA

                                                                                       s.* .* *




    H <v                           e\ ib v t       WV» H P * *u*»V
                                            , UeldL       W fr        •utff'V* ,       U   U2LA A £y^ed-
         U K     tO T M J U ^ - W v ^ ,   dLA \z>jr OA **         W       U      l «   i   fCrHrCXrU- »   fe>

“C u v ^ <5\^n Msl <Aj *& U ^ h a j^ sUiieV’. *


    W<_ l*C&A (p* w u » fe t* £ j               9vu
^ L ^ J t - ^ W c u ^ Vt*vurr*tsu> £ i* k A * ^      {j €td , tpuA u x CA4-*
         io e ^ L a w e < o U & j                   u*W ai Ua>t
 u r r v ^ c ^    k >          ^    f afp€s*A. a, ^tM c?                      w ^ U -U a .   \*h\ C ^ o e c f.
 Ifo ssv jifc . H>                          .


                                       “f e c i l t u U U <




               WORKING FOR A BETTER FUTURE IN WEST LANCASHIRE

                 Parliamentary Assistant: Frank McKenna Parliamentary Secretary : Pauline Roughley
                           Contact a t : 127 Burscough Street, Ormskilfc, Lancashire L39 2EP
                                         TelephoneVFax : 01695 570094
26 February 1998

                        H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                            L ONDON S W 1A OAA
Mr John King
The Chairman
Knowsley North & Sefton East CLP
26 Peatwood Avenue
Kirkby


Dear John,

I am aware that some Party members are upset and concerned at the
situation locally following the Home Secretary’s statement last week that
a case had not been established for a further Judicial Inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster. I also acknowledge that much o f the anger locally
has been aimed towards me personally. I am writing, therefore, to
explain my own position. In order to do so fully, it will be necessary for
me to write at some length, and 1 apologise for this.

I should first state that, despite the personal criticism o f me* I do remain
very concerned and sympathetic to the feelings o f frustration o f all o f
those who lost relatives and friends at Hillsborough. Indeed, since
visiting the scene o f the disaster on the day following, and the fact you
and many other friends were at the event, that concern has always been
close to my heart.

I think it would be helpful if I dealt with the main issues which people
are understandably concerned about, and which were examined as part o f
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny o f the evidence.

First, however, it might help if I make some comment about Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s inappropriate remarks at his first meeting with the
families o f the victims. He did apologise, and the families were given
the opportunity to veto his further involvement. They chose not to do so.

The main issue which I know causes a great deal o f anger, which I share,
is that nobody has ever been punished for what happened. What is clear,
and was supported by both the Taylor Inquiry and Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, is that, “...the main reason for tne disaster was the failure o f police
control.” (Lord Taylor’s Interim Report, August 1989, paragraph 278).
In addition to the culpability o f the police, the Taylor Inquiry also
identified that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield City
Council shared some o f the responsibility, and they have recognised this
fact by contributing sums o f money to the compensation settlements.

The senior police officer. Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid, retired on
grounds o f ill health in 1990 which meant that disciplinary action could
not be taken against him since disciplinary action can only be taken
against serving officers. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had the scope to refer
matters for any disciplinary action to the appropriate authority, but,
having examined the original and new evidence, he concluded in respect
of Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid that, “...as the rules stood (and still
stand), such charges cannot be pursued against a retired police officer.”
(Chapter 1, paragraph 58, Scrutiny o f Evidence, Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith).

The Home Secretary, in his statement, made it clear that the police
disciplinary system is open to abuse, and that we will be changing it.
However, under the terms o f the European Convention on Human Rights,
new rules cannot be applied retrospectively.

One other issue o f concern has been the operation o f the Coroner’s
Inquest. This is a very complicated issue relating to the verdict o f the
Inquest, and the families’ concern that the cause o f death was not, as they
see it, accidental. However, the Counsel acting for the Family Support
Group said in their submission to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that, *\.,it is
accepted, eight and a half years after the event, that it is impractical and
may be undesirable for fresh inquests to be convened.” Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s Report states, “In order to justify a further application to
the Divisional Court for judicial review to (pash the inquest verdict o f
accidental death, without an order for a new inquest, any new evidence
must, in my opinion, show that had it been presented to the jury they
would have been likely to reach the only other possible verdict, namely
unlawful killing.” (Chapter 1, Paragraph 66).

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith describes the statutory framework for
Coroners’ Inquests. The key point is that such procedures are neither
designed for nor appropriate to cases arising out o f major disasters. The
Home Secretary has made it clear that new procedures for any future case
following a disaster are to be introduced. However, as the families’
lawyers themselves made clear, there is nothing to be gained by going
through a system which is inappropriate and unsuitable again. I should
add that I did, during the Inquest, attend for one day at the request of
local families, and it was both harrowing and clearly unsuited to this
situation.

There is finally the issue o f the new evidence which the families and the
Granada television programme raised. This is summarised in Appendix
10 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's Scrutiny Report. He concludes that,
“Eight of these questions were addressed quite plainly by Lord Taylor.
He answered them in as far as answers are possible, and I think the
answers he gave were right.” Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses all the
10 questions in Appendix 10.

There are two other questions which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined
in the light o f fresh evidence. The first is the fact that two o f the videos
from the day went missing. The second relates to evidence from a doctor
who assisted following the injuries.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith looks at the possible impact o f the two missing
 videos in great detail, and particularly the evidence o f the Sheffield
 Wednesday video technician, Roger Houldsworth, in Chapter 2 o f his
Scrutiny Report. He examined material from the number o f video
cameras in use on the day, including the Club's, the television
companies' and those used by the police. After examining what they
might have added to what was shown to the Taylor Inquiry or the
Inquest, he concludes that, “The only sense in which Mr Holdsworth’s
evidence is new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is
in relation to submission 5.... I am unable to accept that his recollection
o f events is now accurate. Even if it was correct it would not have any
effect on previous proceedings. It would simply have been evidence o f
one more person who thought that the central pens were full at J4.52.”
There is plenty o f evidence already that this was so and that is why the
Taylor Inquiry blamed the police for losing control.

A great deal has been made o f new evidence from Dr Ed Walker. Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that,
“Dr Walker’s evidence was assailable to the Coroner and the fact that he
treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini inquest on him. It would be
unusual for a junior doctor to be called to give evidence of treatment,
even if he was the first anaesthetist on the scene. The matter was dealt
with, as one would expect, by Dr Appleyard, the Consultant Anaesthetist
in charge o f the Intensive Care Unit who was called to give evidence.
For the reasons I have already given, Dr Walker added nothing o f any
significance.”
(Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Chapter 3, Paragraph 71)

This relates back to the issue of the Coroner’s verdict o f accidental death,
and that is dealt with earlier in my letter.

One finai point I feel that I should cover is the interference with police
officers’ statements. One o f the amended statements is contained in its
unamended state at Appendix 6 o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Report. It
is clear that the sections removed were done so because some o f the
remarks were frivolous and could have caused upset. They do not
remove evidence. I have read through all o f the other amended
statements in their unamended state, and they do not, in my opinion,
show anything which would have led Lord Taylor or Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to arrive at different conclusions.

 Before concluding I should say a word about my own role. As a Home
 Office minister I pressed for a further scrutiny o f the evidence to see
 whether a fresh Judicial Inquiry could be justified. I was supported in
 this by other ministerial colleagues from Merseyside. We did this
because we wanted the families* concerns to be re-examined. I read the
draft and report very carefully and looked for any material flaws in it. I
have been unable to find any. I f anybody can point out any serious errors
or flaws to me I will raise them. However disappointing this is for
everyone, m yself included, I am at a loss as to what more can be done.
The Taylor Report was the best analysis o f what happened that could
have been made at that time, and I think that the families and their
advisers accept that. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith accepts that Lord Taylor
was thorough and correct in his findings. The only way in which I could
change things would be to turn the clock back, and I do not have that
power. If I can help in some other way I would willingly do so, but I
simply do not know how.
Once again, I apologise for the length of this letter. However, I do feel
that such an important issue needed clarification.


Yours sincerely.




George Howarth MP
Knowsley North & Sefton East.
