15. PITCH PERIMETER                                                          strength specified in Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
                                                                             construction its height may be more than 1.12 metres. This is
    FENCE/W ALL                                                              because the pressures acting on a person forced against such a
                                                                             fence are distributed over a large area of the body, unlike the
                                                                             situation with a normal crush barrier, where the pressures
A pitch perimeter fen ce/w all may not only delineate the playing
                                                                             are localized.
area from the spectator accommodation but may have to serve
as a crush barrier, or in some situations as a barrier to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an emergency.

2 14 . The type, strength and height of a pitch perimeter fence or
wall will vary according to its location and required function. At one
extreme, at a certain type of ground or small stadium used by very
few spectators, there may be no need for a perimeter fence or wall
at all; or if such a wall or fence exists it may need to consist of little
more than a rail to mark the playing area. At the other extreme, at
some major soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd movement
forms a necessary part of the safety measures, it may be necessary
to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph 209) but allows for
access in emergency. Even at these grounds however specification
of the pitch fence may vary for different parts of the ground.

215 . For most major stadia, whether used for association football
or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence will be required either to
prevent access to the pitch as mentioned above, or at least to
discourage attempts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates
or other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres) should
nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency and, at those
grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the exit system,
for the departure of spectators at the end of an event. Provision of
such gates or access points is particularly important to allow full
access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a
place of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should
                                                                                                                                                 ©
be properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access
to the playing area or perimeter track can be ensured.


216 . If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence it should be
deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the conditions of height and
         I



                                62
