                                                                  i#
                       (S K IK S B ^ 01
The Secretary
The Taylor Inquiry
The Home Office
                   o                   <$>                  n
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT

27 June, 1989

Dear Sir

No doubt in common with the ten other companies selected to
tender for the supply of the system required to implement the
Government's football membership scheme, we have been
following the course of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry with
considerable interest.

Plainly, my company has a commercial interest as much in the
outcome of your process as in the final choice made by the
proposed Football Management Authority. Here, too, the eleven
potential suppliers are on common ground and it occurs to me
that Lord Justice Taylor may wish to include their
representations amongst the evidence he takes - if only to
consider what effect a membership and admission system might
have had on the crowd and its behaviour at the Leppings Lane
turnstiles.

Whatever rumblings may have been heard from its opponents, it
is clear that the Government's Football Spectators Bill is
designed to provide the legal framework within which the
national membership scheme can be operated, not to specify the
manner in which the scheme shall be implemented.  For this
reason, it appears likely to be enacted largely unchanged.

However, the Football League and its professional advisers,
Arthur Young Management Consultants, appear to expect the
report and recommendations arising out of Lord Justice
Taylor's inquiry to affect in some degree the Statement of
Requirements which they will issue alongside the Invitations
to Tender. Might it not, therefore, be appropriate for the
inquiry to take into account the sort of proposals which are
at present under consideration by the football authorities?

We at Check-In are convinced that, had our scheme been in
operation, many of the factors which may have aggravated
conditions at Hillsborough might well have been eliminated.
Accordingly, we would value greatly an invitation to give Lord
Justice Taylor the opportunity to examine the Check-in
admission system so that he may take its attributes and
benefits into account as he reaches his conclusion.

I enclose a very basic background explanation of Check-In and
a pilot voucher book produced for publicity purposes. These
will go some way towards illustrating how we have addressed
the twin issues of hooliganism and crowd control in a manner
which is, on balance, more likely to provide real benefits to
football than exacerbate its financial difficulties.
                                                      ../more

                       Satellite Business Village, Fleming Way,
                         Crawley, West Sussex RH10 2NE.
                               Telephone: (0293) 551051
I would be grateful if you would acquaint Lord Justice Taylor
with the contents of this letter, and of the supporting
documentation, so that he may decide whether he wishes to take
our submission into account.  In the meantime, should you
require any further information, please do not hesitate to get
in touch with me.

Your faithfully




Nick Twillev
Managing Director
Check-In Admission Systems Ltd
                     NEWS RELEASE
From:    Rob Wilson
         A Plus Public Relations
         (0753) 586655 (day)
         (0734) 665619 (evening)

For:     Check-In Admission Systems Ltd                      Date: 1 June, 1989


                 BACKGROUNDER: THE CHECK-IN SCHEME

        Check-In is a system for administering the Football
Membership Scheme to be set up under regulations contained in
the Football Spectators Bill and for controlling the admission
of authorised spectators to designated football matches.                         Its
major advantage over competing schemes - all of which use
plastic identity cards - is that it provides the access
control required in the Bill without resort to expensive and
potentially unreliable equipment at turnstiles.


        Check-In is a development of the ticketing system used
with complete success at the Los Angeles Olympic Games and is
now being considered for the Barcelona Games in 1992.                         It is
based on a personalised book of vouchers, unique to individual
fans and similar in style to a cheque book.


        Each voucher in a Check-In book has a digitised
photograph of the bearer, his/her name, address, membership
number, together with a turnstile number and even a seat
number - if required, details of the match and the emblem of
the visiting club.


        These vouchers have a number of benefits over and above
the fact that there is no sensitive electronic equipment that
could fail at critical times, causing major delays and trouble
in streets outside grounds.


                                                                   .../more



                        Satellite Business Village, Fleming Way,
                          Crawley, West Sussex RH10 2NE.
                                Telephone: (0293) 551051
        Unlike your 'flexible friend', the easily damaged plastic
identity card, Check-In vouchers offer total flexibility -
providing everything from a simple visual check on access to a
full-blown ticketing system.


        The cost of producing the voucher-books, according to
Check-In, could easily be funded through local and national
sponsorship by incorporating redeemable coupons and
advertising.     The books could also promote a sense of
belonging to a club since they are, by their nature, a diary
of fixtures and they could have seasonal messages from the
club to supporters.


        Implementation of Check-In could lead automatically to
the issue of non-transferable personalised tickets for such
matches as the FA Cup Final at a non-designated ground such as
Wembley and, likewise, coupons could even be issued to
supporters eligible to go to matches overseas.


        The Check-In books could be season tickets, which could
encourage a growth in regular attendance by committed
supporters, and could increase a club's early season cash
flow.


        Under the proposals put forward by the Check-In
consortium, the voucher books would be produced on Check
Technology machinery operated either by the Football
Membership Authority or their agents, who would also provide a
service to the clubs for digitising applicants' photographs
and dispatching to the address specified by each applicant.


        Check Technology's sophisticated CTC 4000 printing system
converts blank sheets of paper of any thickness or colour into
fully-formed, correctly collated books, complete with emblems
and pictures, all in a single pass.
                                                      ..../more
     For the millions of voucher-books likely to be required,
the cost per book could be as low as 60p and, according to the
consortium, even that could be more than covered by money-back
coupons and advertising.


     The Check-In admission system envisages that individual
clubs would enjoy a high level of local autonomy - essential
if they are to maximise the benefits of local sponsorship in
the form of discount coupons and advertising - while a central
register of all ticket-holders would be maintained to detect
duplicate, false or fraudulent applications.


     A national register, called the Football Admission Names
Store (FANS), would uniquely identify everyone entitled to
receive a book of Check-In vouchers.    It would also ensure
that only those entitled to receive a book would do so.       Each
new record would be checked for duplication and eligibility
before it was added to the master file.


     Each individual club would maintain an accurate database
of its own supporters, including their digitised image,
gender, name, address and international allegiance.     The club
would make sure that the FMA was regularly updated on changes
of status on their list and the FMA would notify the club of
disqualifications.     With this information the voucher books
could be updated and sent out as a matter of course.


     The system would have to handle several million records
and would call for a high level of database management skills,
a particular area of expertise for one of the members of the
Check-In consortium.     The Computing Group Ltd has recently
been responsible for the Automobile Association's marketing
database, its design, management and implementation.     It also
handles the membership registration database and member
administration for the 'Airmiles' travel incentive scheme.
                                                  ..../more
     Forgery - another potential problem area - is to all
intents and purposes ruled out, according to the Check-In
consortium.    The printing process would ensure that the
supporter's digitised photograph is fused into the voucher in
such a way that it would be virtually impossible to remove
without damaging the surface of the book.     Other security
measures such as fluorescent fibres, chemical verification
agents and concealed patterns could also be used.


     Application forms to join the membership scheme could be
obtained from a local club, or perhaps from a post office.
Once the form was complete, it would be submitted in person
with two photographs to a club or a post office.     At this
point a preliminary check that the photograph and the
applicant correspond would take place.


     For those supporters who follow no particular club a
direct, national class of membership would be available and
they would make their application through, say, the post
office.   Each application form would carry a unique
identification number protected by one or more check digits,
which would ultimately form part of the membership number.
One photograph would be sent for digitisation, the other would
remain as a photographic record.


     Check-In, according to the consortium, has a logistical
advantage over other schemes due to its simplicity.        The
timetable set by the Government is for the membership scheme
to be in place by next Spring.     After Hillsborough, there may
now be a short delay, but the Government is likely to insist
that the scheme be in place by the 1990/91 season at the
latest.



                                                  ./more
     Suppliers of plastic identity card schemes, with all the
associated equipment at turnstiles, would be hard pressed to
meet even the Autumn 1990 date.   The Check-In alternative
could realistically be in place by the Spring of 1990.


     The Government has made it clear that it does not want to
see another season pass without a scheme in place to combat
hooliganism, leading Check-In to be confident that it has the
answer to football's identity crisis.




                            -ends-
^7   k%!
