E.R.
      41-2.JS


      From:        J L Goddard                         cc:   Mr Cogbill
                   F8 Division                               Mrs Lee
                   Ext. 3314                                 Mr Hopley
                                                             Miss Wooldridge
                   20 February 1991                          Ms Rex




      Mr Clayton



      BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES:        DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS


      Thank you for your minute of 19 February covering a revised
      draft of instructions to Parliamentary Counsel.         May I say
      that I think we have now made very good progress and subject
      to the following detailed suggestions for drafting amendments
      I am generally content.


      2.      Paragraph 1.2 add at end, "However, if Sir John's Bill is
              considered in Standing Committee it will be necessary to
           amend it so that its drafting conforms to that of the
           Government Bill.


  |        Paragraph 1.4.      Replace "Under" by "Unlike".


           Paragraph 2.7, line 12:—


                  (i) Delete "is" and replace by "and international
                  matches are".


                   (ii)   Delete "Such" and replace by "Some of these".


           Paragraph 2.7, line 13.       Delete "although some" and
           replace by "but".
Paragraph 3.1, line 2.    Replace "attempts to set" by
"sets".


Paragraph 3.2, line 9.    Replace "be" by "he".


Paragraph 3.7, line 10.     After "nuisance" insert "or
provide the spark for disorder" and replace the following
two sentences by "The same remarks apply if such objects
are thrown at other spectators or players.     Various
things are thrown at players or rival spectators on the
terraces."


Paragraph 3.8, lines 8-10.     Delete after "offensive" to
end of sentence and replace by "and that ethnic
minorities and others, without being unduly sensitive may
reasonably take exception to an action which, in the
football context, is an expression of contempt for ethnic
difference."


Paragraph 3.8, lines 10-12.     Delete from "the activity
..." to ".... silly that";     and replace "could hardly be
argued" by "is unlikely".


Paragraph 3.9, last line.     Replace "the throwing of
bananas." by "whether the throwing of an object causes
offence on racial grounds."


Paragraph 3.10.   Delete last sentence.    It seems doubtful
that a hat or any other object thrown in the air in
celebration would rise and fall vertically so that it
could not be said to be thrown at or towards the pitch or
at or towards another person.     I see no need to cover
this point.


Paragraph 3.11, line 5.     Delete "boiled sweet) at" and
replace by "packet of cigarettes towards".     This is for
greater verisimilitude in the football context.
Consequently in the last sentence of the paragraph
<




    E.R.
             replace "boiled sweets" with "cigarettes".


             Paragraph 3.15, line 5.     After "limiting" insert "and we
             do not intend to catch private conversation.      One
    ( (j     essential element in the offence is that the sound is
             loud enough to be in some sense public."


             Paragraph 3.16:-


                  (i) Line 11.     Delete "the guttural nature of the
                  sound,".     The sound is generally not guttural.


                  (ii) Line 13.     Delete "black" and after "people"
    #v2_          insert "of particular racial origin".


             Paragraph 3.20, last sentence (at top of page 13).
             Replace whole sentence by "The chanting to be caught is
    V *7)    lewd or simply indecent rather than necessarily
             "repulsively indecent"."


             Paragraph 3.21.      Delete first sentence.   As far as I am
     V br~   concerned this is not the case.


        3.   I hope it will now be possible to get instructions to
        Counsel quickly.     We need to be prepared against the
        eventuality that Sir John Wheeler's Bill does make progress
        and require detailed amendment in Committee.




                                          ^ » —
                                    J L GODDARD
