Mr Mike Hall MP                                     Our Ref:  PW/99 5/145/2
House of Commons                                              PO 5349/99
LONDON                                              Your Ref: MH/MF
SW1A0AA




Thank you for your letters of 29 January and 29 March to Jack Straw on behalf
Mr Eddie Spearritt who is seeking to establish what happened to him at Hillsborough
after he was removed from the crush. I am very sorry for the delay in replying.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, at page 45 his report, states that:

       ‘I have been unable to ascertain at what time Mr Spearritt reached hospital,
       though according to Mr Wardrope it was before 5pm. Most of the serious
       cases, of which Mr Spearritt’s was one, were taken to hospital well before
       this. No detailed inquiry or evidence was collated in respect of victims who,
       like Mr Spearritt, were crushed but survived. I do not think that it is possible to
       conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritt was at any time “left for dead” .’

Mr James Wardrope, a consultant from the Northern General Hospital in Sheffield
was one of those consulted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for his scrutiny but Mr
Wardrope did not give evidence in person to the scrutiny. There are, therefore, no
transcripts or notes of any meetings involving Mr Wardrope. A copy of a letter of 12
September from Mr Wardrope to the Secretary of the Scrutiny is enclosed for your
information. This letter was included in the material placed in the Library of the
House following the Home Secretary’s announcement of the outcome of the
scrutiny. The scrutiny did not retain copies of the patient notes which are referred to
in the letter and I can only advise you to contact the Northern General Hospital on
any queries about the hospital records.




                                   PAUL BOATENG
                                       a-vVJU »«■

26. Counsel tor the Family Support Group have also put to me the evidence of
Andrew Worsley, who dragged Steven Williams out from underneath h,s lathe J r
Worsley says he thought Steven Williams was dead because he was blue in the tace and
his eves were staring He dragged him out of the tunnel at the back of the Leppings
L anJterrace to a p ile where® there were 15 to 25 bodies dead or unconscious. He there
handed him over to a police officer “who dropped him uncaringly on the tloor .


27. That appears to be the last M r Worsley saw of him. It would seem that Steven
Williams must have regained consciousness fairly soon afterwards, since he was
conscious when he was put in the ambulance. But it is not known what i any
resuscitative treatm ent he received or whether he was seen by a doctor. If Mr Worsley s
evidence is correct, it shows a callous attitude by the police officer ,n question But there
were doctors and ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end whc.were dealing with
those brought out through the tunnel from the terraces. The fact that Mr Worsley may
 have thought that M r Williams was dead does not mean that those more expert did so,
 or that they abandoned him.

 28. Roger Ball is the father of Kester Ball, who died in the disaster. He came to see me
 in London on 31 October 1997. M r Ball gave evidence at the Inquest to the effect that
 he was in pen 3 and became crushed. Shortly before the game was stopped he must have
 lost consciousness. He regained consciousness near Gate C, with someone slapping his
 face. H e fully recovered, and was not taken to hospital but searched for his son.


 29 There has been put before me also a letter from solicitors acting for a Mr Ian W ier
 to M r Ball’s solicitors. It is stated that M r W ier found Mr Ball collapsed on the ground
 and apparently dead. The man next to Mr Ball was dead. M r Wier says that M r Ball was
 going blue in the face and another supporter trod on his chest to get out of the ground.
 He revived M r Ball by slapping his face.


  30 It seems that M r Ball recovered consciousness without any resuscitative treatm ent
  such as mouth-to-mouth ventilation or heart massage and thereafter seems to h ave
  made a complete recovery. The fact that a wholly untrained person (Mr Wier) thought
  he was dead does not suggest to me that the emergency services were making similar
  erroneous assumptions.

  31. Edward Spearritt is the father of Adam Spearritt, who died as a result of the
  disaster Adam died in intensive care at 16.45 on 15 April. Edward Spearritt gave
  evidence at the Inquest. He was in pen 4 and was crushed. H e lost consciousness and
  was taken to hospital. He too was taken to intensive care, but made a full recovery
  Counsel for the Family Support Group told me that there is no evidence as to what
  happened to Mr Spearritt between the time he lost consciousness at 3.06 pm or
  thereabouts and 5 pm when he arrived at Hospital. Counsel submitted to me that it was
  reasonable to conclude that M r Spearritt was also left for dead because of what
   happened to other bodies (presumably a reference to M r Ball)
32. I have been unable to ascertain at what time Mr Spearritt reached hospital, though
according to Mr W ardrope it was before 5 pm. Most of the serious cases, of which Mr
Spearritt s was one, were taken to hospital well before this. No detailed inquiry or
evidence was collated in respect of victims who, like Mr Spearritt, were crushed but
survived. I do not think that it is possible to conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritl
was at any time “left for dead”.


Ambulancemen


33. I have been asked to consider evidence from three ambulancemen—Anthony
Edwards, John Flack and Peter Howes.


34. Anthony Edwards was employed by South Yorkshire M etropolitan Ambulance
Service (SYMAS). He was on duty on the day of the disaster. He has made four signed
^statements. The first, dated 7 May 1989 to SYMAS solicitors, was put on the West
^ Midlands Police Holmes computer and was available to the Taylor Inquiry and the
   jroner. The second is dated 25 October 1989. The third is dated 5 September 1995 and
the fourth is dated O ctober 1997. In addition he has written me a num ber of letters.


35. Mr Edwards was very anxious to speak to me and he came to see me on
11 Decem ber 1997. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest but his
part in taking Victoria Hicks to hospital is referred to in the mini-inquest into her death
(24 April 1990, page 9).


36. In his first statement, of 7 May 1989, Mr Edwards describes the arrival of his
ambulance at the Penistone Road end, being ordered onto the pitch by M r Hopkins, the
Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, but being told by police that he could not get
through. A fter the intervention of Mr Hopkins, his ambulance was driven onto the pitch
as the St John Ambulance was leaving. On the way to the Leppings Lane end progress
was slow. Fans were screaming for the ambulance to stop.


37. O n arrival at that end there was much confusion. M r Edwards went to assist a
casualty and whilst doing so he was deliberately kicked in his rib. His ambulance was
eventually loaded with a boy and girl (Victoria Hicks) and another body.


38. The ambulance left with two policemen, a nurse and two spectators (one of whom
was Trevor Hicks, Victoria’s father), and proceeded to the Northern G eneral Hospital.
The ambulance returned to the ground and M r Edwards assisted with casualties at the
gymnasium. By this time the serious casualties had been dealt with, he was exhausted
and was told to go to Casualty at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital because he had been
kicked. M r Edwards said that he was unaware of any Hillsborough plan or the role of
the gymnasium as a casualty clearing centre or temporary mortuary until he was told on
the day.



                                            45
APPENDIX 1



people who helped me in my scrutiny


1. This Appendix lists the people who have assisted me in my scrutiny. They fall into
three categories;
  (a) those who made written or oral submissions to me;
  (b) those who gave evidence to me, orally or in writing; and
  (c) those whom I consulted, mainly about what happened at previous proceedings.


Submissions


2. The relatives of victims who put submissions to me in connection with my scrutiny
were:
      Mr & Mrs Aspinall (parents of James Aspinall)
      Mr Roger Ball (father of Kester Ball)
      Ms Louise Brookes (sister of Andrew Brookes)
      Mrs Christine Burke (widow o f Henry Burke)
      Mrs Corrigan (mother o f Keith McGrath)
      M r & Mrs Church (parents of Gary Church)
      Mrs Fox & Ms Lynne Fox (mother and sister o f Thomas Fox)
      The Glover family (family of Ian Glover)
      M r & Mrs H am m ond (parents o f Philip H am m ond)
      M r & Mrs H ankin (parents o f Eric Hankin)
      Mrs K Harrison (widow o f Gary Harrison)
      Mr & Mrs Hicks (parents of Sarah and Victoria Hicks)
      Mr Howard (father o f Thomas Howard and grandfather o f Thomas Anthony
      Howard)
      M r & Mrs Lewis (parents o f Carl Lewis)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Gary Jones)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Richard Jones)
      M r & Mrs Joynes (parents of Nicholas Joynes)
      Ms Deborah Matthews (sister o f Brian Christopher Matthews)
      Mrs Joan McBrien (mother of John McBrien)
      M r & Mrs G McDonnell (parents o f Peter McDonnell)
      Mrs Irene McGlone (widow o f A lan McGlone)
      M r & Mrs Pemberton (parents o f R oy Pemberton)
      The Roberts family (family of Graham Roberts)
      The Robinson family (family of Steven Robinson)
      M r Harold Rowe (brother-in-law o f Alan McGlone)
      The Sefton family (family of Andrew Sefton)
      Mrs Sinclair and Jane Sinclair (sister and niece of Michael Kelly)
      M r & Mrs Spearritt (parents o f A d a m Spearritt)
      Mr & Mrs Steele (parents of Philip Steele)

                                           109
      Mrs Sandra Stringer (m other of Paul Carlile)
      Mrs Thompson (mother o f Stuart Thompson)
      The Traynor family (family of Christopher and Kevin Traynor)
      Mr & Mrs Whelan (parents o f Ian David Whelan)
      Mrs Anne Williams (m other of Kevin Daniel Williams)


3. All these people both wrote to me and saw me in private session, apart from those
whose names I have put in italics, who did not seek private meetings with me. I also had
oral and written submissions from the following:
      Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      M r Julian Knowles, Junior Counsel
      Ms A nn Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group
      Professor Phil Scraton, Hillsborough Project, Edge Hill University College
      Ms Sheila Coleman


Evidence


4. The witnesses who gave me oral evidence (in most cases in addition to written
statements) were:
       Police Sergeant Julie Appleton, West Midlands Police
       Police Sergeant Trevor Bichard, South Yorkshire Police
       M r D erek Bruder
       D r M atthew Bull
       Mr Donald Denton, former Superintendent, South Yorkshire Police
       Mr Tony Edwards, former South Yorkshire ambulanceman
       Mr David Frost, former South Yorkshire police officer
       Mr Roger Houldsworth
       Ms D ebra Martin, former Special Constable, South Yorkshire Police
       Mrs J M artin
       Police Sergeant Graham McCombie, West Midlands Police
       Mr McRobbie, former South Yorkshire police officer
       M r Paul Taylor
       D r Edward Walker


5. Witnesses whose written statements I consulted at the request of the families or the
police, but whom I have not seen, were:
       M r Ian M cDermott
       M r Andrew Worsley
       Mr Steven Williams
       Mr John Flack
       M r Peter Howes
       D r James Burns
       D r Iain West
       M rN o elB u rn e



                                            110
Assistance


6.   People whom I consulted to assist me on various aspects of my scrutiny included:
       The H on Mr Justice Collins
       Mr Christopher Dorries, presently Coroner for South Yorkshire
       Detective Chief Superintendent Foster, W est Midlands Police
       Mr Douglas Fraser
       Mr Benet Hytner QC
       Mr Tim King QC
       M r Peter Metcalfe, Ham m ond Suddard Solicitors
       Sir David Parry-Evans, St John Ambulance Brigade
       D r Stefan Popper, former Coroner for South Yorkshire
       D r David Slater
       H er H onour Judge Elizabeth Steele
       Mr James W ardrope
       Mr Peter Wells, St John Ambulance Brigade
       M r Richard Wells
       M r Peter Whitehurst
       D r David Williams


Correspondence


7. A t the beginning of my scrutiny, in July 1997,1 wrote to all the families whose
relatives had died asking for any information they wanted to give me. I also wrote to the
FA, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest, and Sheffield W ednesday Football Clubs and to the
Director of Public Prosecutions, the A ttorney General, the Crown Prosecution Service,
and the Police Complaints Authority.


8. I have had a num ber of letters from members of the public expressing views about
the disaster.




                                            111
