 From: Paul Pugh                cc: Home Secretary             Mr Middleton
       Head of Operational          Mr Michael                 Mr R Evans
       Policing Policy Unit         Mr O’Brien                 Mr EdmundscJri
       Room 529                     Lord Williams              Ms Scott
       Queen Anne’s Gate            Mr Omand                   Mr Warner
       9 0171-273-3141              Mr Boys Smith              Mr Owen
       28 January 1998



Linda Rushton
APS/Mr Howarth


HILLSBOROUGH


Your note of 27 January records Mr Howarth’s reactions to my submission of
22 January about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.   I agree with most of
Mr Howarth’s comments about handling, but there is one point which I ought to
clarify.

2.      Mr Howarth refers to ‘the failure on the part of South Yorkshire Police to
disclose sections of the video tapes ‘and suggests that this should be deplored.
There is no evidence that South Yorkshire Police failed to disclose any video
material. There have been allegations that the West Midlands Police, who
investigated the disaster on behalf of the Taylor Inquiry and the Coroner,
deliberately omitted relevant material from the compilation tapes which they
prepared for the inquiry and the inquest. That is an allegation which, I understand
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers to be completely unfounded; and there are
clear records that all the material from police video cameras was secured
immediately after the disaster and made available to the investigating team, and that
any of the material which the investigating team did not include on the compilation
tapes was available at the time for viewing by any legal representatives of the
parties to the inquiry or inquest. I do not think that the issue of inadequate
disclosure by the South Yorkshire Police of video material arises.




                                   PAUL PUGH


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0541pd.doc
                             RESTRICTED: POLICY


From:       Linda Rushton                                cc: Mr Michael
            APS/Mr Howarth                                   Mr O’Brien
            Room 702                                         Lord Williams
            Queen Anne’s Gate                                Mr Omand
            @ 273 4238                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                             Mr Middleton
             27 January 1998                                 Mr R Evans
                                                             Mr Pugh
                                                             Mr Edmundson
                                                             Ms Scott
                                                             Mr Warner
                                                             Mr Owen




Clare Sumner
PS/Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Mr Howarth has seen Paul Pugh’s submission of 22 January concerning the
handling arrangements of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

2. As I mentioned yesterday Mr Howarth feels that, in view of the reaction
that this report will provoke on Merseyside, it would be helpful if a meeting
could be arranged between himself, the Home Secretary, Jane Kennedy and
Peter Kilfoyle (who are also Liverpool MPs) before the handling arrangements
are finalised. He was content with your suggestion today that he could
discuss this matter informally with the Home Secretary however he still feels
that a meeting with the above would be necessary.

3. With regard to handling, Mr Howarth has stated that the positive
measures that have been introduced (or are in the process of being
introduced) to reduce the likelihood of such a disaster repeating itself should
be emphasised as fully as possible. In particular, he has made the following
points:

•       Emphasis should be given to the measures being taken by the Home
         Secretary and Mr Michael to reduce the numbers of serving police
         officers who seek to evade disciplinary action by taking medical
         retirement.

•       As far as possible, the failure on the part of the South Yorkshire Police
         to disclose sections of the video tapes should be deplored.
                     RESTRICTED: POLICY


Subject to Lord William’s views, it will be important to have lines to take
on Coroner’s Inquests in such cases.




                        Litxda    £u S K ± ccv



                         Linda Rushton
From: Sarah Clifford
Communication Directorate
x2284

28 January 1998


                                                             cc: Mr Michael
                                                                 Mr O’Brien
                                                                   Mr Pugh
                                                             Mr Edmundson
                                                                   Mr Bone
                                                                 Mr Warner
                                                                  Mr Owen
1. Mr Butler

2. Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH REPORT: MEDIA HANDLING FOR THE HANDOVER

Issue

Media handling for tomorrow’s “handover” by Lord Justice Stuart Smith of the
Scrutiny report.

Timing

Pressing - 1understand the report is now due to be handed over to the Home
Office tomorrow, rather than Friday.

Recommendation

That you agree the attached draft press statement is issued to Merseyside,
Sheffield and national media tomorrow, as soon as the report is given to the
Home Office. The media are awaiting news of the “handover” and this upfront
approach will forestall the news leaking out via the families and make your
position clear. Mr Owen agrees with this approach.

Are you content with the statement and the handling arrangements?
28 January 1998                                          0171 273 4610

      HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: HOME SECRETARY CONSIDERS
                      JUDGE’S REPORT


Home Secretary Jack Straw today received the report of the Hillsborough
Scrutiny from Lord Justice Stuart Smith.

Mr Straw said:

       “I am grateful to Lord Justice Stuart Smith for the enormous amount of
       work he has done carrying out the Scrutiny.

       “I will now carefully consider his report. I hope to be able to publish
       both the report and my response to it shortly .”

Notes to Editors

1. The Scrutiny was announced by the Home Secretary on 30 June 1997.

2. Its terms of reference are:

       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

       (a)           To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

       (b)           To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
                     General for the purpose of discharging their respective
                     statutory responsibilities; or

       (c)           To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in
                     relation to police disciplinary matters;

       And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
       available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
       and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence
       not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their
       respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
       which should be taken in the public interest.
                   Police Policy Directorate                                Home Office
                                                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                   Paul Pugh                                                London SW1H 9AT
                                                                            Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                   Head of Operational Policing Polity Unit (OPPU)          Fax:       0171-273 2703




  RESTRICTED
  PERSONAL

 Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) Cl Mgt
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield
 SS3 8LY                                                             29 January 1998




 HILLSBOROUGH


 As I mentioned on the telephone, the Home Secretary has agreed that you should
 have a copy of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report because as disciplinary authority
 for South Yorkshire police officers, you are in that sense one of those to whom the
 report is addressed in order to consider whether any questions of a disciplinary
 nature arise from the report. A copy of the report is enclosed with this letter.

I emphasise that the report at this stage is for your personal consideration, and for
that of ACC Daines, with whom you may wish to discuss its contents. The Home
Secretary has not formed any view about the report’s conclusions, nor will he be
making any public comment about the content of the report until he has considered it
and decided the terms of the response which he will make when the report is
published. As I mentioned, I would expect publication to be in February. I know that
I can rely on you to respect the confidentiality of the report. In addition to yourself
and Home Office officials, only the offices of the Attorney-General and the DPP have
received copies.

I expect to be in touch again soon, when the Home Secretary has considered the
report.




                                                PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\letter\pp0544pd.doc
