I am very conscious of the strength of feeling surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster,
and I understand that my decision not to hold a fresh public inquiry will feel like a
betrayal to the families of those who sadly died at this tragic event and for many who
have supported the families’ campaign.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough and
independent scrutiny of the evidence submitted by the families, including key
allegations and concerns about missing or concealed videotape evidence, the cut-off
time of 3.15pm for the Inquest, and interference with witnesses and witness
statements. As I indicated in my statement to the House of Commons, Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has investigated these matters thoroughly. His comprehensive report
sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his conclusions. It
is, of course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish, but there
can be no justification for calling it a whitewash.

It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been aired publicly before. What the Scrutiny had to consider
was, not only whether the evidence put forward was new, but also whether it was
credible and of such significance that it would justify a new inquiry, or some other
action. This is what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now reported on.

I have considered the Judge’s report carefully and accepted his conclusion that the
evidence does not add anything significant to the evidence available to the Taylor
Inquiry and the Inquests. I recognise the bitter disappointment of the families but I
hope that when they have had time to consider the report in detail, they will
understand why I have reached this conclusion.

I should emphasise that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely
accepts Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was
the failure of the police operation. This has been accepted by South Yorkshire Police
who have apologised on many occasions.

I fully accept that the system has failed the Hillsborough families; as the Judge says in
chapter 7 of his Report:

       “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally
       been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
       even to the extent o f losing their job

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system. The Home Affairs Select Committee has recently made some
important recommendations on the police discipline and complaints procedures. I
welcome their report and I will respond shortly.

I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement o f the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a


:ODMA\MERIDIO\EDRM#90168# 1
public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party is
to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after the inquiry has been
completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, the
families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress. There is
no immediate prospect of a suitable legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act
1988 but we intend to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept my decision.
However, I believe that at this point we must put an end to speculation about new
evidence or about re-opening the previous inquiries or proceedings.




::ODMA\MERIDIO\EDRM#90168# 1
