       | \   a lrm \ '
              !
                         it VW Wk
                         »
                                                A*y ^          6opi^                ric               _
                             dva        TV K!    U N IV E R S IT Y OF NEWC>
                                                                        ^WCASTLE UPON TYNE
                                                                                           \/<Jd<J^   RU-
                                                   Materials & Manufacturing
                              D epartm ent o f M echanical/Engineering
                              Head o f D epartm en t:    Professor L Maunder OBE F Eng

                                         Stephenson Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU
                                                        Tel: Tyneside (091)   222   6200




                                                                 23rd October 1989.


Mr. R. Whalley,
The Home Office,
Room 662,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT.


Dear Bob,

                  3rd Visit, Ayresome Park, 14th October
                     Middlesborouqh v Plymouth Arqyle

     I met Mr. T. Hughes, Club Secretary, and Chief Superintendent
Tasker for a brief discussion before kick-off.   The Club,  Second
Division this season, enjoys a long tradition of loyal support in
the area.     Relationships between Club, police and emergency
services are clearly excellent.

     The Ground itself, however, has some way to go to achieve the
standards of best practice. The Club is aware of this, and is
seeking the means of improvement.    Counting at turnstiles,    for
example,  is carried out by hand; the running totals for given
banks of turnstiles are also accumulated by hand.  Perimeter fences
are conspicuously short of gates.  They also carry rather vicious-
looking spiked devices on their top-rails as deterrents          to
climbers.

     On the positive side, the proportion of seating accommodation
is favourable; arrangements for segregation of rival supporters
seems good;    enclosures for Club members are extensive,   and an
expensive fire warning system has been installed as protection for
the wooden stands.

     Capacities of the terraces were reduced by 15% following the
Interim Report, giving a ground capacity of 27,700 (Club membership
- free cards - is 24,521!).  Some disgruntlement had been caused by
the Club's beliefs that other Clubs'  capacities had been based on
initial densities substantially higher than Middlesborough's.
      The management of stewards and police-steward cooperation are
good.   The police box, although small, had the fire-officer and the
ambulance-officer in attendance during the visit. Its CCTV viewing
of the ground was good but its outside cover was limited - it is
intended to install additional cameras at entrances.           Fully
equipped ambulances were in attendance;        a general    hospital
occupies one side of the site, and there is a fire station within a
few hundred yards of the ground.

     Overall, I got the impression of a good managerial drive.   The
physical provisions for safety - notably emergency access to     the
pitch from the terraces and expeditious counting of entrants -   are
less good.

    A note on operational procedures is enclosed.

                         Yours sincerely,




                            L . Maunder
                               CLEVELAND AM13ULANCE

                          MIDDLESBROUGH FOOTBALL CLUB
                          AYRESOME PARK, MIDDLESBROUGH

                             OPERATIONAL PROCEDURES



The following operational procedures will apply to all First Team matches
played at Middlesbrough Football ground.

1.   The on call duty communications officer will collect the Ford Sierra and
the Support Equipment Trailer and report to Ayresome Park 15 minutes befors
briefing time.

2.    The Ford Sierra and S.E.T. will be parked alongside the police vehicles
and the duty communications officer will be located in the control command
room.

3. An ambulance crew consisting of a paramedic and technician will attend
ftyresome Park 15 minutes before briefing time.  They will be stationed in t.he
north West Corner (Tractor entrance) of the ground, equipped with a Portable
V.H.F. radio.   This crew will wear their high visability fluorescent
waistcoats with the words 'Ambulance' or 'Paramedic' clearly marked on the
back.   The ambulance will be parked in the ambulance bay inside the
underground car park.

4. The duty communications officer attending the ground will be equipped wil.h
the following communications equipment:

            1 - Portable telephone
            1 - Portable V.H.F.
            1 - Fixed V.H.F. unit in the command room.

5. The duty communications officer and Paramedic   crew will attend thePolice
briefing session before the match.  The duty communications officer will then
brief the First Aiders with regards to:

            a.   Calling the Ambulance Service
            b.   Role of the Paramedic crew
            c.   Triage and casualty clearing areas
            d.   Vehicle parking points.

These briefings are held - Mornings and afternoon matches 2 hours before kick
                          off.
                           Evening matches 1% hours before kick off.

5.    hour before commencement of the match, all communications between l.he
command room, paramedic crew and HQ Control room will be tested.

7. V z hour before commencement of the match the duty communications officer
will inform HQ Control that all requests for medical assistance in the ground
will be issued from the command room.

8.  The Paramedic crew will only be used for life threatening emergencies such
as heart attack or injuries involving serious blood loss oceurinp, to cne
person.  All incidents of a minor nature i.e. faints, foils, will be dealt: 1>>
the voluntary first aiders or stewards although ambulance paramedics can
attend to assess the situation.  Requests for an ambulance response to these
patients will be addressed to the Ambulance Officer in the control command
room.
