f£OM   SED    EDINBURGH
                          V^dbf^                9.13.1989    1 1 s4?                       P.   2




                              SCOTTISH EDUCATION DEPARTM ENT
                                    43 Jeffrey Street, EDINBURGH, EH1 1DN
                                        Telephone Exchange: 031-556 8400
                                                   D irect Line:. 031-244’ E x t 5322
                                                   GTN No.: 7188
             ^AA/O^ .                              Fax No.: 031-244 5387




       BY NEFAX
       Robert Whalley Esq                                          Pi    boi            ^ k c v - ,’
       Secretary
       Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium D isaster                                              KU
       Home Office
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
       LONDON
       SW1H 9AT                                                         13 September 1989

                                                                                                         1




       VISIT TO SCOTLAND
       As discussed yesterday, here is the draft of a letter which I might send
       you. I hope it is couched in suitably diplomatic term s. I would be glad
       to consider any drafting (or other) comments you might have - but it
       would be helpful to h ive these by midday tomorrow, T hursday, as I am
       out of commission all day Friday, and Monday is in effect our Bank
       holiday. So I would like to get the letter off to you tomorrow.




                          M     .



       PETER MACKAY




        MWE00719.099
?0 M    SED   EDINBURGH                           9   . 13.1989   11:48




                                                       ,V \ |l 4£ u


  DRAFT I
                                                          (XVVvJI-d
  Robert Whalley Esq
  Secretary
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium D isaster
  Home Office               1
  50 Queen Anne's Gate
  LONDON
  SW1H 9AT




   POSSIBLE VISIT TO SCOTLAND

   1.        ■ite to confirm iu r recent conversation about the possibility of
   Lord Justice Taylor visit ,ng Scotland in the course of preparing the final
   stages of his rep o rt. Scottish Office Ministers drew the attention of the
   relevant Scottish interes ;s to the recommendations of the interim rep o rt,
   which is being acted on here already, and our expectation is th at they
   will similarly want to talce full account of the recommendations of the final
   report given Lord Justice Taylor's intention to range widely over issues
   of crowd safety. I l;a re no doubt that it would fu rth e r enhance the
   acceptability     of   the   rep o rt's recommendations   in   Scotland    if
   Lord Justice Taylor were known to have visited here before finalising his
   report. I know that Ministers would warmly welcome such a visit,

       2.   Moreover, we in th s Scottish Education Department have had recent
       discussions with the Sco ;tish Football Association and the Scottish League
       about the     action   they are       taking to     im plem ent    the  interim
       recommendations. It is clear that they too would welcome a v isit, and
       now that the report is L o v in g to consider more w ide-ranging issues than
       those arising directly from the Hillsborough a c c id e n t , I think both the
       Association and the Leaiue would want to reconsider th eir earlier decision
       not to submit evidence to the Inquiry.



       MWE00619.099
FROM     SED   EDINBURGH                         9.13.1989   11:49




       3.    I am sure that oi r Ministers recognise the sfevere p ressu res on
       Lord Justice Taylor's tir le if he is to achieve his targ et of completion of
       the final report by the New Year.           However, on the precedent of
       Mr Justice Popplewell's Visit to Scotland, a short visit here would be a
       very useful opportunity ^to visit one or two grounds and talk briefly to
       Scottish police, football ^authorities and licensing authorities about safety
       issues. It is argued t<| u s, at least by the footballing in terests, that
       practices here differ in b number of resp ects, in degree if not in kind,
       from those south of the* Border on m atters such as policing and crowd
       control and it might (veil be worth exploring, from your detached
       perspective, how real thsse differences are.

       4.   I do not think the SFA or the Scottish League a^e at th eir best on
       paper, but oral exchanges would, I am su re, be worlhwh’le.           The
       Secretary of the SFA, Mr Ernie Walker, is at present chairing a UEFA
       Sub-Committee now looking at the issue of all-seated stadia in Europe and
       you might indeed find :t helpful to draw on his experience of cu rren t
       European thinking. I sm sure they would be glad to spend time with
       Lord Justice Taylor - and you might want to consider w hether to let them
       have a note beforehand |of particular questions which he might want to
       pursue with them.

       5.   I think a visit, including discussions with the SFA and League
       (probably a combined m feting), ACPO(S) and a licensing authority such
       as Strathclyde could be itted in to a day's visit quite comfortably. You
       mentioned that Lord Jus ice Taylor had wondered about visiting Ibrox on
       14 October; we would be happy to help arrange this - b u t I think it
       would be desirable, if at all possible, to make it clear when making
       arrangem ents for such a visit that he would re tu rn for fu rth e r
       consultations with other Football in terests. I mentioned to you th at Celtic
       Park might also be worm a visit as it is said to be one of the largest
       terracing areas left in Britain. You also had thought about a visit to
       Aberdeen - as one of th« first examples of an all-seated stadium. (There
       is now another all-sealed stadium built from scratch (with p roperty
       developers’ money) which opened this year in P erth.

       6.    I attach a schedule of the Premier Division matches in November, In
       addition, Scotland are playing Norway on the evening of Wednesday,
       16 November at Hampder and I expect there will be a large crowd th ere,

       MWE00619.099
    FROM   SED   EDINBURGH                          9 . 1 3 , 1989   11 :50            P.   5




           hoping to see Scotland qualify for the World Cup Finals. A visit around
           that might fit in with your timing. I should also reg ister th at there are
           two ru g b y internationals at Murrayfield on 28 October and 9 December
           against Fiji and Ronmnia respectively, and a visit th ere might be
           appropriate.

           7.    I would be glad to have a fu rth e r word with you in the light of
JWtCu      Lord ^Taylor's views, Ve would be happy to help in any way we can in
L          setting up arrangementfe for the visits, including, in cons \sllation with our
           colleagues in the Scot ish Home and Health Departm ent» any necessary
           discussions with ACPO S). My colleague, Alan McPherson, would be the
           best contact for th a t, once we have established the principle of w hether
           or not Lord Justice T ailo r will be able to come.

           8.  I am sending a c6py of this letter to David Belfall in the Scottish
           Home and ’teftlt5* Department.




           PETER MACKAY




           MWE00619.099
on


     £
     N
