                            MR. MAURICE KAY, Q.C. ,




    On Saturday the 15th April, 1989 I went with my Son (aged 13) from our home

in Nantwich, Cheshire to Hillsborough for the F.A. Cup Semi-final between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.    We are Liverpool Season ticket holders and, as such

ha^ been allocated two tickets for Hillsborough - one seat in the North Stand

^and one for standing at the Leppings Lane end.    We had been to the equivalent

g^rnp last season when we had both been allocated seats.



    Because of our experience of traffic congestion last year we left heme early

this time and reached the ground before 2.00 p.m.     My Son was keen to enter the

ground early      he could and so we separated at about 2.00 p.m. so that he could

go to the seat in the North Stand.    We arranged to meet at the exit from the

North Stand immediately after the game.     I did not try to enter the ground

straightaway because I did not want to have to stand in a packed crowd for what

could have been more than three hours.     I therefore walked away from the access

area at Leppings Lane.    During the next half hour or so (a4approximately 2.00 -

 2.30) I observed thousands of Liverpool supporters approaching the ground.      It

was apparent that a number were attempting to purchase tickets.     In the quarter

 of a mile or so approaching the ground I saw no misbehaviour - the general mood

 of the fans was no different from w h a t ^ ' would expect.



     At about 2.30 I returned to Leppings Lane entrance in order to enter the

 ground.   It was then obvious that the number of fans seeking admission to the

 standing area was in excess of the capacity of the small number of turnstiles

 available.    It was also clear that the Police Officers were too few, too mounted
or too badly deployed to bring order to what was already a chaotic situation.         I

emphasise that this was half an hour before the kick-off and had nothing

whatsoever to do with latecomers.      I joined the back of the group seeking

admission in a period of 5 - 10 minutes I made no progress towards the

turnstiles.      The crowd was disorganised, the attempts of the mounted Police to

assist seemed counterproductive and the effect of too many people in too small

an area was to cause discomfort and danger.      I decided to move away from the

area and did so.



*      I walked away from the entrance area, up Leppings Lane towards the A616.      At

about 2.50 I was speaking to a Policeman who was on foot.      He had a

walkie-talkie.      He told me that he had just heard that the kick-off had been put

back to 3.15.      I then went back to the turnstile area where it was apparent that

the method of policing had changed.      Instead of the huge melee between the gates

and the turnstiles, there was now in effect a Police cordon which was

controlling and limiting the numbers in the area which had previously seemed to

overcrowded and disorganised.



        I waited for my turn to be allowed up to the turnsiles and into the ground.

    This I was able to do without difficulty.   I assume that by this time the much

    published opening(s) of the concertina gate has already occurred.



        Once through the turnstiles I purchased programmes from a stall to the

    right.   I could see the tunnel leading to the back of the goal and two gated

    access points leading to stairs.   I intended to find a place to the rear or side

    of the standing area and I approached the gated access to the right.   I was

    there told by a Steward that this was access to the seated area only and that

    the access to the standing area was through the tunnel.   I saw no Stewards or

    Police Officers directing people away from the tunnel access or advising people

    that (as I discovered later) there is also access to the standing area at the
sides, rather than through the central tunnel.     If I had known that I would have

gone to the sides.



    I proceeded down the central tunnel and, on reaching the hideously crowded

terraces, found that the match had already started.     It was now about 3.02.        For

the next few minutes the crowd around me swayed and moved involuntarily.        I was

pushed up against a crush barrier.     The weight from behind me was irresistible

and it took considerable effort to move sideways.     As this was happening I was

aware of the match caning to a halt and people down at the front getting onto

Ithe pitch but I could not see and did not know until much later the extent of

the disaster at the front.



    Police Officers at the front were gesturing for us to move back but at

first it was impossible.      However, after moving to seme railings, at the side

 it soon became possible to move back through the tunnel.     As I did so, sane

Police Officers were caning through the tunnel onto the terrace.      Ahead of me

 two or three men were carrying an injured friend. When they got through the

 tunnel they asked a person who appeared to be a Steward for directions to the

 First Aid Post, but the man did not know.     It was at the this point that I

 discovered that it was possible to enter the terraces from the side rather than

 through the central tunnel.     I did so and by chance met up with            I Ia

 Solicitor from Ellesmere Port whose season ticket at Anfield is close to mine.

 From this n©w position w g            th© ©v©nts on th© pitch   th© siribulojiCGSj

 the rescue work, the makeshift stretchers.     We remained there until the

 announcement (which had for long seemed inevitable) that the match had been

 abandoned.



     During the time when I had been in the central part of the terrace I have no

 doubt that the only significant cause of the problem was too many people in too

  small a space.   I suspect many like me, were in that section because they did
   not know there was any choice.      I saw no-one behave irresponsibly in that

   section, nor was there any obvious drunkeness (although I had seen a few

   inebriated people outside, not doing any harm to any others).       I suspect that a

   fair number of the people crammed into the central terrace were, like me, people

   who usually sit at matches but were compelled to stand at Hillsborough because

   of the ticket allocation.



        After the announcement that the match had been abandoned       I went to the

   North Stand exit point to meet my Son.       For more than an hour he had been

   anxiously watching events unfold at the Leppings Lane end and on the pitch,

^ f e a r f u l that I might be a casualty.   His attempt to obtain information or advice

    from a Steward had drawn a negative response.       We met at the arranged place and

   nade our way back to the car.       It was only then when we turned on the car radio

    that we realised the extent of the tragedy and the number of fatalities.
