                                         cc   Mr   Boys Smith
                                              Mr   Turney
                                              Mr   Goddard
                                              Mr   Soden
                                              Mr   Watts




Mr Mould


HILLSBOROUGH: REPORTS BY POLICE FORCES
British Transport Police
I have now received from British Transport Police a report of
their limited involvement in Hillsborough, which has been copied
to Mr Dear.

The report is in three slim volumes (about 50 pages in all) and
recipients are welcome to ask for sight of them, or for a copy (I
am on x 2952 in Room 533A). BTP were involved at the Stadium:
their small contingent were taking a refreshment break there when
the disaster took place and various officers helped with the
cordon across the pitch and with tending the injured or dead.
Emotions were heightened on the return train journey and BTP
officers wisely ignored a number of antagonistic remarks made to
them by spectators then.

On the whole the report is 'unexceptional' in that little fresh
light is shed, though I would mention two specific incidents:

     i.    Heavy drinking took place by a group of 200 or 250
           football supporters on open ground near an off-licence,
           from at least 11.50 hrs until 14.00 hours, when they
           were considerably more noisy (statement of ^    |   ,
           pages 1 and 2).

     ii.   Deplorably, a small group of Nottingham supporters
           repeatedly jeered at and taunted Liverpool supporters
           carrying the dead and injured from the pitch to the
           gymnasium, and spat on them and hurled abuse (report by
           1"     ^ to Sub-Divisional Commander - Appendix F of
         the report).

South Yorkshire Police

In speaking to SYP for factual replies to PQs I ascertained that
they were not preparing a further written report for the Home
Office. I said one might be required but that a formal request
would be made if so. When we spoke you suggested that would not
in fact now be required - can I leave this to G1 to take further
if necessary?




                                        F J SMITH
                                        25 April 1989
