                        CONFIDENTIAL ^



From:   A H Turney (2798)                    cc   Miss Nicholson
        Fire and Emergency                        Ms Rex
        Planning Department                       Hr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot
        3 August 1989                             Hr Moriarty
                                                  Hr Boys Smith
                                                  HMCIC
                                                  HMCIFS
                                                  Hr Hower
                                                  Hr Bolton
                                                  Hr Goddard^
                                                  Hr Gilbert
                                                  Hr Hould
                                                  Hr Lidington




Hiss Bannister



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
I attach background briefing for the Home Secretary for any
interviews he may give tomorrow after publication of the Interim
Report. No doubt you will arrange for him to have a copy of the
statement to hand.
2. I also attach a draft letter for the Home Secretary to send
to Hr Hattersley tomorrow morning enclosing a copy of the report;
you agreed to arrange precise timing and addressing.
3. I also confirm that Lord Justice Taylor will be pleased to
call upon the Home Secretary at 9.30 am tomorrow; he will be
accompanied by Hr Whalley and I will attend.




                                        A H TURNEY




                    CONFIDENTIAL
                    CONFIDENTIAL



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
Briefing notes for the Home Secretary
Basic Facts

Inquiry conducted by Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor with assessors:
     Brian Johnson QFM, Chief Constable of Lancashire
     Professor Leonard Maunder, Professor of Mechanical
          Engineering at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne

The incident took place on 15 April 1989; a semi-final of the FA
Cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough
Stadium, (Sheffield Wednesday's ground).

95 people died and over 400 received hospital treatment.

The enforcing authority under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975 was Sheffield City Council from 1 April 1986. (Previously
the South Yorkshire County Council.)

General response to the report
Welcome the thoroughness of the report. Invaluable analysis of
the events of the day. Ends conjecture about the causes of the
tragedy.  (Cannot say welcome everything in the report because of
criticism of the police which requires by law further enquiries.)

It does not call for any immediate action by central Government
but it does call for action by local authorities concerned with
safety certificates, by clubs, and by the emergency services,
particularly the police.

Circulars issued by the Home Office and the Scottish Office
encourage those to whom the recommendations are directed to get
on with the task of implementing items where relevant.

This is an interim response.   We shall need to wait for the




                       CONFIDENTIAL
                     CONFIDENTIAL



Judge's more considered recommendations when we receive the final
report.

Responsibilities and the law
If a private occupier invites members of the public onto his
premises for payment, then it is primarily his responsibility to
make arrangements to ensure their safety. Football clubs are no
different from other occupiers in this respect.

The Government has reinforced those basic responsibilities by
requiring safety certificates for the larger sports grounds and
by setting out safety standards in the Green Guide.

The report does not reveal any major shortcomings either in the
law or in the recommended standards.

What it does reveal is that there were shortcomings both in the
physical arrangements for securing crowd safety at the
Hillsborough ground which had been present for some time (which
reflect badly on Sheffield Wednesday and the local authority).
It also points to severe shortcomings in the way in which the
police handled the crowd and reacted to the incident on the day.

     Supplementary points
     The basic factors which gave rise to the Hillsborough
     tragedy were not new. The dangers of overcrowding both
     outside and inside football grounds was identified in Lord
     Wheatley's inquiry into crowd safety in sports grounds in
     1972. There had been other reports before that.

     Lord Wheatley's inquiry led to the publication of what is
     now generally known as the "Green Guide".

     The Green Guide is published by the Home Office and the
     Scottish Office and it sets out the criteria for crowd
                     CONFIDENTIAL



     safety at sports grounds.

     The system of safety certificates for sports grounds was
     introduced by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

Public Order and Public Safety
There needs to be a balance between public order and public
safety. There is obviously potential conflict between measures
to control hooliganism and crowd disorder (which usually means
confining the crowd behind barriers or within pens) and those
which are necessary to ensure that they can get out if, as in
this case, there was gross overcrowding or if, as at Bradford,
there is a fire.

If the Green Guide is followed properly, that balance is
maintained.

In this case the report suggests that not only was the guide not
followed, but the police failed to recognise that what they were
handling had developed from a public order problem into a public
safety problem.

The Police
In the first instance the implications of this report have to be
considered by the Chief Constable and the South Yorkshire Police
Authority. If there are questions of criminal or disciplinary
proceedings then the Director of Public Prosecutions and the
Police Complaints Authority will also be involved.

It would be wrong for me to discuss the future of individual
police officers at this stage. It must be remembered that I have
to consider appeals under the police disciplinary procedure.

Resource implications
There are clearly some resource implications and these in the
                       CONFIDENTIAL



main will fall on the clubs. For those whose safety arrangements
are already satisfactory the resource implications should not be
too great.

The report asks local authorities to take immediate steps to
re-examine grounds against the Green Guide criteria. That may
mean reordering their immediate priorities, but in the long term
it should not add significantly to their workload.
                                                  >


The conduct of the fans
What we conclude from the report is that even if some fans
misbehaved or had too much to drink, in general the conduct of
the fans was no better and no worse than should have been
expected.

The crowd's behaviour seems to me to have been largely
predictable. What was lacking was the arrangements to ensure
that they could gain entry to the ground in good time and that
individual pens were not overcrowded.

Alcohol
Lord Justice Taylor made no recommendation relating to alcohol
(contrary to predictions in the Sunday Times) but could of course
do so in his final report. Lord Justice Taylor concluded that a
minority of fans in the crush outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles were influenced by drink but that this was not a
primary cause of the problems there.

The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 prohibits
in England and Wales the bringing of alcohol into designated
grounds, or its possession within sight of the pitch. The Act
also provides for magistrates to grant exemption orders for
licensed premises inside grounds, with no view of the pitch, to
sell alcohol during the period of a designated match. The police
are empowered to close any such bar in the ground should the
                    CONFIDENTIAL



continued sale of alcohol be detrimental to orderly conduct or
safety. The Act makes it an offence to be drunk on entry to or
inside the ground - wherever the alcohol is purchased.

Using the power to impose conditions when granting an exemption
to sell alcohol, magistrates can for example specify that only
low alcohol drinks are to be sold. This may have attractions
over spectators arriving late after consuming alcohol outside the
ground.

In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1985 makes
similar provision for alcohol restrictions as in England and
Wales, though with no exemption for the sale of alcohol inside
grounds.

Football Spectators Bill
Does this wreck the Bill?
Not at all. The Bill provides an enabling framework for a
national football membership scheme and Parliament will have two
opportunities to vote on that after Lord Justice Taylor's final
report. The threat posed by hooliganism - including the threat
to safety - remains at football matches. The interim report does
not contain any observations on the national football membership
scheme.

Delays at turnstiles?
The capacity of turnstiles is an important aspect of safety,
highlighted by this report. This is a matter which will
certainly be taken into account when the national football
membership scheme is being prepared.

National Football Intelligence Unit fNFim
(Reference is made to the unit in paragraph 220 of Lord Justice
Taylor's report.)
                     CONFIDENTIAL



This unit is being established now and will provide a central co­
ordinating point for police intelligence to counter organised
football hooliganism and identify national trends. The unit will
also promote efforts by individual forces to collate intelligence
on local football hooligans. NFIU will be established under
common police service arrangements and we intend it to be
operational early in the football season.

Specific recommendations in the report

Recommendation 2b - the 15% reduction in terrace capacity
The proposed 15% reduction in the capacity of terraces while
arbitrary is sensible, certainly as an interim measure. Some
clubs may claim that it will have resource implications by
restricting gate money. The restriction is in fact quite limited
and can be regarded as a prudent temporary measure while the
inquiry gives further thought to the methods of calculating crowd
densities in the "Green Guide". Because it applies to individual
pens, it will only affect total ground capacity when all pens are
full, - something which in practice occurs mainly at major
matches towards the end of the season.

Recommendation 4 - Filling and monitoring terraces.
Fully support the idea that there should be unambiguous agreement
between the clubs and the police about who is responsible for
what, but against the basic duty of the clubs towards those they
invite onto the premises.

Recommendation 8
The report suggests that leaving open gates in perimeter fences
should not lead automatically to pitch invasions. I hope this is
the case. Hope that fans will exert some influence on their more
irresponsible colleagues to see that it does not happen.
                     CONFIDENTIAL


General on recommendations
Accept that practically some recommendations may be difficult to
implement wholly in two short weeks, but exhort all concerned to
aim to achieve all that is recommended.
Draft letter for signature bv the Home Secretary


The Rt Hon Roy Hattersley




This is to let you know that I am today publishing the Interim
Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry which I received from Lord
Justice Taylor earlier this week.

I realise you will wish to have early sight of the Report and I
enclose a copy for your information together with my news release
and a circula*# issued today by my Department.
