  \                                                                          €.®(*y

2 6 APR 198t                                                                               G
                           C. Moynihan, M.P.,
                           Minister for Sport,v
                           Dept, of the Environ
                           2, Marsham Street,
                           London, SW1P 3EB



               PO BOX 192        WREXHAM    CLW                    TELEPHONE 0978-756444

               OUR REF.:
                            CMM/FB
               YOUR REF.:

               DATE:        20th April, 1989.


                            Dear Mr. Moynihan,

                            We write with considerable sorrow and would offer our
                            sincere condolences to everyone involved in football and
                            sport in general for the tragic events that occurred at
                            Hillsborough last weekend.

                            Your conduct, and that of your colleagues, has been an
                            exemplary and factual response to often misguided and ill
                            informed comments and recriminations.

                            In writing to you, Intracard would confirm our willingness
                            to provide any assistance you may consider appropriate to
                            assist you to convey      the   benefits   of  our  mutual
                            aspirations in the promotion of a meaningful National
                            Membership   Scheme and hopefully avert further similar
                            disasters.

                            Out of the tragedy, a conscious view has emerged that the
                            football supporter has been poorly treated as a customer
                            of what, after all, is a major entertainment industry in
                            this country. The customer has a right to value for money
                            and the business a profit in relation to the provision of
                            the entertainment.    In order for this to be achieved the
                            clubs must be attuned to the needs of the supporter.

                            Intracard has always, as you are aware, maintained that
                            our proposals would act as an effective catalyst for other
                            activities.

                             One such activity is, as you know, the provision of
                             mailing facilities from Club to supporter enabling them to
                             have a direct link with their customers and they with the
                             Club.

                             Had intracard been in operation,    especially with    our
                             ticketing compatability, with the information more readily
                             available, perhaps there would not have been so much
                             support travelling without tickets.



                                                                                           %
Whatever the outcome of the enquiries established,        it
cannot be refuted that the Liverpool supporters showed
scant regard for their fellow supporters or the officials
present and in this regard whilst not fighting or throwing
missiles, the phrase "passive hooligans" springs to mind.

The Liverpool Football Club and their supporters should
not deflect criticism and observations of their actions by
shielding in the grief we all feel,    especially for the
bereaved families and friends. Their important input into
the enquiries established will doubtless suggest      more
thoughtful and reasoned responses to the findings than
those presently circulating the media.

Understanding the sensitivity of your intended legislation
for the introduction of the National Football Membership
Scheme, we feel strongly that the political capital being
made as a result of this tragedy is reprehensible and ill
informed and    satisfies the aspirations     of those  in
Football who see the opportunity to forestall legitimate
efforts to place a restraint on who is to attend and how
they are to behave.

It would seem that as long as an agency such as Government
or the Police can be blamed, they will happily open the
tills with scant regard to little else and abdicate what
is their responsibility.

As you know, Intracard has proposed a genuine Membership
facility and not an ID Scheme.          No doubt many of your
colleagues in the House do not understand the difference
between an identity scheme and a full membership scheme
with   national entry and ticketing compatabilitv which
would also enhance supporter estee m . T h i s alsosatisfies
your legislative int^TTC ana provides a platform for the
National Supporters Associations on which to build.

 It could be    that this customer p-st.eom and     potential
 organisation   is   the   chief "* cause'' of objections or
 apprehension for the vociferous voice from        the   club
 boardrooms, against our proposals.         f

 Intracard is   not completely altruistic     but, as you are
 aware, we have over many years endeavoured to     produce a
 meaningful   scheme    that  satisfies several fundamental
 requirements and at the same time        intends   to   give
 considerable financial support to football.

 Intracard   know that if both the supporters and your
 colleagues fully appreciated what was available and not
 merely an ID card, the opposition to such a scheme would
decrease   considerably   and   remove    the   objections,
particularly the well laboured argument that "football is
a unique or special case" that should not utilise what,
elsewhere, is everyday practise and technology.

Any help we can give in support of your efforts to educate
the mis-informed of your colleagues or other interested
parties will be gladly given.       Should you feel we can
assist in any way to help an ever worsening situation of
mis-information and dispute, heightened by the reaction of
recent tragic events, to implement the most progressive
measures we propose, we will be delighted to hear from you.


Yours sincerely,


        C. M.                   .




C. M. MILLMAN




c.c. Rt.Hon. M. Thatcher
     D ^ I h ir d ^ E s q ^ ,
    T^TSTcT^^Esq.,
