                                                                        LAB 98 46/95/


From: Timothy Middleton                              cc      Mr P
      Legal Adviser’s Branch                                 Mr E
      Room 807 QAG

       » 273 3098

       6 March 1998
                                                          pv
Mr M J Pvne                                                                               \

HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

You asked for advice as to whether the material enclosed with your minute of 27
February should be excluded from that being released on the basis that it is privileged
material.

2.      The documents submitted by Collins J, Judge Steel, Benet Hytner QC and
Peter Whitehurst do not report legal advice given to clients. They accordingly do not
attract legal professional privilege. The letters from Collins J, Judge Steel and Peter
Whitehurst cover purely factual matters, and I should think it unlikely that they will
object to disclosure when you approach them. In any case they may all have received
from Stuart-Smith L J letters containing a paragraph similar to paragraph 13 of his
letter to Douglas Fraser, in which case they will be well aware of the view of Stuart-
Smith L J that the information sought was not privileged, and they had the
opportunity to challenge that view in their replies.

3.     The letter from Benet Hytner QC contains statements of opinion about Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield which, if not true, could be defamatory. I think Mr
Hytner will be likely to say that the allegations are substantiated and that he would be
ready to defend them. In any event, the fact that the South Yorkshire police never
contested liability in negligence to the bereaved and injured (see, for example,
paragraph 64 of Chapter 1 of the scrutiny report) suggests that, as Mr Duckenfield was
in overall control of the police operation on the day, negligence on his part is
conceded.

4.     Any liability in defamation on the part of Mr Hytner would potentially be
shared with the Home Office in the event of publication by the Home Office. We can
probably rely on a defence of qualified privilege and absence of malice, but it might
be worth asking the police authority and Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors whether they
would take issue with the placing of the letter in the House library.

5.      Douglas Fraser states clearly that he accepts that the information contained in
his letter is not privileged.
6.       There could be a difficulty with the two letters from Peter Metcalf. In the
second paragraph of his letter of 11 November 1997 he specifically asserts
confidentiality in the documents enclosed with the letter. His later letter contains
reports of the advice that he gave to his clients. In those circumstances, I think you
cannot disclose his material without a waiver of privilege. A waiver might not be
easy to achieve, particularly in respect of the second letter, which is very defensive of
his own position. However, legal professional privilege can always be waived (by the
client, but as far as third parties are concerned the waiver can be communicated by the
legal adviser), and it is worth seeking permission from Mr Fraser to disclose the
material that he supplied despite the assertion of confidence in the first of his two
letters.




T J MIDDLETON
Deputy Legal Adviser
