From: Paul Pugh                              cc: Mr Michael
      Head of Operational Policing               Mr O’Brien
       Policy Unit                               Lord Williams
      Room 539                                   Mr Howarth
      Queen Anne’s Gate                          Sir Richard Wilson
      8 273 3141                                 HMCIC
       26 June 1997                              Miss Weldon
                                                 Mr Halliday
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Granatt
                                                 Mr Middleton
                                                 Miss Loudon
                                                 Mr R Evans
                                                 Mr Edmundson
                                                 Ms Walker
                                                 Ms Clifford
                                                 Mr Warner
                                                 Mr Owen



Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH: ORAL STATEMENT, MONDAY 30 JUNE


Here are the draft oral statement and supporting briefing for the Hillsborough
announcement on Monday.

2.    We have taken forward the handling arrangements which you agreed in Peter
Edmundson’s submission of 24 June. When I explained the position to Richard
Wells, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, he said that, while he remained of the
view that there was no new evidence, he fully understood the reasons for
commissioning a further judicial examination. When the announcement is made he
will make clear that South Yorkshire Police will give the fullest possible co-operation
to Lord Justice Stuart Smith. He will reflect over the next few days on what else he
might say publicly, but he may go so far as to welcome the examination as a means
of resolving matters conclusively.

3.    I attach:

       A      Draft oral statement. Lord Justice Stuart Smith has seen and is
              happy with the draft. He asked for only one change from the previous
              draft: in paragraph 20 he did not want to give any commitment at this
              stage to hearing oral representations.
                                                                      RECEIVED' BY


F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PPO257MA.DOC
       B     Chronology of events.


                                            g on:

                     The new judicial examination and why it is being established.

                     Inquests.

                     Police disciplinary issues.

             #.      The role of the CPS.

             I#.      The role of the Attorney General.   ^


       D     Background on the issues covered in the Question and Answer
              briefing.


       E     Draft letters for you to send on Monday after the announcement to

                     Relatives who have written in the past.

                     Other interested parties.


4.     Please let us know if you require anything further before the weekend.




                                                     PAUL PUGH




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PPO257MA.DOC
                       HILLSBOROUGH Q & A BRIEFING

                                          £ r ,u u    -
The independent scrutiny                   r                  ^       ^\j ^   ;\rW-' ^

Did the Taylor inquiry get it wrong?                      ^       ^                 ^^
I don’t believe so. LJ Taylor carried out a full and through inquiry which identified
the causes of the disaster at Hillsborough and made important recommendations to
prevent such a tragedy happening again.


Why have you ordered this independent scrutiny if you are not prepared to
order a new inquiry?                                  ^                 JV-xJC^
                       /         lnr~£x_X^- ' CkA
As I explained in my statement, we need to establish conclusively that no material
evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.
This is what LJ Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny will do.


What are your reasons for not ordering a public inquiry?

We have examined closely the material submitted to us but we have been unable to
identify any significant new evidence which was not available to LJ Taylor’s original
inquiry.


What about the new evidence uncovered by the Granada
programme/Hillsborough Family Support Group?

LJ Stuart-Smith will be examining the material submitted to determine whether it
constitutes new and significant evidence.


Why have you selected LJ Stuart-Smith?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected figure from the Court of Appeal whose
experience will be invaluable in assessing the evidence presented.


When will the LJ Stuart-Smith begin work?

I expect LJ Stuart-Smith to begin work in September when he has fulfilled his current
commitments. This will allow those who wish to make representations time to prepare
them.
^ \jrv _ y (A .   '   —A3v^
     How long will the scrutiny last?

(-&^JPiopejfLJ Stuart-Smith will report by the end of the year.


     What will the scrutiny be examining?

    LJ Stuart-Smith will look at all the written evidence and other material which has
    been submitted to us. He will also be able to consider further material which
    interested parties wish to submit.               --------------------------


    Will the scrutiny take evidence in person?

    That will be for LJ Stuart-Smith to decide.


    Will former Ch Supt Duckenfield or any other officers be required to give
    evidence?

 ( This is not an investigative body. No-one will be required to give evidence^


    Further action

    What action will you take if the review finds that there is new and significant
    evidence?                                v'~    ~-----------------------                  ^

    If LJ Stuart-Smith finds that there is new and significant evidence not available to LJ
    Taylor’s inquiry whicE^rmgslhe^fmdings of the original inquiry into question, I shall
    order a new public inquiry. The Attorney-General and the Director of Public
    Prosecutions will consider the relevance of that evidence to their statutory
    responsibilities.


    Could Duckenfield or any other police officers face prosecution?

    That will be a decision for the Director of Public Prosecutions in the light of LJ
    Stuart-Smith’s findings.
The inquest

Do you believe a fresh inquest should be held

That is a matter for the Attorney GeneraLAs I have explained, the Attorney General
takes the view that, on the material so far presented, any application to the High Court
for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding.


What about the recent medical evidence that victims were alive after 3.15?

Whether it was appropriate to regard 3.15 as the point at which all victims were likely
to have died was an issue thoroughly examined during the judicial review of the
inquest. The Divisional Court was satisfied that there were insufficient grounds to
reopen the inquest.


Was it right for the coroner to select witnesses, with the help^ofthe police, when
the police were so closely involved with the disaster?

A coroner is the independent investigator into the circumstances of a death. An
inquest is his inquiry and it is for him to decide what evidence to admit and which
witnesses to call. He must discharge his responsibilities judicially and at no time show
bias towards any of those involved with the death.


Inquests: general

What are the procedures for coroners’ inquests?                                     ___

An inquest is a judicial inquiry conducted by a coroner in order to establish the
answers to a limited range of questions surrounding a death which has been reported
to him. It is normally held in public according to procedures set down in the Coroners
Act 1988 and the Coroners Rules 1984.


What is the role of the jury?

The role of the jury at an inquest is to determine the verdict. In most cases, a jury is
not required, but in certain circumstances, such as a death in custody, a jury is
mandatory. A coroner may decide to convene a jury in other cases if he considers it
appropriate to do so.
Inquests: verdicts

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise
might be available.


Why do inquests not return more verdicts of unlawful killing?

The verdict of unlawful killing is reserved for cases of homicide (except where the
killing was justified). To return such a verdict, the court must be satisfied to the
criminal standard of proof.

The normal standard o f proof in the coroner’s court is on the balance of probabilities.

There were 169 verdicts of unlawful killing returned in 1996 out of a total of nearly
20,000 inquests.[19,855 inquests]


What about lack of care?

Lack of care in the coroner’s court has nothing to do with civil negligence and does
not indicate a breach of duty. To return such a verdict there must be a clear casual
connection between a failure to provide physical care and the death.


Inquests and disasters

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

On the whole the existing arrangements work well. However, where a public inquiry
has been established by the Government, there can be an overlap between the inquest
and the inquiry. In these circumstances, the Report of the Working Party on Disasters
and Inquests, which was published earlier this year, recommended that the inquest
should normally be adjourned pending the conclusion of the inquiry, and should not
normally be resumed. This would relieve relatives from the need to give evidence ^
twice over.                     ' ~~...-..... —...-................ ....... . ..


What action is being taken to implement these recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.
It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.
  Disciplinary action

  Why was no disciplinary action taken against two senior officers, as
  recommended by the PCA?

  Charges o f neglect o f duty were preferred, on the direction of the PCA, against two
  officers [Ch^&upt. Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray] in respect o f their
  handling^ f police operations at Hillsborough.

  The senior o f the two officers retired from the force on medical grounds on 10
  November 1991 with the consequence that he was no longer subject to police
  discipline.

  In January 1992, the PCA agreed to an application from the force to withdraw the
  charge against the other officer because the case against him was dependent on their
  being jointly neglectful.


  Do you think it is fair that an officer can avoid discipline by obtaining medical
  retirement?

 Home Office guidance to Chief Constables is clear that every effort should be made to
 .determine the disciplinary charges before medical retirement.

  If discipline action is to be taken,>medical retirement may be deferred until it has been
  concludoTHowever, if an individual is so ill, andjikely to remain so, that he is
_ unable to attend a discipline hearing, the Chief Constable may conclude that there is
  little choice but to abandon the proceedings. This is a decision for the force
  concerned.


 Will any officers be disciplined now?

 That is a matter for the Chief Constable in the light of the evidence found. Action can
 only be taken against officers still serving in the force.
26-'06     97   16:55       ©0171   273   8450                                 0171 273 8450           @ 00 2




         QUESTION AND ANSWER BRIEFING FOR HOME OFFICE

         LINE TO TAKE:

         The CPS considers that the material so far presented to it would not justify fresh criminal
         investigation. However the CPS will reconsider the position if the scrutiny identifies any
         evidence that might be relevant which has not previously been considered.

         Question
         Will the independent scrutiny be able to advise the CPS to commence criminal proceedings?

     Answer
     No, decisions on criminal proceedings are matters for the CPS. The scrutiny will draw to
     the attention of the CPS any evidence not previously considered which may be relevant to
     their duties.

     Question
     What will the CPS do if the scrutiny identifies relevant material?

     Answer
     That is a matter for the CPS, and it would be wrong to speculate at this stage.

     Question
     Will you tell the CPS to prosecute?

     Answer
     No. Decisions on prosecutions are entirely for the prosecuting authorities. It would be quite
     improper for the Home Secretary to try to influence prosecution decisions in individual cases.

     Question
     If the scrutiny finds no fresh evidence, but concludes that material so far submitted justifies
     criminal proceedings or further enquiry what will the CPS do?

     Answer
     The CPS will of course carefully consider any views expressed by the independent scrutiny,
     and take them into account before reaching a final decision.

     Question
     Is the CPS going to make a separate announcement of its conclusions?

     Answer
     I am aware that all those persons who have recently written to the Director of Public
     Prosecutions or the CPS are being sent letters today by the Crown Prosecution Service
     explaining more fully their conclusions at this stage and the assistance they will be providing
     to the independent scrutiny.



     Louise\Hills


                        O
26 00     97   16:55       00171   27 3 8 4 5 0                             0171 273 8450           0003




        Question
        Why has the CPS waited until now to announce its preliminary conclusions?

        Answer
        It would have been inappropriate to announce the view of the CPS while the Home Secretary
        was considering requests for a further public enquiry. To do so might have given the
        impression that no further action was contemplated.




        Louise\Hills


                       Q
HILLSBOROUGH: INQUEST - (ATTORNEY GENERAL INTEREST/ROLE)


Line to take

It is not open to the Attorney General to order a fresh inquest. By statute his consent
is pre-requisite to an application to the High Court for an order directing a fresh
inquest. He has considered several applications relating to the Hillsborough inquest in
accordance with the relevant legal criteria. In no case did he consider that an
application to the High Court would be likely to succeed.




Q.     What is the criteria by which the Attorney General considers applications
       under Section 13 Coroners Act 1988.


A.     The criteria remains that set out by the then Attorney General in a Written
       Answer on 2 May 1989 (Col 39): ie whether an application to the High Court
       would have a reasonable prospect of establishing that it is necessary or
       desirable in the interests o f justice for a fresh inquest to be held.


       What does the Attorney General take into account in considering whether
       the criteria is met.


       He considers the factors set out in Section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988 (eg
       whether there was irregularity or insufficiency of inquiry) in the context o f the
       statutory purposes o f an inquest to which I have referred.


Q.     Did the Attorney General not understand the need for a wide-ranging
       inquiry.                                             — -----------

A.     An inquest serves very specific purposes. Many o f the concerns o f the
       relatives o f the deceased were not matters for an inquest.


Q.     Was not the inquest was full of irregularities?

A.     The main planks of the applications under Section 13 of the Coroners Act
       1988 were the ‘mini inquest’ procedure adopted by the coroner and his
       decision not to leave ‘lack of care’ to the jury as a possible verdict. Both
       issues were in fact considered by the Divisional Court (in unsuccessful judicial
       review proceedings) and rejected.


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 1MA.DOC
Q.     There was also fresh evidence in some cases.

A.     I understand that the then Attorney General took the view that it did not affect
        the issues for consideration by the inquest.


Q.     Has the refusal of the Section 13 applications been considered since the
       ITV documentary?

A.     I understand that no further formal application under the Coroners Act has
        been made to the Attorney General (before or after election) since the
        documentary. The previous Attorney General explained in correspondence to
        some Hon Members that the ITV documentary did not o f itself constitute
        evidence. He promised to consider any fresh evidence placed before him as
        the result o f the research undertaken. No such material was supplied to him.

       The material supplied to the Home Office by the Hillsborough Family Support
       Group was made available to the then Attorney General in March but he
       concluded that nothing in it had any bearing on the issues raised in the
       applications which had previously been made and considered. Nothing has
       occurred to alter or cast doubt upon the validity of that decision.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 1MA.DOC
BACKGROUND

The Taylor Inquiry

• The terms of reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
   1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
   sports events.

• 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours o f film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

   Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day of the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  Wednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

  - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
  - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
  - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
  - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
  - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
  - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
  - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

• The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.
• In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
  recommendations being made in respect of eight o f them.

• In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
  considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could
  be safely used in the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to
  be carried out with immediate effect.

   Final Report

• The final report o f the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of
  measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

• The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment
  of all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect o f
  the top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of
  spikes and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

• Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of
  spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
  Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
  be reviewed.

• The report recommended a written statement o f intent be agreed between the club
  and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
  with particular reference to the filling o f each pen.

• There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role o f the
  police and the responsibilities o f senior officers.

• The co-ordination o f the emergency services and the provision o f first aid, medical
  facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations o f the final
  report.

• The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
  Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
  towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
  going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.


The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed^were ten unresolved questions. These were:
1.     Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperiencedin policing matches?

2.     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the LeppingsTaneend o f the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.    Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it
should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm HcI<:-off?           -

4.    Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motsoivwere aware of the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.      Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained medical
help?

10.    Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?

The Chief Constable has responded to each of these questions and pointed to the
recommendations which Taylor made in respect o f each one. We are satisfied that
none o f the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time o f the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases Taylor not only considered the questions but
made specific recommendations as a result.

The video evidence

Granada suggested that South Yorkshire Police held tapes which represented new
evidence not seen by the Taylor inquiry. The families have alleged that video material
was deliberately withheld from the inquiry and inquest because it would undermine
police testimony that the camera (No. 5) showing the overcrowded pens was not
working properly. Roger Houldsworth, the club’s technician, has provided an affidavit
indicating that the camera was working properly.

The full set o f tapes cover many hours leading up to, during and after the disaster. For
the purposes o f the inquiry and inquest, West Midlands Police compiled a tape of
selected highlights from the CCTV and also from the television coverage o f the "
disaster. It is clear, though, that the full video evidence, including a detailed transcript
of its contents, was available to the inquiry.                   *

We have viewed the South Yorkshire Police tapes and have confirmed that for the
most part they are of no consequence, showing general views o f the stadium and
surroundings. In the final halfhour leadin^up to theTTisaster, they are almostentirely
taken up with the turmoil outside the stadium.

The Tapes do include some material from camera 5 and we found it difficult to
conclude that this camera was less clear than the other cameras. The extent to which it
was claimed that the camera was not working properly, though, is a matter of
interpretation. The families believe~oHrceremisIed the Inquiry and inquestT&ut our
reading of the transcripts suggests that it was claimed the camera was not working:
very well. This is still the police view. We do not consider this divergence of opinion
to be significant.                                                              '

Two video tapes were stolen from the club control room on the night o f the disaster,
the theft was reported and an inconclusiWmvestigation was carried out by West
Midlands Police. The tapes did not contain any significant material hut it has been
alleged that they were stolen by the police as part of a cover up.

Medical evidence/inquest verdict


Dr Ed Walker, who reported to hospital following the disaster, claimed in a recent
article that he tended Philip Hammond whom he says was alive after 3.15pm - the cut
off time established by the coroner at the inquest.

Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. This does not name Philip
Hammond and is arguably ambiguous because it is not clear whether there was any
heart beat when the boy he treated arrived in casualty. It didjiot appear to contradict
the findings o f the Home Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead by
3.15pm and Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the inquest because the
consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a composite picture.

Under the Coroner’s Act 1988 the Attorney-General must give his consent to an
application to the courts for a fresh inquest. At the 1993 judicial review o f the
coroner’s inquest, Lord Justice McGowan accepted that one o f the victims may have
been alive after 3.15 but concluded that there was 'no good reason for ordering a new
inquest or merely quashing the existing verdict’.
Police discipline: medical retirement

The discipline regulations say that if “good reason” is given for an accused officer
being unable to appear before his Chief ConstaBIe on a discipline charge, the hearing
shall be postponed or adjourned. Interpretation o f the law is a matter for the courts,
but it seems reasonable to conclude that “good reason” would include severe illness. If
a doctor certifies that an accused officer has no prospect of sufficient recovery in the
foreseeable future (e.g., is suffering a terminal illness, or such a severe psychiatric
condition that the stress o f discipline could well lead to suicide), there is little option
but to discontinue the discipline proceedings and allow a medical retirement.

It should be remembered that discipline proceedings are stressful in themselves and
may exacerbate a pre-existing medical condition. It would not be fair to assume that
all officers who avoid discipline proceedings have exaggerated their symptoms to a
doctor for the necessary medical report.

W e are-sure that some forces are more robust than others in deferring medical
retirement until outstanding disciplinary proceedings have been completed. After all,
even if an accused officer is unable to carry out normal duties, it does noTfollow that
he cannot attend a discipline hearing. However, if there is evidence of an accused
being so ill that he cannot even attend a hearing, the force’s hands are tied and the
proceedings will be dropped.

The future o f police discipline

A range of police personnel matters are live issues at the moment and proposals have
Been submitted by PPTU. Proposed new procedures for discipline have been under
review for some time and agreement reached with the staff associations in
considerable detail, though there is contention about the standard o f proof and “fast-
track” dismissal which need to be resolved.

The proposed new regulations should improve the ability of chief constables to deal
with discipline proceedings against officers who may qualify for medical retirement,
since they will provide for the exercise o f discretion to proceed in an officer’s
absence. The draft new regulation, which has been seen and accepted by the police
staff associations, says that, in the unavoidable absence of the accused officer at the
hearing, the hearing may be adj oumedXtHepresent regulations say shall). It remains to
be seen whether this makes an effective difference to present practice.
              --------------I G l i 26      THE HOME SECRETO RY’ S O F F IC E -> 7 2 1 9 0 7 9 0
                                                                                                                       NO. 0 7 4        002

3   0   - 9 6 I M0 K)      16-10         MI N I S T E R FOR DO                          F A X :0 1 7 1 2 7 1 5 8 1 6           P. 002




                  DERBYSHIRE


                  Background

                  1.    The British buiU, owned and crcwed oil-bulk-ore carrier Derbyshire sank
                  some 400 miles off Okinawa in September 1980 in Typhoon Orchid. No distress
                  message was received, 41 lives were lost and no (race was fdund of the ship.

                  2.     Following the loss of a sister ship a formal investigation under the Merchant
                  Shipping Act was held in 1988/89 which concluded that in the abscnce o f any other
                  evidence (he ship was overwhelmed by the forccs o f nature. The families of those lost
                  with the ship have contested this finding and have argued that due to poor design and
                  construction the ship broke in two and sank.

                  3.     In 1994 an expedition funded by the International Transport Workers
                  Federation located the wreckage of the ship and following an assessment undertaken
                  by Lord Donaldson the previous Administration mourned an expedition to examine
                  the wreckage. The mam pail oTthis expedition was undertaken »n March and April of
                  this year and the results are being analysed by three Assessors, two appointed by the
                  Department and one appointed by the European Commission. The Assessors report
                  will be published (October/November) and after that a decision will have to be made
                  whether to re-open the formal investigation. If the material is “new and important”
                  the formal investigation has to be re-opened.

                  Line to take

                                a comprehensive survey of the wreckage of the Derbyshire has heeo
                                completed recently and the results are currently being analysed.

                                It is hoped that il will be possible to publish the results of the survey in
                                the Autumn.

                                If the material is judged to be new and important, or indicates there may
                                have been a miscarriage of justice, then under the specific provisions iu
                                Merchant Shipping Act the formal investigation has to be re-opened.

                                The decision of re-opeuiug the formal investigation rests with my Rt Hon
                                Friend the Deputy Prime Minister.



                  SP3/DETR
                  J u u c 1907
A
           DOCUMENTS AND OTHER EVIDENCE CONSIDERED BY SCRUTINY




Documents which are already pubic


1.        Taylor Inquiry: interim and final reports.

2.          Transcripts and other documentation from the Taylor Inquiry (to be returned
            to the Public Record Office).

3.        Transcripts of the inquest proceedings.

4.        Judgement of the Divisional Court on the judicial review application,
           November 1993.

5.        Guide to the safety of sports ground, 1986 edition.

6.        Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office, 1997.

7.        Various published books about the Hillsborough disaster.

8.        Video tapes of broadcast television programmes about the disaster.

Documents originated by the Family Support Group

1.        Legal Opinion by Alun Jones, QC for the Support Group March 1997, with
           Annexes.

2.        Memorial to the Attorney General on behalf of the families of six of the
          deceased seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992.

3.        Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court, 1993.

Documents and other evidence not otherwise publicly available which we will
placing in the Library

1.        Transcripts of interviews with those who gave oral evidence to Lord Justice
          Stuart-Smith.

2.        Other records of the discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
          transcripts were not made.

3.        Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses.

4.        Other written statements consulted at the request of the families (with the
          exception of those provided by Dr Burns and Dr West).


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0591pd.doc
5.         Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
            and others on behalf of the Family Support Group.

6.          South Yorkshire Police operational orders for the 1998 and 1989 FA Cup
            Semi-Finals at Hillsborough.

7.         Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
            complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police.

8.          A report produced by David Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of Devon
            and Cornwall, for South Yorkshire Police in August 1990.

9.         Report prepared by Mr Noel Burne on the state of the ground for South
            Yorkshire Police in 1990.

10.         Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 which contain the records of all material
            recorded by police CCTV cameras on the day of the disaster.

11.         Transcript of the open meeting involving Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
            families on 6 October 1997.

12.        Transcript of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s meeting on 30 September 1997 with
            Counsel for the Support Group.

Documents and other evidence which will not be placed in the Library

1.         Advice of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC to the Director of Public
            Prosecutions, August 1990. (The Home Secretary has agreed with the
           Attorney General that this legal advice should not be made public because it
           attracts legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP not to
            publish such detailed documentation relating to the merits of individual cases
           which have not been before the courts.)

2.         Report of a review of the evidence by the CPS, May 1997. (Same reason
           applies).

3.         West Midlands Police reports to the DPP (23 volumes) (the same reason
           applies).

4.         Appendix 9 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. (This contains details of
           individual cases, and the relevant sections are being sent to the families
           concerned).

5.         Written statements made by Dr James Burns and Dr Ian West.                (They
           concern the case of Kevin Williams only).




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp059 lpd.doc
6.         Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s private meetings with families and
           submissions made by individual families to him. (Each person has the
           transcript of his/her private meeting.)

7.         “Body files” containing the detailed history of each individual victim. (Each
            family has, or request, been provided with the body file of their relative.)

8.         Police tape VRM2. (This is a video of the mortuary.)

9.         Photographic, documentary, video and other material held in the archive of
           the disaster held by South Yorkshire Police. (This consists of an entire room
           full of material. Much of it is held by the police on behalf of the coroner, and
           access to it is therefore governed by the Coroners’ Rules - that is, copies of
           relevant material is provided on request to those with a legitimate interest,
           including relatives of victims. Other sections of the archive contain copies of
           the material listed in other categories above. The remainder is miscellaneous
           material from many sources. Copies are provided on request by South
           Yorkshire Police, subject to them securing the agreement of the third party if
           the originator of the material is different from the person requesting a copy.)

Documents whose position has yet to be resolved

1.        Copies of all the original statements made by South Yorkshire Police officers
           following the disaster. (We are discussing this with South Yorkshire Police.
           They are concerned that because the statements are personal the
           recollections made immediately after the disaster contain emotive, abusive or
           other material which, if made public, would cause offence to the families - for
           example, abusive remarks about the behaviour of supporters. I have asked
           South Yorkshire Police to consider the possibility of making them available in
           anonymised form, so that individual officers would not be identified by name.)

2.        A report on the state of the ground prepared for Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club by consulting engineers, Sir William Halcrow and Partners,
          August 1990. (This report was originally commissioned by solicitors for the
           Club in anticipation of contribution proceedings to determine the respective
           liabilities for compensation payments of the club, the council and the police.
          The solicitors acting for the club have indicated that in principle they do not
           see much difficulty in making this available, but they will not give firm
           agreement until they have seen the published report by Lord Justice Stuart-
           Smith.)

3.        Nine video tapes containing everything recorded by BBC tv cameras on the
          day of the disaster. (These tapes have been made available to all the official
           proceedings, including the Taylor Inquiry, the inquest and Lord Justice Stuart-
          Smith’s scrutiny, but the BBC are not prepared for them to be made generally
          available because much of it is an horrific record of the deaths of the victims.
           I have asked for their agreement that the tapes could, if requested, be viewed
           by legal representatives of the families.)


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp059 lpd.doc
