              Police Policy Directorate                            H o m e Office
                                                                   50 Queen A n n e’s Gate,
              Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)
                                                                   London SW1H 9AT
                                                                   Telephone:   0 1 7 1 -2 7 3
                                                                   Fax:         0 1 7 1 -2 7 3


 Richard Wells Esq Q.P.M.
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield
 S3 8LY                                                      20 December 1996




 As you will be aware,       following the Granada programme,
 Hillsborough, a number of representations were made to the Home
 Secretary calling on him to reopen the public inquiry into the
 disaster. Whilst the Home Secretary emphasised that he would not
 take a decision to reopen the inquiry lightly and would need to
 be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so,
 he, nonetheless, made a commitment in the House of Commons
 carefully to consider the issues raised.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary is particularly
anxious to establish whether any new evidence has emerged. I
would therefore be grateful for your views on this matter in
relation to the ten points raised by the programme which I
attach. It would also be helpful if we could have clarification
on the point about whether the film from the video camera trained
on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor inquiry. The
programme makers have specifically alleged that the Taylor
inquiry was told that the camera was not working, when this was
not the case; I would be grateful for your comments on this
particular point. I understand that the film is available and it
would be helpful if we could receive a copy and of any transcript
of the film which the Taylor inquiry may have received.

Whilst the Home Secretary does not have the power to reopen the
inquest - that is a matter for the High Court on the advice of
the Attorney General - the relatives have expressed continuing
anger that the Coroner imposed a 3.15pm cut off point after which
he would not take any evidence. Whether this was the correct
course might have a bearing on the Home Secretary's decision. I
would also be grateful therefore to receive any relevant
information you might have on this matter. I understand that the
issues will be investigated by the Complaints and Discipline
Department who have already indicated to us that they could
provide a full report by the end of January.




                                                    PAUL PUGH '■
                                                   Head of Unit


K:\CRIME\LETTER\SMD-0051
