From: Linda Rushton                                    cc: Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                       Mr O’Brien
      Room 702                                             Lord Williams
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                    Mr Omand
      S 273 4238                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           Ms Wheldon
      9 February 1998                                      Mr Middleton
                                                           Mr R Evans
                                                           Mr Pugh
                                                           Mr Edmundson
                                                           Mr Butler
                                                           Ms Clifford
                                                           Mr Warner (
                                                           Mr Owen           -
Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

Mr Howarth has seen Paul Pugh’s submission of 6 February concerning the
handling arrangements for the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report and has commented:

1. “Having read the submission and report carefully, I agree with the
recommendations in the submission and the conclusions in the report.

2. On handling, I think that the proposed arrangements prior to and following
the statement are suitable (paragraphs 28-31 of Paul Pugh’s submission).
However, I reiterate that I feel we should involve both Jane Kennedy and
Peter Kilfoyle in discussions about handling and other arrangements. In
practice, this will have to be arranged for this week. (I understand that Maria
Eagle MP has already jumped the gun and has arranged for the families to
meet local MPs on Monday of next week (16 February).

3. On the detail of the report itself there are, I think, some potentially
contentious issues which need further consideration prior to any statement
from the Home Secretary or debate. These are:

(a) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s evaluation of Debra Martin and Paul Taylor’s
evidence (Chapter 4, paragraphs 37-72) is likely to be interpreted as a
whitewash of South Yorkshire police force (and by implication the West
Midlands police force). Frankly, it reads in a manner which supports the police
officer’s version of events without any serious attempts to appear even
handed.

(b) Paragraph 92 of Chapter 4, unless it is read in conjunction with Appendix
8, seems again to rubbish the evidence of the “lower orders” ( in this case
police officers) preferring instead to accept explanations given by senior
officers and those acting on their behalf. To overcome this impression, it may
be necessary to draw attention to the sort of corrections which were made to
the original statements as contained in Appendix 6.

(c) We need to be seen as having responded to the ten questions that were
put to David Maclean MP in 1996, then a Minister at the Home Office, by
Granada Television, the programme makers of ‘Hillsborough’. This
programme had a significant impact on a large number of people, the majority
of whom will not read Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. I think that we will
need to ensure that the responses to these ten questions, contained in the
report, are emphasised in a proactive manner; perhaps this could be
achieved via the press release or could be incorporated into the Home
Secretary’s statement? In addition, it could be helpful for the Home Secretary
to give an extended interview outlining the responses to the ten questions
and other matters.

(d) With regard to the two missing video tapes (Chapter 2 Paragraph 22) the
conclusion drawn by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that they would not have
provided anything in addition to the video evidence available to Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry, the Inquests or any other proceedings should be brought out clearly.
It is particularly important to emphasise, as the report does, that there was a
substantial amount of other video footage which covered much of the ground
and outside for most of the period in question. It is therefore likely that any of
the coverage which these missing video tapes could have contained has
been obtained from other footage. The Granada Television programme
supported the conspiracy theory whereas Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report
rejects it. However, the point that we must get across is that, either way, it
does not mean that there is material missing which would have shed further
light on events.

4. With regard to the details of the Home Secretary’s oral statement, I
suggest the following amendments to Annex B (draft oral statement):

Paragraph 11          Second sentence

Replace: ‘it could never happen again’ with ‘it is much less likely that such a
disaster will ever be repeated’.

Paragraph 14          After second sentence

Insert: ‘Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its
present form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind’.

Paragraph 20

I feel that to use the phrase “draw a line” under the whole Hillsborough
disaster could easily be misconstrued if the Home Secretary were to use it in
his statement to the House. While I agree that it is necessary to make it clear
that this is the final word on the issue of any further inquiry, this point needs
to be made with great care and sensitivity.”




                                LINDA RUSHTON
