                states:-



     I am employed as a qualified ambulance man with SYMAS.



2.   My date of birth is


3.   I have been with SYMAS since 1976, and became a qualified

     ambulance man in 1977.


4.   I was off duty on Saturday 15th April and wanted to attend

     the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest FA Cup semi-final at

     Hillsborough.     I attend football matches quite regularly

     and try to see Liverpool play fairly often because my 12

     year old sfcn is a Liverpool supporter.     On this occasion my

     son was not going to accompany me to the match.



5.   I did not have a ticket for the match but I knew that some

     Liverpool fans were going to a pub in Barnsley for lunch and

     so my friend,                    an<* 1 went there to see if we

     could obtain any spare tickets.       We arrived at the pub at

      1130 and we bought two tickets for the Leppings Lane stand

      at £6.


6.   We went to Hillsborough,   parking at Parsons Cross Estate

      which is about a mile from the ground and walking down to

      Leppings Lane from the North.    We arrived outside the ground

      at about 1440.
Before approaching the turnstiles,       fans have to go through

some large blue wrought iron gates.        As we walked through

these gates a policeman closed one side of the gates and I

turned and closed the other side behind me.



There was a mass of people outside the turnstiles and no

queues.     I stood on a stanchion which supports a metal

wall dividing turnstiles A/G from turnstiles 1-16 in order

see over the heads of the people in front of me.         I could

see that it might be possible to walk around the crowd and

get in through the far right hand turnstile.         I could not

at the time see that there was a metal rail alongside the

entrance to turnstile G. I told _____to follow me and we

went around the back of the crowd, passing to the extreme

right where   the     crush   was were    not too bad.    As   we

approached the far right hand turnstile a concertina exit

gate (gate C) which is to the right of the turnstiles was

open and I walked straight into the ground.         The time was

shortly after 1440.      The doors were slammed shut behind me

and my friend was unable to get in.           I do not know who

opened that gate, nor do I know who closed it.           I would

estimate that about 100 other people walked in with me.        As

a result of going into the ground that way my ticket was not

checked and I still have my complete ticket.



I was now in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand.      There
ygjrg several people there but the crowds were not nearly as

bad as they had been outside.     I waited there for about 5

minutes in an attempt to meet up with                  and I

bought a programme whilst I waited.       There were people

milling about in this area but it was not too crowded and I

thought everyone there was waiting for their companions

outside.


     did not appear and as it was approaching kick-off time

I walked to the right of the Leppings Lane stand and took up

a spot on the corner of the ground underneath the score

board.     I did not go down the tunnel in the middle of the

stand because I had been there on previous occasions and I

knew it would be very crowded.    Whilst I was waiting in the

yard there were not any crowds in the tunnel but I could see

/the crowd at the very front (i.e. at the ground end) of the

tunnel, although I was not taking any particular notice.



A couple of minutes after I had taken my position the game

 kicked off at 1459 but like a lot of the people around me I

 was watching the crowd behind the goal and not the game.

 People were already climbing the fence to get onto the

 field.


 During those first five minutes of the game I heard two

 messages come over the PA system.    One was for Liverpool

 supporters to stop pushing in the Leppings Lane end of the
      ground and the other was for people to clear the playing

      gj^ga as people were already spilling onto the pitch.



13 . At 1506 a policeman ran onto the field and grabbed the
      rsfsr66>    The game was stopped and the players left the

      field.     By now there were quite a number of people on the

      field and I could see some people on the pitch trying to

      resuscitate a youngster.    People around me stood staring in

      silence.      I remember seeing a St John's ambulanceman run

      down alongside the South Stand with an oxygen bottle.     The

      time was 1512.



14.   I decided to try to get onto the pitch.      I could not move

      forwards and I realised I would have to leave the area where

      I was standing and try another entrance with the help of the

      police.



15.   As I came round the corner of the Leppings Lane stand near

      the entrance to the tunnel there were people lying on the

      ground.     A policeman and a supporter were resuscitating a

      man in his late 30's near the tunnel entrance.      As I bent

      down they asked if I could help.    I tried to resuscitate him

      but I realised it was too late.      He had no pulse and his

      eyes were dilated.       He was clearly dead and in my opinion

      had been dead for some time.      I cannot say for how long, I

      am not a doctor, but from his colour (blue) he had clearly

      not been breathing for some time.




                                  ‘f
    16.   Nearby a man of about 30 was lying on the ground and he was

          being turned on his side.        I checked him but he too was

          dead.



    17.   I went to another casualty.        He was being attended to by

          people who seemed to know what they were doing.       They had

          him on his side and he was breathing.       As I looked around
f         people were being left on the ground with their             faces

          already covered over.      I went over to a man of about 16

          whose face had been covered and a youth was standing near

          him in tears.    I asked if he knew him and he replied "no".

          All this occurred within a minute or so of my arriving at

          the scene.



    18.   I noticed an ambulance had arrived outside C gate.         I went

          down to the gate to speak to the crew.           They were      a

          Sheffield crew of two men,        namely              and

                  , with a front line ambulance.             was already

          resuscitating a casualty in the gateway.      I spoke to

          as he was loading casualties into the ambulance.     I tried to

          impress upon him the seriousness of the situation inside the

          ground and I asked him if he knew how many ambulances were

          coming.    He told me that 20 ambulances would be coming.



    19 . As the ambulance left I spoke to a police officer, I believe
          an Inspector, and I told him that we had to get casualties




                                      S'
      down to the gate ready for the ambulances and that the other

      supporters had to be kept out of the way.



20.   As I returned through C gate into the crowd a policeman and

      policewoman were attending a youngster just outside C Gate.

      I asked how he was and they told me he was all right at

      present.     I checked his pulse which was strong and I told

      them I would try to get him a stretcher when one became

      available.


21.   I helped a number of casualties down to C gate.             Most of

      these casualties were able to walk but complained about

----- chest pains.      I helped to carry one man with a group of

      other   people,   he   was   being   dragged   and    was   clearly

      distressed.


22.   We placed the casualties against the wall outside C gate.

      There is a plan attached to this statement.          The casualties

      were placed in the area marked with a yellow line.            Other

      people also took casualties down to the same area.



23.   At   1535 another ambulance had arrived on the scene at

      Leppings Lane and I recognised Leading Ambulanceman _______

      as one member of the crew.        I informed him of the situation

      and I helped load a casualty onto his ambulance.               This

      casualty was a man of about 40 with crush injuries and

      breathing difficulties.          I also loaded a youngster onto




                                   6
         's ambulance and I travelled in the back of this

ambulance with             and the two casualties to Northern

General.    As we left the scene I could see that another

ambulance had arrived.     We drove along the service road to

Penisto ne Road and from there to the Northern General

Hospital.   During the journey I was trying to keep an oxygen

mask, on the 40 year old patient.    We arrived at the casualty

area where the hospital seemed to be prepared for a large

number of casualties.     We lifted the patient with the help

of a porter because the patient was struggling so much.      We

put him onto a heavy duty trolley.      The other casualty was

unloaded by hospital staff.      The time was shortly after

15 50   and we went   straight back to the ground,      to the

Leppings Lane end.


When we arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground we

loaded up two stretcher cases.       Both were men of about 20

who were fully conscious and had crush injuries.       We also

loaded up two walking casualties.      One of these was holding

his chest and both appeared to be suffering from shock.       A

nurse also got into the ambulance.       We left             at

the ground and went to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital where

we arrived at the fracture entrance.       I explained to the

doctor briefly what the apparent injuries were and he put

the patients into categories.       We simply unloaded them and

returned to the ground.
25.   We arrived back at the Leppings Lane end of the ground from

      the south and again pulled into the service road.   There was
                        *


      an ambulance present already full of sitting cases and there

      did not seem any further need for my assistance.     Leading

      Ambulance man         was in the area and he returned to the

      ambulance.   As there was nothing further for me to do I

      started to look for my friend                He did not seem

      to be in the area of the Leppings Lane entrance and so I

      returned to the car where he was waiting.    I had left the

      ground at 1625.




Signed




Dated
                                                                                              Police Access


Sheffield Wednesday F.                C.                                             Police
                                                                                     Room
    Hillsborough Ground                                                      Room



                                                                 Gymnasium
                                                                                                              7 7 -8 8
                                                                                                                73-76
                                                                                                                                  cs
                                                             NORTH STAND




                                                                                                                         LA 4 9 -5 4




                                                             Player s
                                                             Tunnel
ivay Fans Entrance
 and Enclosur&s


        Police Control     1 9 -2 2                         SOUTH STAND
                                                       tn
                                      Official                                      29-32 33-36

      KEY

     TURNSTILES   ¥77771                         Director! Entrance
