 From: Peter Edmundson
                                                                cc Mr Michael
       Operational Policing                                        Mr O’Brien
       Policy Unit
                                                                   Mr Howarth
       Room 527, QAG
                                                                   Permanent Secretary
       * 2 7 3 -2 6 2 1
                                                                   Mr Boys Smith
       3 December, 1997
                                                                   Mr Middleton LAB v
                                                                   Mr Pugh
                                                                   Mr Clifford ABCU
                                                                   Mr Granatt CD
                                                                   Mr Bailey
                                                                   Mr Warner
                                                                   Mr Owen
 Home Secretary


 HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Issue

You asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for his advice on the issues raised by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police. The Judge has now written back to you and, in the light o f his
advice, you can reply to the earlier correspondence.

Timing

2.      Urgent. The Judge has indicated that he would like any final submissions to
his scrutiny to be made by Friday 5 December.

Summary

3.     Mr Pugh s submission of 20 November explained the issues raised by the
Family Support Group. The Group asked you to extend the timetable for Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith s scrutiny because of the delays which the relatives alleged they were
experiencing in obtaining documents from South Yorkshire Police. The Group also
asked that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith should take possession of the police’s archive to
safeguard its integrity. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,
vehemently denies the allegations and inferences made by the Group.

4.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he has not encountered any
difficulties with access to the information held by South Yorkshire and that there has
been no cause for concern as to the integrity of the police’s archive. He also indicates
that he expects to keep to his original timetable to report to you by the end of the year.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
 Recommendation


 5.      That you write to the Family Support Group indicating that Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith does not intend to prolong the scrutiny or to require the transfer of the
 archive from South Yorkshire Police. You should also write to Richard Wells in
 similar terms.

 Consideration

 Access to information

 6.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s reply to your request for advice is attached at
 annex A. He indicates that South Yorkshire Police have co-operated throughout his
 scrutiny and he refutes any suggestion that his scrutiny may have been obstructed by
 the South Yorkshire Police. He states that the scrutiny has not had any difficulties
 with access to information held by the force and that, in his view, the police have done
 all they can to ensure the families and the Family Support Group received the
 information they sought.

7.      During his visit to Liverpool a number of families complained to the Judge
either that they had not been given their relative’s body file or that they thought it was
mcomplete. The Judge says that he asked them to request the file immediately from
the police or to let him have details of what they had so that he could check it against
the archive. Most did not contact him and in the two cases that he was asked to
pursue, nothing of significance had been left out. The Judge also notes that medical
records do not exist for most of the victims because they were not admitted to
hospital. Those medical records which do exist are held by the hospitals, not the
police, and can be released to properly authorised persons.

Integrity of the South Yorkshire Police archive

8.     The Judge says that he would have removed the archive of material from
South Yorkshire if there had been any question mark over its integrity there, but this
was not the case. He also points out that it would have been a formidable logistical
task to remove all the material to London and the scrutiny would then have been
responsible for dealing with the families’ requests for information, distracting it from
the main task.

Timetable for completion of the scrutiny

9.     No timetable was imposed on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for completion of his
scrutiny, but his letter re-iterates his intention to complete his report within the
timescale we originally envisaged, i.e. by the end of the year. He has written to the
Family Support Group and other interested parties to ask that any further material
which they wish to submit is forwarded to him by 5 December.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
 10.     The Judge has responded positively to your invitation to discuss issues
 relating to the publication o f evidence to the scrutiny and I understand that your
 offices are in touch about a convenient date.

 Term s of reference

 11.    Trevor Hicks has also written to you about the scrutiny’s terms of reference
 which he promised to do in his earlier letter. We suggest that you simply acknowledge
 receipt o f his further letter. We will forward advice as soon as possible.

 12.    We have also received a letter (at Annex B) from the Clerk to the Liverpool
 City Council Hillsborough Disaster Working Group in support of the Family Support
 Group’s representations about the scrutiny. You may wish to reply personally or
 arrange a P/S reply rather than a reply from officials. A draft is enclosed.


 Handling/presentational issues

 13.    No further issues at this stage.




                                              Peter Edmundson




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
Mr Trevor Hicks
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group




Thank you for your letter of 9 November about the difficulties which you say have
been experienced in obtaining material from South Yorkshire Police and others and
the need, therefore, to extend the timescale for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny.


As you know, I asked for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s advice on the issues which you
raised. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, has also written to me
after the contents of your letter were disclosed to him by the media.


I should make it clear that, having appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct this
scrutiny, the management of the scrutiny is entirely a matter for the Judge. Although I
indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be possible to
complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is ultimately a matter for
the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that if he reached the
conclusion that more time was needed to complete his work, this would certainly be
within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated to me that he
hopes to be able to keep to his original timescale for completion o f the report. I
understand that he has now written to you and other interested parties to confirm this.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he has been given full access to the
material held by South Yorkshire Police and that the force has co-operated throughout
his scrutiny. He has not seen any sign that the police are deliberately obstructing
requests for information from other parties. He has also expressed surprise that
difficulties should have been encountered in obtaining hospital records, (which are
held by the hospital, and not the police), if the request was made by a properly
authorised representative of the victim’s family.



f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
 In his letter to me, Richard Wells has indicated that the force has made every effort to
 respond to requests for information within the constraints of the Coroners’ Rules and
 considerations of witness confidentiality. He states that no family is waiting for all or
 part of a body file to be released, although the force is processing requests for
 photographs from two families having already supplied laser copies.


 From what I have been told by Richard Wells and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it appears
 that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be available for
 examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him, and that the
scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the Family Support
 Group and others.


The Judge has indicated that he would have arranged for the archive of material to be
removed from the South Yorkshire Police if there had been any doubt as to its
continuing integrity there, but that this was not his view. He does not, therefore,
consider it justifiable to incur the considerable logistical difficulties and costs
involved in such an operation.


You have also written to me about the scrutiny’s terms of reference. I will consider
the points you have raised and reply as soon as possible.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) CIMgt
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




HILLSBOROUGH

Thank you for your letter of 12 November commenting on the issues raised by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group about access to information held by your force. It
was very helpful to have your views on the issues raised by the Family Support
Group.


I enclose a copy of the reply which I have sent today to Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
Family Support Group. As you will see, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has confirmed to
me that he has not experienced any difficulties with access to information required for
his scrutiny and that he expects to complete his report by the end of the year.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
Colin Moneypenney Esq
Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party
Liverpool City Council
P 0 Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool L69 2DH




Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
Working Party in support of the Family Support Group’s request for the timescale of
the scrutiny to be extended.


Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is ultimately a
matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that if he decides
that more time is needed to complete his work, this would certainly be within his
discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated to me that he expects to
keep to his original timescale for completion of the report.


Trevor Hick’s letter expressed concern about access to information held by the South
Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he has been
given full access to the material held by the force and that the force has co-operated
throughout his scrutiny. From what I have been told by the Chief Constable of the
South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it appears that, for the purposes
of the scrutiny, all the material which should be available for examination by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him, and that the scrutiny has been able to
investigate fully the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.


The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the Scrutiny
will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence was
overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the consideration of



f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to recommend any other
action which should be taken in the public interest. His terms of reference are,
therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they will allow him to carry out a
full scrutiny of the evidence which has been submitted by the families and others.


As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of those
who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these meetings
fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report. I do, of
course, understand the distress caused by the Judge’s comment to Mr Phil Hammond.
The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this remark, which he made
off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it to be taken seriously. He has
made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not the subject of the Scrutiny.


I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in which
the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated before, I will
make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his report, and will take
whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence about the disaster has been
overlooked.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUT
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007


The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP       ( ?
                                                               Your reference:               -------
Home Secretary
Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                               Our reference:

                                ( \ r fwyv*.                  £)ate:       A y        November 1997

                                               e'\/V«, **     l| it-
                                                                  D nz .
                                                                            *■
                                                                                 P                     ____
                                                                                     RECEIVED 8 V
                                                                       '         I     2 * W T M97

                                                                                     HOMESECRETAHY
Thank you for your letter of 24 November about the conespondence you have had fiom the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire. I have as
you say seen copies of their letters.

I said soon after my appointment in the summer that I expected to be able to let you have my
report by the end of this year. My work on the scrutiny is well advanced and I believe that I
will be able to keep to this timetable. I am writing to the Family Support Group and other
interested parties to tell them this and to say that it would help me if they could let me have
any further material which they wish to present to me by Friday 5 December.

I have not experienced any difficulty with access to the information held by South Yorkshire
police. They have co-operated with my scrutiny throughout. I have as you say decided to
let this material remain in police custody in Sheffield rather than transport it to London
Bringing it here would have created formidable logistical difficulties. It would also have
meant that it was the scrutiny, rather than South Yorkshire police, who would have had to
respond to requests from the families and others for information from the archive That
would have seriously hampered me and my staff in the task which you have given us to do.

Nevertheless if I thought there was any question as to the continuing integrity of this material
I would have ensured that it was removed from South Yorkshire police custody. But I do not
think that.

Although this is not strictly speaking a matter for me I have also formed the view that the
police are doing all they can to ensure that the families and their support group receive the
information which they ask for. These requests are onerous but I have seen no sign that the
police are obstructing them.

When I was in Liverpool from 6 to 8 October a number of the families whom I met told me
that they did not have a copy of their relatives’ ‘body file’ from the police. I recommended
     J                   P°!1CC. for lt ,tl*i*ht away- 0ther people told me that they suspected
that the body file material which the police had sent them was incomplete. I asked them to
let me know what they had so that I could check, but in most cases they have not done so. In
the two cases where I have been able to check the material which a family has against the
actual body file I have found nothing o f significance missing.

Mr Hicks s letter mentions the medical records of the people who died at Hillsborough
These detail the treatment they received in hospital. Most of those who died did not go to
hospital and have no such medical record, but for those who did their medical record is held
by the hospital, not by the police. It is not part of the ‘body file’ (unlike the post-mortem or
autopsy report, which is part of the body file and which families who asked for this will have
seen).

Hospitals will release copies of the medical records of a person who has died to a properly
authorised personal representative, including of course a solicitor such as the solicitor who
acts for the Family Support Group. I have to say that I am slightly surprised that the Group
now say that they are denied access to them. I have as Mr Hicks says looked at the hospital
medical record of Philip Hammond, who died in the disaster. It is a one-page document
which contains no useful information at all.

Finally, I agree that it would be helpful for us to meet to discuss the publication of the
material which has been put to me during my scrutiny and I look forward to that.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
                                       The City of Liverpool
V
$                                      l'i i u i i n n ! A   \, lini ii i sl ni ! i ( i u Di rt t t n n i t c
                                      ^ •rR h o d ts^ H ta d o f Law & Committee Services
                                      Solicitor to th« Council
                                      PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                                      Tel: 0151-225 24&4 Fax: 0151-225 2427



                                                                                 to: Colin Moneypenny



    Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
    Home Secretary
    Home Office
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    LONDON
    SW1H 9AT                                                                                          Nove

    Dear Mr. Straw

    Hillsborough S c r u t i n y

    You will be aware from our ItfMftv.uJUQ" cuiiespondence, when I
    expressed the welcome of Liverpool City Council to your decision
    to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake a Scrutiny of V
    evidence related to the Hillsborough Disaster, that the City
    Council, through its Hillsborough Disaster Working Party has
    c°n5.4-?^?.Vs.
                 1y..,an4.,unanimously^supporte.d>her.Hillsb©rough families
    throughout their eight year quest for justice.

    I have now been requested by a recent meeting of the Working Party
    to write to you again to express the full support of this Council
    for the comments contained in the letter to you, dated 9th
    November, 1997, from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
    Family Support Group. The Council considers that in particular you
    should give serious consideration to responding positively to the
    requests made in that letter for you to extend the timescale of
    the Scrutiny to ensure that all the concerns of the families are
    properly and fully investigated and for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    to be allowed to take possession and control of all the
    documentation and evidence to ensure their integrity and their
    disclosure to all parties.

    In endorsing the above requests, the City Council feels that for
    you to act upon them would be entirely consistent with the
    comments made by you on 30th June stating that you were determined
    to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked-and that •
    you did not reach a conclusion without a full and independent
    examination of the evidence. The Council, as I have said, did
    support the announcement of the Scrutiny and was particularly re­
    assured by your comments, even though its own position at that
    time, was that sufficient reasons and sufficient cause for concern
    had already been demonstrated to justify the establishment of a
    new Inquiry into the Disaster.




                          Director o f Personnel <ft Administration: Ian Jones
                        Administration & Commercial Services; Human Resource Service;
              Information Technology Services; Law & Committee Services; Legal Services Agency;
                                    Public Relations & Information Service.
You should.be aware that ,Liyerpopi,wCity Council has now expressed
extreme dissatisfaction                                __   m __ g
** specxiic concern, I understand being expressed to you by the
Family Support Group, which is again shared by this Council, that
its terms of reference are so narrow that they prevent the
assessment of all the evidence which the families believe, in the
interests of justice, need to be assessed.

Furthermore I have been requested also to place on record the
extreme concern of this Council that the appalling remarks made by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - a reference to Liverpool fans arriving
late for which he subsequently apologised - prior to his meeting
with families on October 6th, do appear to indicate a severe lack
not only of judgement but more importantly of the impartiality
which should be the most crucial attribute necessary for ensuring
the independence of the judicial assessment he was appointed to
make.

While the City Council will await the outcome of the investigation
with great interest, there is no doubt there is a widespread
feeling, certainly amongst the Members of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party but also throughout the wider Merseyside
community, that the offensive"comments made by Mr. Stuart-Smith at
the Albert Dock, indicating a t 'least some pre-judgement of the
issues, may well have demonstrated that, in addition to the other
difficulties discussed above, he personally is not able to provide
the balanced and fully independent assessment of the evidence to -
which the Hillsborough families after all these years are surely
entitled.

I would be most grateful if you would be able to take on board all
of the above comments in considering your response to the letter
from Mr. Hicks and in determining the future progress of the
Scrutiny.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny ‘‘ s / V ----
Committee Clerk to t
                   theHillsborough
                     heHi
Disaster Working Party.
                                                                                                                              ^          R0%




             SUM^                                                                                                                 SUppQ^
                                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                              Cl                          S dc.
                                                                                                                 ^*-v ^ § eW t-
               Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
               Home Secretary
               Home Office
               SO Queen Anne’s Gate                                                                                       O   w   «~-n
               London
               SW1II 9AT
                                                      •p> I                                                               9* November 1997
                                                     J :       J —                                                      BY FAX AND POST ^

0               Dear Mr Straw,                       ^                                  p W        ^ . ^           ^                                   wU U u ,

                 re: Hillsborough Scrutiny A                           ft         ~     v U /^       ^          w 4 e    f»   U         £K *r{- S * * H

                 It is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your                                                      lfl /
                 intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement o f the scrutiny on the                                                     /,v
                 30* June the problems o f slow or non-disclosure of information by South Yorkshire Police
                 and others have continued, unabated.. It is o f such scale and regularity as to render any
                 arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f work totally untenable. We believe it is a
                 deliberate lactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
                 outcome o f the scrutiny.

                   We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
                   Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
                   our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our case are being thwarted.

                    You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that femilies expressed concern that custody
                    (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
                    Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
                    Rather than the spirit of “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
                    of ihe problems of the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

                     They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it. ^
                     li cannot he right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
                     or delay o f information.

                        I xamplcs o f the problems we are encountering are:-

                        l ; As Uiie as the ft* November we received four important photographs - they were requested
                        <>\.vr three months ago!!!


                                                                   V IC E -C IIA IR M A N / S K C R E T A R Y
                                                                                                                                  treasurer
(IIAIRMV'*                                                                                                                        Mrs. J. T rajm 'f
                                                                   I*. Iliiiniiiiinii
I Itl K
I “ I I I l l l l l I t M l.
                                                                   21 RiiwhiiiMR<*®J                                              4 3 G u n e fic M
                                                                                                                                  Birkenhead
                                                                                                                                                      R uad


tS>         I. I                I* •   i ->i   >                   Liven>J,|l                                                     Merseyside
  ....I...10' *'*'                                                 1.17 h f i \
                                                                                                                                  Tel   0 I 5 I - 6 J 2 7 M ).'
 ;      I .         :                                              Irl/I.(< 01M721S/M
                                                                   \|., t 1. I,'.*'! t H I ’ l                                          u AM
II      <i:   no   .10   l-v\   0I7J9   140002         TREVOR H I C K S




     2)Several families are still waiting to receive all or parts o f their loved ones “bodyfiles"

     3)On the 24* September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
     written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

     4)Medical records o f the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
     Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

     The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1* September but this had to be relaxed when it
     became clear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
     information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions im d-^tem ber and
     lodged others on the 25* September. Both o f those documents made itclcar that our efforts
     were being hampered by the painfully stow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

      Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn of the year” full consideration of newly
      disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part o f any deliberation or
      conclusion.

       It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession rod control o f all the
       documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and tonety drolosure to all
       parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families o f the deceased.

       We finther submit that it is now imperative that you extendthe timescale
       tbeir proper consideration by the Judge ifthe scrutiny is to be accepted by the ta ih e s and the
       public as fur and exhaustive.

        All o f us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the ta llie s N p tee
        you to introduce a one or two mouth extension to the ttaescale to ensure all our concerns can
        be properly investigated and“scrutinised”. It is the ta llie s view t h a t j t o ^ w t o c to r e
        for J f c c to be done aDd clearly it must be “seal to be done properly” tf fod. m t e judraal
        process is to be regained by the many thousands o f votes who wrote to you, attended *
        justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

         We stall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
         Tw ^^f              you have«t down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also grve
         rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

          Yours sincerely,



          Trevor Hicks
          Chairman. - TfFSG
