                                                                                                \ t cU y \\   £A/'   CC.

                                T H E S U M M I T G R O U P PLC
           49 PALL M ALL, L O N D O N SW1Y 5JG. TE LEPH O N E 01-930 7682. TELEX 296816. FACSIM IL]




16th May 1989

Mr. R.M. Whalley
                                                                                         ce T-vf        /
Secretary to the Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry
Room 662                                                                                    N, JvSKo<^ x
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
Dear Mr. Whalley,
I am writing to you in connection with the enquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster by Lord Justice Taylor.
I understand that the Enquiry's terms of reference include the possibility
of making recommendations on all aspects of            crowd safety at football
matches. In this regard, much has been said in Parliament and in the Press
about the potential impact on safety of the Government's proposed Football
Spectators Bill, with its requirements for a national membership scheme.
The Summit Group pic for and on behalf of The General Electric Company pic
has made     proposals to the Football authorities for this scheme based on
the GF.C's_                Smart Card technology.        We believe that an
understanding of this technology and how it could work would assist an
appreciation by the Enquiry of the effect on crowd safety of a membership
scheme based on GEC's technology. Our submission is that not only would a
scheme based on this technology not have a negative impact on safety, but
under certain circumstances could even enhance it.
The Smart Card itself contains a micro-computer with a large re-usable
memory, surrounded by an aerial.       Its circuits are powered by magnetic
induction when the card is placed in any orientation (upside down even)
over a "reader" which emits an inductive radio frequency.     The card itself
is exceptionally secure and robust, and information stored within it can
be protected from any unauthorised reader.
The main areas which appear to us as relevant to safety are the following:
1.   Speed of entry through the turnstiles
     Much has been made of the undesirability of big queue build-ups
     outside grounds at turnstiles in the minutes before kick-off, while
     cards are checked. This is an understandable concern with conventional
     cards which must be passed to the turnstile operator and/or inserted
     into a slot to be electronically read, adding several seconds to each
     spectator's entry.
     GEC's Smart Card however permits entry to the ground at least as fast
     as at present, if not faster.   The card simply requires to be placed
     by the spectator, in any orientation onto a reader.   This reader is a
     totally sealed unit with no moving parts which can therefore be
     accessed directly by the spectator without fear of its being
     vandalised.




       A GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY, P.L.C. AND BRITISH & COMMONWEALTH HOLDINGS PLC ASSOCIATEDCOMPANY
                       REGISTERED OFFICE AS ABOVE, REGISTERED IN ENGLAND & WALES 2231277
The card produces an almost instantaneous response (estimated 0.1 of a
second) activating a valid entry light. An invalid card would produce
an equally quick response to alert a police officer or club steward,
who would usually question the spectator inside the ground after he
has passed through the turnstile.
Combined ticketing and identification checks
Since each card has a secure large, re-usable memory it can be
programmed for pre-paid entry for any number of matches from one up to
a season-ticket.      On placing the card on the reader, this data is
automatically read within the same time as the membership details,
permitting    entry   faster   than would be    possible  with  manual
verification of conventional ticket vouchers or collection of cash by
turnstile operators as at present.
Such a combined ticketing system whose relevant information was stored
electronically within the card, would have the added advantages that
tickets    could   not   be    touted  or transferred without   proper
authorisation.   Thus fans would not travel to all-ticket matches in
the hope of acquiring a ticket at the gates and possibly cause trouble
outside the ground if unable to do so.
Crowd management and segregation
The Smart Card's electronic memory can also be used to store not only
details of the Club with which a football supporter wishes to be
affiliated (if any) but also a class of membership, supporters' club
etc. This facility can be used to ensure segregation between home and
away fans if desired, as well as controlled access to specific
enclosures within the ground set aside for such membership groups.
Once again, on GEC's Smart Card such information is read automatically
within the same fraction of a second as the membership and ticket
details, avoiding delay caused by other access control procedures
presently in use such as cards requiring visual checks, or cards/keys
which are inserted into slots.
This segregation control can be quickly and easily altered at each
ground before each match by club officials in consultation with the
local police, if required, on a turnstile by turnstile basis.
Control of numbers within confined areas
Using the GEC system the number of cardholders passing through each
turnstile is automatically recorded and cumulative totals for each
ground sector relayed continuously to the police room. Provided
turnstiles are arranged to permit entry only to suitably limited and
secure spectator areas, the numbers entering each such area can be
monitored and access to that area closed when it becomes full.
For all-ticket matches, tickets electronically entered on membership
cards could be issued for only the numbers of spectators that can be
safely accommodated in each ground area.      Thus, provided that each
turnstile is clearly marked according to which ticket holders will be
allowed access through it, overcrowding can be avoided even without
requiring all-seater stadia.
5.   System failures
     Concern has been expressed as to the effect on crowd management and
     behaviour of a computer breakdown in the immediate pre-match period.
     Each turnstile using GEC's Smart Card can operate completely
     indepedently of all other turnstiles and of the       club and national
     central computers, being backed up by emergency battery power if power
     supplies are interrupted.    All required information is stored at each
     turnstile should the club/central computer    go down or the connection
     be broken.
     At worst, a breakdown in card-reading equipment at any one turnstile
     should render that single turnstile inoperative for only a matter of
     minutes, until a replacement unit could be installed in its place, an
     unskilled operation capable of being quickly and easily carried out.
6.   Ability to read cards away from grounds
     GEC's Smart Card can be securely read by a properly authorised person
     using a battery powered hand-held reader at points where spectators
     might congregate before or on the way to a match. Thus police officers
     or club officials could check cards and tickets for all-ticket matches
     for example at coach departure points, railway stations or ferry
     terminals, or at whatever place outside the ground the police thought
     appropriate and dissuade individuals who did not have a valid ticket
     and/or membership card from travelling     to the match ground and
     possibly causing trouble outside it.
There are many other features of GEC's proposed system which enable it to
work securely, economically and effectively to meet the requirements of
the national membership scheme as well as for the benefit of individual
clubs and football as a whole. A fully working prototype system has been
built and could be shown to the Enquiry if so desired to demonstrate the
safety features referred to above.
Alternatively we would be glad to give evidence to the Enquiry on these
issues should Lord Justice Taylor so wish.

Yours sincerely.



J. D. KAFHAtSLY
