INQUIRY     INTO      THE      HILLSBOROUGH
                                                 2
       STADIUM               DISASTER




                     Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                       and

               PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                       At

                 The Town Hall,

                  Sheffield,

                       on

          Thursday, 22nd June, 1989




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Afternoon Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                     (Afternoon Session)


G. KIRTON Recalled

     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow (Cont)
     Cross-Examined by Mr. woodward
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Dyson

W. EASTWOOD Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins
                      TWENTY-SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                         THURSDAY,    22nd JUNE,      1989

                             (AFTERNOON SESSION)

                           GLEN KIRTON,       re-called

                Cross-examined       by HR.    GLAS GO W   (Cont.):

         MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, the one matter which I was going
   to trouble Mr. Kirton with further we have now r es o lv e d on
   the d ocuments and if you will forgive me it will save a
   lot more time if I give you the d o cu me nt s and then I need
   not take the F.A. through them.

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:      Yes.

        MR. GLASGOW:    We are now able to prod uc e the d o cu me nt s
   relating to the return of unsold tickets in 1988 and insofar
   as they are i mportant we thought it right that you should
   have the p recise figures.   (H a n d e d )

             Sir, while Mr. Kirton is in the box, he is, I think,
   the only other F.A. man who may be able to help, you will
   see that one is the returned invoice, a S h ef fi el d Wedn es da y
   d oc um en t in two halves.        It is phoftcopied so that the
   reverse is on the back, which shows the total of 895 and
   22 at separate prices which is 917 tickets in total returned
   by N ot ti n g h a m Forest.    I h asten to concede, of course,
   that these are not figures th&t are of any great moment
   and I accept that but they are the a c cu ra te ones.         The
   other one is the Liverpo ol Foot ba ll Club, some wh at
   s u r p r is in gl y  they retu rn ed 220, and I am sure that will
   come as a comfort ---           Oh, he is so overcome, my friend
   Mr. Jackson, that he has depar te d to comp os e himself.

          LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:      He has     found    it too e m ba r ra s si n g I

         MR. GLASGOW:        We all have that e xp er i en c e        at times -
    I more often than      not.

Q. Mr. Kirton, there is one lasf matter, may I just put it
   to you simply so that you can have the a cc ount of the
   c o n v e r s a t i o n which Mr. M ac kr el l believes took place,
   and may I - d espite my obvious hostility, for which I
   regret the e m b a r r a s s m e n t but you will a p p r ec i at e that
   I am not c h a l l e ng in g your honesty about the c o nv e r s a t i o n s
   but I have put it to you that you are conf us ed about
   two separate c on ve r s a t i o n s and that that is what led to
   this m i s u n d e r s t a n d i n g and I hope you will u nd er s ta n d
   that it is me putting it to you, not Mr. Wackrell.                        His
   u n d e r st an di ng is, his r e co l le c ti o n is that there was
   indeed a c on v e r s a t i o n bet ween you and him at about quarter
   past or twenty past two at a time when there would indeed
   have been 15,000 or 20,000 people to come in to the ground.
   M,ay I ask you, do you now recall that you did speak to him
   at about that time, if I can help you, shortly after you
                                  63

                                                             G. K I R T O N

     came down from luncheon.   Does that help?           A.   I
     have been giving what you say c o ns i de r ab l e thought but my
     honest answer has to be that I do not recall that
     conversation.

Q.   Sobeit.       I am p u t t i n g to y ou e se c on d ly that there was
     indeed a c o n v e r s a t i o n at about the time you say - I am
     talking in very round figures - at about a quarter to
     three when you and he were a p pr oa ch ed by anot he r Club
     officer.       Do you r eme mb er that, by           any chance, on the
     p e rimet er?    A.        No, I do not.

Q.   It may be important, Mr. Kirton, b ec ause we may hear from
     somebody else that this was a Club officer who came up
     to both of you in order to tell Mr. M a ck re ll that there
     had been an entry into the ground at another point.
     Does that ring any bells at all?    A.     No, I am afraid it
     does not.

Q.   I think I should put to you I am not s u gg es ti ng that you
     heard the c on v e r s a t i o n about the brea ki ng in of fans or
     the entry through Gate C because, to be precise, Mr.
     M ac kr e l l ' s r ec o l l e c t i o n is that he took this man on one
     side to talk to him about that just out of your hearing
     but that what you wo uld have heard was Mr. M ac k re l l asking
     that man w hether or not there was capac it y in the ground
     for people outside and being assured that there was.
     A.      No, sir, I do not recall that.

Q.   Sobeit.   Those are the two c o n v e r sa t io n s   that   I wanted
     to put to you.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        As you are p u tt in g that,
     app ro ac he d by whom?

           MR.   GLASGOW:     By Mr.   Lock.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   And that entry had been gained
     at another point - what does thBt mean?

          MR. GLASGOW:   I am sorry, I mean entry had been gained
     at a point that they were not looking at, in other words what
     we have called Gate C.

           LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:     I see.

          MR. GLASGOW:    But I stress, sir, I hope not unnecess ar il y,
     it is not s uggested that the Football A s s oc i at i on knew of
     that entry at that time, and that is important, I am sure.

                     Cross-examined      by MR.   WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Kirton, you made, in order to have it clear, a tape
   note of your r e c o l l ec ti o n of the events and you did that
   really at the first opp or t un i ty you got to sit down and
   gather it a l to ge th er ?      A.   Yes, on the Sunday, the day
   following the match.
m   ( s t y


                                              64

                                                                 G. K I R T O N

              Q. When you made that note, you had a clear r e c o l l e ct i on
                 of a c o n v e r sa ti on at about 2.40 p.m., twenty to three,
                 with Mr. Mackrell.           No doubt about it?   A.   That is
                 correct.

              Q. A ccording to your t ra ns cr ip t - because this is what it is
                 is it not, that we have before us - you said this, "It
                 was clearly nowhere near full at this stage.        Graham
                 told me that there were 20,000 still outside.         C al ling
                 to mind the 1987 Semi- Fi na l s at Villa Park and H i l l s b or o ug h
                 when k i c k -o ff both had been delayed at the requ es t of
                 the Police, I asked Graham whether on this occa si on the
                 Police wanted a delay."         You nod;  is that your firm
                 r ec ol le ct io n of what was said?   A.   Yes.

              Q.   You asked him at twenty to three whether or not a d elay
                   was wanted and w hether it was the Police that w an te d it.
                   A.   Yes.

              Q.   And he a nswered   that.   A.     He did.

              Q.    And to the best of your recollection, did he a ppear          to
                   u nderstand what you were talking about?     A.    Yes.

              Q.    And did he say to you that     they did not? A.     That      is
                   my recollection.

              Q. Did he use the phrase, "They did not"         or     "We do not"?
                 A.   No, "They did not."

              Q. And, of course, if there had been any c o n v e r s at i on with
                 Mr. M ackrell at 2.15 that would not have been a time for
                 c on si de ri ng putting off the kick off, would it?
                 A.      No, it would not.




                                                /It w ould have been.
                          65

                                             G. KIRTON

Q. It would have been rather early?   A. fhe nature of the
   conversation wouldn't have taken place at 2.15 because
   one would have expected the ground to be reasonably
   unfilled at that stage.

Q. Are you able to recall what Mr. Mackrell was wearing that
   day?   A. I believe he was wearing a grey, double-breasted
   suit.

Q. Was Mr. Mackrell carrying a radio?   A.   Yes.

Q. Do you recall seeing a Club official with a radio wearing
   a blazer at about this time, 2.40?   A, Not specifically,
   no. Obviously I had seen Club officials during the course
   of the day at all times, but not specifically at this time.

Q. Involved in this conversation that you had with Mr. Mackrell,
   was it just you and Mr. Mackrell or was there^anybody
   else in attendance?   A. In the conversation it was just
   myself and Mr. Mackrell.  As I said earlier, there were
   a lot of people around, particularly photographers.

Q. Do you know a Mr. David Alexander Cannon, a company director
   of All Sports /UK? A. Yes, I do.

Q. He is a gentleman who is known personally to you?     A. Yes,
   he is.

Q. According to a statement that has been supplied to us by
   the Inquiry, Mr. Cannon too has a recollection*6f a Club
   official speaking to you on the question of the number of
   people who were in the ground or not in the ground.    May
   I read to you what he says:   "I became engaged in
   conversation with Glen Kirton.   I think he is the
   Assistant Secretary to the F.A.   I would consider Mr.
   Kirton as a friend and colleague.'* Do you remember talking
   to Mr. Cannon that day?   A. Yes, I recall speaking to him
   and a number of other photographers, not specifically in
   relation to this particular time.

Q. But this would be round about the tunnel, would it, where
   you spoke to him? A. Yes.

Q. "After a few minutes of conversation with Mr. Kirton, a
   ground official carrying a walkie-talkie came up to us.
   I don't know this man's name but he was smartly dressed
   in a dark coloured blazer" - and that would not be Mr.
   Mackrell if your description of Mr. Mackrell's clothing
   is right - "collar and tie. The ground official in my
   presence and hearing said to Mr. Kirton *1 think we still
   have between 15,000 and 20,000 people outsilfie the ground'.
   Mr. Kirton replied, *Well, do you want to delay the kick-
   off?"*  So this is the photographer, Mr. Cannon, overhearing
   a conversation that you were having with somebody . There
   was a discussion between you and a Club official, whether
   it was Mr. Mackrell or somebody else, over the question of
   whether or not the kick-off should be delayed?     A. Yes.
                          66


                                             G. KIRTON

Q. And you wese asking the Club whether the kick-off would
   be delayed - is that right?   A.  I was asking Mr. Macteefell
   for information as to whether the police were likely to
   ask for a delay.

Q. According to Mr. Cannon's statement from which I was reading,
   the official, who is the gentleman with the blazer
   according to the context, said "I don't think it will
   be necessary".  Do you remember that being said? A. No.
   I recall Mr. Mackrell responding to the question, "No";
   not an official with a blazer.

Q. At that stage did Mr. Mackrell seem to be concerned about
   the build up of the fans or the absence of filling of any
   particular place in the ground?   A. No, no concern was
   expressed.

Q. Did the impression you have in the course of that
   conversation amount to this - that there was confidence
   that the crowd could be got in?    A. Yes.  Mr. Mackrell
   did not say that he was confident the crowd could be got
   in by kick-off time.  My question was, as I have said,
   were the police going to ask for a delay, and he said "No” .

Q. Of course, trying to recall these events now is difficult
   and even to have done it immediately afterwards.  An awful
   lot had passed through the consciousness?   A. Yes.

Q. Making things awkward.  But we have before us a statement
   from Mr. l»ock. Do you know Mr. Lock? A. Yes, I do.

Q. Do you recall seeing Mr. Lock at any time that afternoon?
   A. Yes, I recall seeing Mr. Lock on several occasions.

Q. Did you see him in the vicinity of the tunnel at any time -
   the players' tunnel?   A. Not specifically, I'm afraid.

Q. You do not remember that?   A.   No.

Q. There is evidence that there was a time when Mr. Lock was
   near the mouth of the tunnel, the players' entrance, and
   that words to this effect were passed - that he said
   "It's all fieM down at Leppings Lane end;  it's all hell
   out there". Were you present at any time when that was
   said?   A. No, I was not.

Q. According to Mr. Lock's statement - sir, it is page 15 -
   Mr. Lock, who had been to the control room, ran back through
   the players' tunnel.  Using his personal radio to speak to
   Mr. Stuart Thorpe, he ran into Graham Mackrell and someone
   hfe knows as Glen Kirton, an F.A. official and told you
   and Mr. Mackrell that the Police had opened the gates at
   Leppings Lane end of the ground.  Do you follow? A. I do.

Q. This is before anybody has been up to the control room.
   If Mr. Lock says that, how does that accord with your
   recollection?   A. I do not recall him saying that in my
   presence.
                                              G. KIRTON

His statement continues, "Grafaam responded to the effect
'Can we get them in? Are we to capacity?1 and M r . Lock
responded that we were not". Do you follow?     A. I do.

You see, there is a similarity in the subject matter between
this conversation that Mr. Lock is  speakingof and some
of the things that you recall, a similarity in the view
that people would be got in - do you follow?    A. Yes.

This account   that Mr. Lock gives, could it be a part of
the whole of   the conversation that you were having with
Mrk Mackrell   discussing delaying the game?   A. No. My
recollection   is that the conversation was with Graham
Mackrell and   Graham Mackrell alone.

You went up to the control room eventually?    A.   Yes.

When you did, you were accompanied by Mr. Kelly and Mr.
Mackrell? A. That's correct.

Did you all get into the control room? A. To the best of
my recollection we did, yes? certainly Graham Kelly and
myself, and I believe Graham Mackrell was behind.

Did you know that by that time Mr.    Mackrellhad been down
to Gate C?   A. No, I did not.

You speak of your attention being drawn to a television
monitor?   A. Yes.

Of course, there is a bank of monitors there. Were they
all running?   A. To the best of my recollection, they
were all on, yes.

I suppose you are not able to say what each of them showed?
A. No.




                               /Q.   But they were all
X.                               68

                                           G. KIRTON


     Q. But they were all showing pictures as viewed by the
        individual cameras? - A. Yes.

     Q. Would it be right to say that when your attention was
        drawn to a video screen, you only looked at it very
        quickly? - A. Yes, that is correct.

     Q.   And in answer to Mr. Phillips you agreed that it was a
          frozen picture.  Are you really able to say that? - A.
          That is the impression that I got. What I said was there
          was no movement on the pitch.

     Q.   Of course if it was a view of a gateway and nobody was
          moving about, no pigeons or pieces of paper fluttering
          around that would give the same impression? - A. Yes.

     Q. You are sure that your attention was drawn to a monitor?
        - a . Yes, Mr. Kelly's attention was drawn to the monitor
        and I was witness to that.

     Q. And Mr. Mackrell was a witness or there with you? - A.I
        believe he was behind me.

     Q. Gate C had not been broken as we know.   It had not been
        forced or damaged.  Do you recall whether at that time
        notwithstanding what was being said by Mr. Duckenfield,
        whether Mr. Mackrell said:  "Well I have just been down^
        there, just been to it, nothing was broken"? - A. I don t
        recall Mr. Mackreil saying such a thing.

     Q. You recall no comment by Mr. Mackrell to what was being
        said in the Control Box? - A. I recall no comment.

     Q. May I move to another matter.  It is right, isn't it,
        that following these awful events that afternoon, in the
        immediate aftermath a number of people came to you and
        attributed the cause of it to a shortage of tickets? -
        A. No, nobody came to me.  I heard those comments made by
        a number of supporters.

     Q. The common view being expressed by many that you heard
        was that the fault was a shortage of tickets? - A. Yes.

     Q. And that in some manner that was the explanation for what
        had occurred? - A. Yes.

     Q. There was a time when you had a word with Mr. Rogan Taylor
        wasn't there that afternoon? - A. That is correct.

      Q. Do you remember what time that was? - A. I believe it was
         in the area of 4 o'clock.

      Q. At that time round about 4 o'clock was it being said to
         you that the explanation for this event was that a gate
         had been opened by the Police? - A. Yes.
                         69
                                     G. KIRTON


Q. So whatever had been said to you in the Control Room within
   the hour you were having reports or accounts from other
   sources to indicate that the Police had opened the gate?
   - A. Yes.
Q. May I move to another matter on the question of tickets or
   people without tickets.

         Were you at the Wembley this year? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. Did you yourself observe any determined effort by people
   without tickets to get in? - A. Yes, I did on one occasion.

Q. What was that? - A. This was shortly after the kick-off
   when I was in the Royal Tunnel area of Wembley Stadium
   and I had to go from there up into the Stands and my route
   was blocked by a door that would not open. I was with an
   Official from Wembley Stadium who was in the same position
   and we decided that the only way to get where we wanted
   to get was to go out of the ground and in through another
   entry, so we went to the nearest exit from the area that
   we were in and the Steward on this particular door opened
   the door to allow the Wembley Official to go through. He
    stepped through and before I could follow there was a
   press of Liverpool supporters pushing up against the door
   trying to force their way in. The Steward just managed to
   get it closed in time.

Q. This was not a recognised entrance/exit for supporters?
   - A. It was the Royal Tunnel entrance.

Q. When the door was opened did you see how many people were
   out there? - A. I saw a pack of people. It would be wrong
   of me to try to guess how many altogether, but I could
   see at least two dozen.
Q. Were you able to draw any conclusion as to what team they
   supported? - A. I have said they were Liverpool supporters
   and the answer why I thought they were is that they were
   wearing red and white favours some of them. Th€8?e may
   have been Everton supporters amongst them also. I could
   not swear that there weren't.
Q. From what you observed did they appear to be very determined
   in their efforts? - A. Yes, they were attempting to force
   entry.
         MR. COLLINS: Sir, if it helps Mr. Woodward and
   everyone, we have a report from the Metropolitan Police
   upon the Cup Final following up the report in The Times.
   It will be circulated.  I confess I thought it already
   had been.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I have had it.
                          70

                                      G. KIRTON


        MR. COLLINS:  You have had it sir, everyone else
  will if they have not already, and the effect of it is
  that there is clear evidence of a number of Liverpool
  fans coming to the ground with the intention of forcing
  their way in. That is the purport of the report and as
  I say so that my friend need not develop this too hard
  that will go in.

        MR. WOODWARD:  I am grateful for that.  Sir, we
  were not aware that this piece of information had been
  put in. This is at another place.

        MR. COLLINS:  This is why I rose when I did after
  he had dealt with this one.

        MR. WOODWARD:   This is at a separate part of the
  Stadium.

        MR. COLLINS:    Certainly.

        MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you.   Thank you sir.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. DYSON:

Q. Mr. Kirton, going back to the question of the Cup Final.
   Can you tell us how many tickets were distributed to the
   two competing Clubs for that match? - A. They had
   approximately 37,000 each.

Q. Just one or two miscellaneous questions, if I may.  First
   of all so far as the transcript of your tape which you
   compiled on the Sunday after the match is concerned, is
   it right to say that this proof is actually the transcript
   or is it a reflection of the transcript? - A. It is a
   reflection.

Q. May I ask you how it was that you could remember that
   it was at around 2.40 p.m. that this conversation took
   place? - A. My recollection is that when Graham said
   that there was still much space in the Stadium, I looked
   at my watch to see how near to kick-off time that we were.

Q. We have seen the evidence of the Returned tickets from
   the 1988 semi-final.  Are you able to help us as to whether
   any tickets were returned for the 1989 semi-final? - A.
   No sir, I am not.

Q. Can you help us as to whether from your   general knowledge
   of football the degree of support which   Nottingham Forest
   has attracted this year is greater than   or the same as it
   was last year? - A. No sir, I could not   tell you that
   figure exactly.
Q* Perimeter fencing.  Can you please tell us what the arrange­
   ments for perimeter fencing were at the Old Trafford match
bx   ■
                                   71
                                              G. KIRTON


           at which this unfortunate Liverpool/Nottingham Forest
           match was actually played several days after the disaster?
           - A. The ground at Old Trafford is completely fenced.
           The fences remained in place and the exit gates to the
           fences were left open throughout the game.

         Q. Were they manned by anybody? - A. Yes, they were.

         Q. Do you know by whom? - A. By! the League, by Club Stewards.

         Q. The only other matter Mr. Kirton I would like to ask you
            about is the favourite subject of pre-match entertainment.

                   First of all speaking on behalf of the F.A., what
            is the F.A.'s attitude to the idea of curtain-raiser
            matches? - A. We believe that they are an excellent idea.
            There are, however, serious administrative problems with
            them, not the least of which is the tendency of professional
            Football Clubs these days, especially on big occasions, for
            their players to want to have a warm-up on the field.    This
            invariably for a 3 o'clock kick-off would mean that the
            fifeld was likely to be wanted by the players of both sides
            any time between the periods 2.10 through to 2.45.




                               /Q. I think everybody knows ...
                                              G KIRTON


Q. I think everybody knows that at the Final there is pre-match
   entertainment, as there was this year. Would you please
   describe any difficulties that you experienced over the desire
   of the competing clubs to have warm ups during the period when
   you had arranged for pre-match entertainment? - A. Yes, sir,
   at 2.15 on FA Cup Final day I was told that Liverpool Football
   Club were proposing to send their players on to the field for
   a warm up at 2.30, which was almost exactly the time when
   Gerry Marsden would be singing "You'll never walk alone".   The
   clubs had been informed beforehand that the pitch was not
   available for warm ups, and Liverpool who had been there the
   previous year knew the drill at Cup Finals.  I went to the
   dressing room and told Mr. Dalglish that his players could not
   go out, and he told me words to the effect, "Never mind, they
   are going out anyway". I arranged for the Chairman of
   Liverpool and the Chairman of Everton Football Club to come
   down to the players' tunnel, and they persuaded managers of
   both clubs that their players should not go out.   I
   subsequently learned that three Liverpool players had been on
   the verge of coming on to the pitch at 2.35, when they had to
   be physically restrained by one of the FA officials.

Q. And so Gerry Marsden was able to proceed unimpeded, was he? -
   A . He was.

Q. What about the recent match of Chile against England? I think
   you had some pre-match entertainment arranged for that? - A.
   Yes, we did. We had a women's international match England
   -v- Sweden which was scheduled to kick off at 6 o'clock, with
   the main match kicking off at 8 o'clock.  The game was
   publicised as such, and as late as 15 to 20 minutes before the
   end of the women's game I would say there were less than 1,000
   people in the stadium.

Q. Finally, can you speak about the experience abroad at all? -
   A. Yes, I have travelled with the England team overseas
   practically every match they have played since 1978.  I
   suppose I have seen 50 or 60 international matches.  There is
   invariably musical entertainment before the game. This may be
   Tannoy or a band.  I can count the number of other occasions
   when there has been other pre-match entertainment I think on
   the fingers of one hand.  I can recall offhand two curtain
   raiser football matches.

Q. I said "finally".  There is one other matter.  Would you be
   kind enough to take the core bundle and go to page 294. This
   is a letter under cover of which the current memorandum was
   distributed to the clubs.  Is it right you had a part in the
   drafting of the memorandum? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. And the letter? - A. No, I did not draft the letter, just the
   memorandum.

Q. And one sees in the last paragraph of the letter that
   recipients are asked to study the memorandum in great detail
   and failure to act on any of the recommendations may be taken
   into account should a club subsequently be charged with
>1

                                  73

                                                       G KIRTON


          misconduct under Rules 23 and 24. - A . Yes.

     Q.   Is that in fact what happens, that is to say that a failure to
          comply with a recommendation does not automatically mean that
          a club will be charged with misconduct, but may be taken into
          account? - A. That is correct.  The memorandum is intended as
          a recommendation to the clubs as to what measures should be
          taken, and they are informed that the Football Association may
          in the case of a charge being brought against the club take
          failure to act upon those recommendations into account.

     Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What about 299(1)(i)? - A. I think
       . that paragraph says exactly what I have just said.

     Q.   It says a bit more than that, does not it? "May in itself
          lead to such a charge"? - A. Yes, it does indeed.

     Q.   Is that acted upon? - A. I can recall no case where it hasled
          to a charge against the club.

               MR. DYSON:     Thank you very much.

               MR. COLLINS:     I call Dr. Eastwood, please.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Glasgow, I have Just this
          moment received what seems to be another small bundle of
          documents. Does it come from the club?

               MR. GLASGOW:   It is an explanation offered of the way in
          which the drawing with the marks on the bottom came to be
          forwarded to the local authority.

               MR. TOULSON:    You asked me the origin of the second
          drawing in Eastwood's statement, the one which has the
          separate 1,200   and 1,000. Would it assist you, sir, if I gave
          you the answer   now or would you rather take it from the
          witness, or left to a later stage?

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I don't mind.  Whichever way you
          prefer.  I have just had this handed to me. I was told it was
          from the club.    In fact, you have produced it.

               MR. TOULSON:   It shows the origin of the document.
          Having raised the point may I deal with it shortly.  Do you
          have Dr. Eastwood's statement there, sir? You will find at
          the end of his statement immediately after the yellow divider
          there is a schedule of job numbers, the files relating to
          which were passed to the Police.  The plan you were asking
          about starts with the number 8945, which corresponds with a
          job number you will find on page 2 about two-thirds of the way
          down, "Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, anti-hooliganism
          requirements, 13th March, 1987". On the next page, page 3,
          there is a heading, "List of jobs which may be relevant to
          work at Leppings Lane end", and then halfway ....

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     "Nothing relevant".
                                           G KIRTON


     MR. TOULSON:   Exactly.  It was thought there was nothing
relevant, but it clearly was from that file this drawing must
have come.  The file has been got, and those documents are the
file. What they show in short is this.   It begins with the
club writing to Dr. Eastwood on 10th March enclosing a copy of
the League's proposals for implementation of the membership
scheme and asking for his comments.  The next page sets out to
all clubs information about the proposed membership scheme,
the essence of which was, really in paragraph 1 of the first
page, that clubs were going to be required to designate
membership areas to which only members would be admitted, and
they were to cover at least 50% of the ground's capacity, and
clubs were also going to be asked to supply certain
information, a schedule to the letter, which starts two pages
further on under the heading, "Local plans".  The first of
those is a ground plan:  "Submit architect's plan of stadium",
etc., etc.

     Dr. Eastwood's reply came three pages from the end of the
bundle, 13th March, 1987, in which he sets out his comments,
and shortly suggests that the South Stand and the Kop should
be designated for members who would comfortably exceed the 50%
requirement.  There is a misprint, I don't think it matters,
five lines from the bottom of the page, where it says, "The
North-West corner of the Kop holds only 2,900 people". The
words "of the Kop" should be deleted.  They are in error.

     The next page he offers, the penultimate page in the
bundle, and says:

     "Turning to the items in the document headed 'Local
     Plans', I think you will need help from us on the
     following items:  (1) Ground Plan, we will prepare".




                      /It would appear
(%' V V>£

                                             75




                 It would appear by i nferenc e that they were taken up
                 by the Club on Item (1) but not others b ec au se the docu me nt
                 immed ia te ly pre ce di ng that, four pages from the end of the
                 bundle, is a letter of 29th April to Mr. Mackrell:        "As
                 r equested on Tuesday, 28th April we have p le a su r e in e nclosing
                 two prints of our drawing" and that is the drawing.

                      The last d ocume nt in the bundle is only included
                 simply for c om p l e t e n e s s because it is the c om pl et e file but
                 it has no relevance.

                       LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:        Thank you.

                                      WI L FR E D EASTWOOD,    called

                                      E xam in ed   by MR.   COLLINS:

            Q. Dr. Eastwood, so far as your s t at em en t is c on c er n ed that,
               of course, has been circulated, as you a pp re c ia t e and I
               am not going to take you t hr ough all of it, I am simply
               going to ask you about parts of it but the s ta t em e nt itse lf
               can be treated as your evidence, in effect.              Can I just
               follow up, as we have been dealing with it, the m atter that
               was raised and the figures of 1200 and 1,000 on those pens.
               Can you recall how they came to be put on the plan that was
               pro du ce d?    A.   I cannot recall but I have asked the
               d raf ts ma n who prepared the plan this l u n c h- t im e and he
               asked John Strange, an a ss oc ia te in my firm, how should
               this 2,200 be split up and the answer is he was told
               1200 and 1,000 and I have no k n ow le dg e - I had no k nowledge
               of that.

            Q. Do you know how Mr. Strange came to pluck those figures,
               as it were?   A.  He plucked those figures, I suspect.

            Q.   You mean --- ?  A.    He knew the figure 2,200.         He saw that
                 a no-man's land had b ee n .c r ea t ed at one side and decided,
                 "Well, we will give the 1200 to one side and not the other."

            Q. Because, as you I think now a p pr ec ia te from the figures
               that have been given to us by the Health & Safety Executive,
               not only was the 2,200 wrong but on the m e a s u r e m e n t s the
               1200 and 1,000 are clearly wrong.        A.   I a po lo gi se
               most sincerely.   I did not realise that this drawing was
               going to do these rounds and be so m i s le a di n g to all, sir.

                      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   When you say "wrong", Mr.
                 Collins, you mean as against what is s u gg es te d ---

            Q.        MR. COLLINS:      As against the 54, beca us e that was
                 the crit er io n you were using, was it not, the Green Guide,
                 54/10 square metres.      A.   Yes.

            Q.   I may have to come back to that later but that expl ai ns
                 how those figures came to be on that plan.   A.   Yes.
a3 f
  -




                                        76

                                                                   W. E A S T W O O D


       Q.   It does not appear to have been done p a rt i cu l ar l y
            s c i e n t i f i c a l l y or m at hemat ic al ly . A. No, not at all.

       Q.    Let me come back to the beginning, Dr. Eastwood.                     You
            are, as you say, C hairma n of your firm, E a st wo od              & Partners,
            C onsult ing Engineers, which you founded in 1972;                   is that
              right?    A.   Yes.

       Q. And you had some c o n s i d e ra b le experience, I think, with
          football grounds and design of football grou nd s generally.
          A.   Design of football ground structures.

       Q.    S truct ure s and so on, yes.          I think you W er e also concerned,
            I am looking at P aragraph 5 of your statement, with the
            Working Party to advise the Whea tl ey C om mi s si o n in c on ne c ti o n
            with the i nv es t i g a t i o n arising out of the Ibrox Disaster.
            A.    That is so.

       Q. And you say that         the Working Party spent a day with you
          disc us si ng safety     at football stadia.          Was that because
          at that time you         had a cert ai n expe rt is e in these m a tt er s?
          A.    Yes.

       Q.    What exp er ie nc e had you had then?       A.   At that time I
            was the M a n a gi ng Partner of H us band & Co., C o n s u l t i n g
            Engineers, who also had c o n s i d e ra b le interest in football
            grounds and as the Ma na gi ng Partner I was the person who
            dealt with football grounds.

       Q.   We know that even tu al ly       out of this was d e v e lo p ed the
            Green Guide, apart from          the legislation.    A.     Yes, not
            entirely out of my ---

       Q. Of course not, I meant out of the Whea tl ey                C om mi s si o n
          into which you p roduce d some in-put. A.                   Yes.

       Q. Did you say any th in g or do anyt hi ng in c o n n ec t io n with
          the tests that are now in the Green Guide?             Was that part
          of your in-put at all?      A.   I was already testing.

       Q.   Did you have any say?            A.    Yes.

       Q.   Or were you asked      any q u es ti on s about how the Green
            Guide should ---        A.    I was asked how I was testing.

       Q. And you explained,        did you?           A.     I explained.

       Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Is this testing crush                    barr ie rs ?
            A.   Crush barriers, sir, yes.

       Q.            MR. COLLINS:      That, of course, is now in A pp en di x C
            in the c urrent Green Guide but thstrepeats, I think,
            e s se nt ia ll y in the same terms what was in the 1976
            Appendix.         the system that you were adopting, is that
            the system that we come to later in your p ro of which is
            i l l us tr at ed in the p h ot o gr a ph ? A. No.

       Q.   It is a dif fe re nt   system ?       A.        Yes.
or* i Db
                                             11

                                                                 W. E A S T W O O D


           Q. What      was the system that you were then o pe ra t in g ?
              A.        First, the test load was 300 lbs./ft. as distinct
              from      the 400 which went into W h ea tl ey and I was
              test      loading three times and work in g to a r ec ov er y of not
              less      than 75°o on the third test load.

           Q.    But was the method that you   were using, the four p l ac em en ts
                on the crush barriers as we see in that photograph, much
                the same?     A.   The eight placements.

           Q.   Eight    placements.    A.        Yes.

           Q. Four on each side of the stanchion.                  A.      Always     two
              rails of crush barrier on each ---

           Q. And that was with the machinery, if I can call it that,
              if that is the proper way to look at it, which had been
              devised by you?   A.  Yes.

           Q.    I think you are aware, are you not, Dr. Eastwood, that
                other e ngineers con c er n ed with other football g ro unds
                have d ifferent methods.       A.   Yes.

           Q. And, of course, the Green Guide, alth ou gh it states what
              sort of tests ought to be appli ed does not descend, as
              one would p erhaps expect, to p a rt i cu l ar s of how you should
              carry out these tests.    A.    Ihat is so.

           Q. And there is quite a room            for int er pr et at io n,    is there    not?
              A.  And error.

           Q.   And error.   Well, again, I think I will have to come back
                to that a little later on.   But you are aware generally,
                no doubt, what the Green Guide is after, what is the purpose
                of these tests.   A.   Indeed.

           Q. Which is what, as you u nderst an d it?          A.To apply    a
              load to the barrier which is s u ff i ci e nt l y above the design
              load to give c o nf id en ce that over the next -- r e as on ab le
              conf id en ce that over the next 5 years the barrier is not
              going to d e t e r i o r a t e to below the design load and that the
              test load should be carried r ea so na bl y comfortably.

           Q.   Now, the design load of a     barrier is equated to what?
                What is it d esigned for?      A.     I don't know how the
                5 kN/m length was arrived at but I do know from some
                expe ri en ce before I met the W he at le y C o m mi s si o n people
                that it was very unlikely any barriers had had more than
                300 lbs. at that time and the 5 kNs is about 340 lbs.

           Q. Were you aware of some Home Office resea rc h into this
              issue which was held at about the time and indeed for
              the purpose, I think, of the W h ea tl ey C o mm i ss i on ?
              A.   I knew of it but don*t know anyt hi ng about the
              results.

           Q.   B ecause that is wherp you get your 300 and 340 figures
                from, in fact. Were you aware of that?       A.   No.
                                  78


                                                     W. E A S T W O O D


Q.   Those are the figures that are thrown up by the Home
     Office.    A.  Well, the 340 of course came into the Green
     Guide.   The 300, I have never heard of a ny body using it
     except me.     That was my test load after Ibrox and it was as
     simple as this, that the load which, say, a b al us t ra d e in
     a crowded store o ve rl o o k i n g a balcony or s o m e th i ng must
     at that time take 200 and I added 50%.           It was as simple
     as that.

Q.   I follow.        You will perhaps be glad to know that that
      figure comes out at about the same figure as the tests
     run by the Home Office on barriers showed to be the maxi mu m
     likely m o m e n t a r i l y on a c ro wded terrace. A. Yes, it
     was by a ccident that I arrived at that.

          LORD JUSTICE      TAYLOR:      Where do we see 340 in the
     Green Guide?

          MR. COLLINS:   Sir,          I think it is in the 1976 Green
     Guide, not in the ---

           LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:      Not in the     1986?

           MR.   COLLINS:      Not in the    1986.

Q.   I think that is right, is it, Dr. E as t wo o d? A.      Both
     of them, sir, have the 5 kNs as the design w o rk i n g load
     but we have pro ba bl y only got kNs down, not lb. e q u iv a le n ts
     after it.

Q.   You may be right.      Let me jast check.          It is P a ra gr ap h 118.
     it does give 5 and 340, you are quite right.             It is page
     38 of the present Green Guide and it is the design force for
     what are desc ri be d as the A, which are the ones that are
     s upposed to be s tronge r and indeed if we can get this out
     of the way, Dr. Eastwood, as far as you were c on c er n ed
     all the b arriers at S he ff ie ld W e dn es da y were tested
     or were d esigned for that load and were t ested to the
     6 kN capacity.      A.   Yes.

Q.   You yourself, Dr. Eastwood, attend S h ef fi el d W e d n e sd a y
     quite regularly, I think.  A.   Yes.

Q. And you have a g randson who is also a keen ---                        A.   Yes,
   wears the right colours, yes.

Q.   You were first retained by the Club as far as our d o cu m e n t a t i o n
     goes in about 1978, is that c or re ct ? A. Yes.

Q. And we can see that at page 30 I think of the core bundle
   although I think it may be simpler for you to refer to your
   own bundle.   I will give the relev an t a l t e r n a ti v e numbers.
   A.   Page 4, sir.

Q.   Page 4 and page 7.        In fact the r e s ol u ti o n a p p o in t in g you is
     at page 7.      Now, you were comm is si on ed , a cc or d in g to page 7,
     to act on b e h a l f of the Club in the d ea li ng s with the
G6

                                          79

                                                                W. E A S T W O O D


          South Yor ks h ir e County Council or the Shef fi el d M e t r o p o l i t a n
          District Council in r elat io n to the d e s ig n at i on and that
          meant at that time advis in g the Club, did it not, and
          liaising with the County Council in order to achi ev e the
          Club got a Safety Certificate.        A.  In those fields
          in which I have expertise.

     Q.   Of course.           Were you or did you see y o u r s e l f as purely
          acting on b eh al f of the Club and c o n si d er i ng the inte re st s
          of the Club?           A.   No.     No p r o f e s s io n al e n g i n ee r does
          that.          The public inter es t must always be paramount.
          N e v e r t he le ss one must i ne vi ta bl y become, shall we say,
          a little, tiny bit polarised, is the frank answer.

     Q.   So far as e x p e n d i t u r e of money is concerned, did you
          c on side r it your task to try to m in i mi z e that for the Club?
          A.     Not in any way if it involved s a c ri f ic i ng proper
          standards*

     Q.   So far as proper sta nd ar d s are concerned, you had to have
          regard, of course, to the Green Guide, did you not?
          A.   Yes.

     Q. We appreciate, all of us, that that is meant to p ro vi de a
        flexible guide, it is not a rigid set of rules.                       Nonetheless,
        there must be a good reason, must there not, to go outside
        the Guide r e c o m m e n d a t i o n ? A. P ro fe ss i on a l j u dg me nt and
        c o mm on se ns e is what the Guide says.

     Q.    Indeed, but some of the Guid e' s r e co m m e n d a t i o n s are quite
          positive.      For example, height of crush barriers.
          A.   So is the one which says "eng in ee ri ng j u dg me nt and
          c ommon sense".

     Q.    Yes, I follow that, Dr. Eastwood, but all I am saying is that
          if the Green Guide says somet hi ng p os i ti v e then p r e su m ab l y it
          must involve a c on s i d e r a b l e degree of t ho ught and you would
          have to justify going outs id e that r ec om me nd a ti o n;    is that
          right?    A.   Yes.

     Q. And you would always have to have in mind u l ti ma te ly the
        qu es ti on of safety of those who were going to a ttend the
        g round?     A.   At all times.

     Q. And thEt must be the g ud ii ng light,            is that right?             A.    Yes,>
        paramount.

     Q.   And that was how you a pp ro a ch e d your task.                A.     Indeed.

     Q.   So that if at any time the Club prop os ed to do s om et hi ng
          which you c on si d e r e d to have safety imp li ca ti on s, then
          you would have told the Club.          A.   I w ould look at it
          very ---       Would you please tell me what you mean by
          safety i m p l i c a t i o n s ?    **

     Q.   Yes.       If, for example, the Club wanted to chan ge some th in g
          on the terraces, change the lay-out or do work which you
          c o ns id er ed might have a s afety i m p li c at i on which perhaps
                                80


                                                        W. E A S T W O O D

     they had not thought about,      you would have       to advise         them
     about that, would you not?        A.   Yes.

Q. An obvious example is        changing the c o nf i g u r a t i o n of the
   crush barriers.   A.         Yes.

Q. Another example which will become relevant would be the
   changing of the t urnstil e lay-out. It might have safety
   implications.  A.    Yes.

Q. And if you felt that there was s om et hi ng which in any way
   p rej ud ic ed or might p re ju di ce safety, you would have to
   advise the Club about that?           A.   Yes.

Q. And you always      no doubt did that?      A.     I did,      I believe,
   yes.

Q. And if, nonetheless, the Club wanted to go ahead, you
   would then act on their b ehalf and put it, of course, to
   the Safety Comm it te e or the Working Party or w ha t ev e r it
   was that was dealing with it.      A.   Yes.

Q. Because you had to notify under the Safety C e r t i f i ca t e ---
   A . Yes.

Q.   The C ounty Council   if there were to be any changes.
     A.   Yes.

Q. Would you then conceive it to be your duty if, n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g
   your r e s e r v at io ns the Club had gone ahead* that you would tell
   the County Council your reser va t io n s or you would leave it
   to them to find out, as it were, for t he ms e lv e s?          A.   I
   am certain that a nything on w hich I ha'd r e se r v a t i o n s I did
   tell the County Council.

Q.   So you would consider it your duty n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g that
     the Club wanted you to go ahead to tell the C ounty Council
     of any r e s e r v at io ns if you felt they affec te d safety.
     A.   Yes.        Yes.

Q. Even if that might mean that the Club's desires were frustrated
   because the County Council deci de d in the end that it would
   not be proper to allow them to go ahead with the changes
   they w anted?  A.   That is a c om pl i ca t ed question. Can
   you be more specific?

Q.    I am simply asking to see how you saw your role and I want to
     see what the ground rules were.           A.      I saw my role as
     ad v is in g the Club, givi ng my p r of e ss i on a l opinion, and I
     think doing it firmly if the Club ever w anted to do s o me th in g
     which was co nt ra ry -- to p os it i ve l y do s om et h in g which was
     c o ntra ry to what I belie ve d to be in the p ublic interest.

Q.   It comes back, I suppose, to safety being p a ra mo un t?
     A. Yes, not absolute safety, of   course, the Guide says.

Q.   But of course one cannot achieve a bs ol ut e safety, I do not
     think anyone ever sug ge s te d or would s ug gest that one
ef'? />,&

                                         81


                                                            W. E A S T W O O D


                 could but one tries, if there   is a choice,    to c hoose that
                 which is the more safe.   A.     Yes.

            Q.   Now let us come back, if I may, to your statement.       You
                 say in P aragraph 11 that in liai si ng with the Club you
                 have found that they have been very w il l in g to spend money
                 to improve the ground.    A.   Very much so.




                                         /You have never had any
                                          W. EASTWOOD

You have never had any problems that you have been able to
identify where the Club has said that money stops them
doing anything which you think they ought to do? A. Anything
 that I thought they ought to do, I would tfell them so, and
then they have to decide whether they can afford it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: The question was whether you
ever did and they said no.   A. No instance where I said
"I think you ought to" and they didn't.

     Mr. COLLINS:  In paragraph 14 you deal with the 1975
Act and the 1976 Guide.  You make the point that you were
working under the 1936 guide, not the 1973.   In fact, Dr.
Eastwood, the 1973 guide was the first guide.   There was
a new edition in 1976 and yet another new edition in 1986?
A. The 1976 guide does not mention the 1973.

No, it does not, you are qiiite right. I think I do not
need to take you through any of the rest of you® general
introduction.  Can I come on to paragraph 20 which deals
with crush barriers?   In 1978, as you have pointed out,
there were a number of barriers at the Leppings Lane end
but not so many as there are now and fewer than recommended
    the guide, and I think you have produced a plan, which
is one of the three that was copied further this morning,
the number being 11424/6 which shows the barrier arrange­
ment at the Leppings Lane end when you were first retained
    the Club - is that correct?    A. That is so.

We can see quite clearly that there are effectively, except
at the left-hand side as we look at it, two relatively
continuous lines of barriers and one extra one in the
middle at the mouth of the tunnel?   A. Yes.

I am obviously concerned only at the moment with the
central part of the terracing and not with the side.
A. Yes.

When you came to examine that, you did so in some detail
and eventually wrote an interim report which we have at
page 36 of the bundle,   which is your letter of the 12th
January 1979,   which is at    pages 10 to 22of    your bundle.
If we look at the fifth page of that, letter B, we see
your assessment of the situation aitS the question of capacity
at the Leppings lane end.   That, of course, is one of the
important aspects of the safety certificate, that there
would have to be some limitation on the capacity and some
specification of the capacity of each part of the ground.
I think it perhaps speaks for itself but you say, about
seven lines into paragraph B;

     "The full area would justify about 8000 spectators.
     We suggest it would probably be appropriate to
     allow 10   per cent as   the equivalent of   gangways,
     giving a   capacity of   7,200".

That is because there were in fact no gangways on this
terrace - is that correct?   A. That is so.
w(f?l
                                   83

                                                     W. EASTWOOD

        Q. And you did not anticipate that it would be feasible to
           put gangways?   A. It would be feasible but dangerous.

        Q. In what way dangerous?   A. The obvious place for a gangway,
           of course, would be straight in front of t h e 3 tnn*»®i. There
           you would have a flight of steep steps - 14 degree steps -
           with no crush barriers, where the pressure of people coming
           from the tunnel would be transmitted straight down.       So
           it wasn't possible to put a radial gangway there.       Then
           if you looked to putting them to the side, you found the
           most awful engineering problem.  Those two wing walls,
           you have to go round them because they are retaining walls
           retaining the bank higher up; you would have to cut in
           there, come round and back, and would have had to put in
           crush barriers and hand-rails in all sorts of positions
           which would have blocked up the terrace.  It became quite
           impossible to put in a gangway.

        Q. Would it have been possible to have put in any diagonal
           gangways at all?   A.  There are some diagonal gangways
           on that ground.  They are not easy to fit in because of
           the fact that your steps are there, your terrace steps
           are there, your gangway steps are there, and you are
           limited by the guide to the difference in level between
           the terrace step and your gangway step of, I think, 200mm.
           Now, if your gangway is not parallel to the steps, you
           find the step is either too low at one side and okay at
           the other or the other way round, and you can't fit in a
           safe gangway at an angle.

        Q. I think you said at the outset that there were gangways ---

        Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You said that there are
             diagonal gangways?   A. Just very slightly diagonal,
             but of course ---

        Q. Where?    A. There is a slightly diagonal gangway I think
           at the top end.   I believe there is one that is not quite
           straight.   But it wouldn't have help&d&me.  Where would it
           have started from?   If it's only going to be 5 or 10 degrees
           at right angles to the stand, people still go straight down
           the stairs.

        Q.       Mr. COLLINS:  The purpose of having gangways is to
             enable spectators, or any spectator who wishes to, to have
             an easy way of getting out of the terrace and to an exit,
             is it not?   A. The easiest way to get out is usually
             most of the way along the steps of the terrace.

        Q. I follow that, but the purpose of the requirement that there
           should be 12 metres from a gangway or an exit point is to
           ensure that there is not too great a distance for a
           spectator to move before he reaches some means of getting
           to an exit?   A. Yes.

        Q. That is the purpose of it?    A. Yes.
                                         W. EASTWOOD

So if you do not have gangways on a terrace, you must
reduce the capacity to prevent overcrowding - is that
right?   A. Not at all, not at all.  You just come straight
off the steps.

If you have too many people on the terrace, you do not
enable them to get through the crowd, do you?    A. No,
you are completely misunderstanding, I think.

Very possibly.   You tell me what I have got wrong.  A. On
the Kop at Hillsborough, facing you when you are on this
terrace there are two main entrances in the bank.   Neither
of those, of course, has a gangway in front.   Each of them
has two gangways which are whatever, 12 metres either side,
and there is of course a lateral gangway.    The people
coining out of that big block 24 metres wide and half the
height of that Kop go straight up to that tunnel exit.
The last two yards across - or the last 1.2 metres,
whatever the width of the gangway is - they come on to
a gangway, to walk across it, straight across it, not to
go along it. That is there at the other end of the ground
and it is quite a common feature in other grounds.   I do
not regard gangways as being at all desirable from the
point of view of safety.   They are convenient for people
who want to leave 6the ground early, to go to the toilet
or whatever.   They are convenient for some other things.
But there is no peril in walking on the steps, either along
the steps, which is what most people do, if you watch the
pattern of movement after a match at Hillsborough on the
Kop, which is one of the two largest in the country, and
at the end of the game the spectators just walk alonggthe
steps that they are standing on until they come to the end
of the ground;   and if they come to a gangway in between,
they walk across it, step across it and go along again.

That may well be as a matter of fact what people tend to
do when they are all going out together;  but what is the
purpose of the green guide recommendation - and I am
looking at paragraph 96 of the 1986 version - that the
aim should be to ensure that every spectator on the
terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or exit? A. I
don't see any great purpose in it, other than those
of convenience.

You do not think it is a safety consideration?   A. Not
in an open terrace of good conformation.

Those who want should be able to move along without any
difficulty if they need to?   A. It is much safer to move
along the terrace than it is to get jammed elbo-to-elbow
in a gangway.  So people don't run to the gangway unless
it is nearly empty, except just as they are coming to the
doors.

There are no gangways, though.  You say in this letter,
"It would be appropriate to allow 10 per cent of the
equivalent of gangways"?   A. Yes.
                                       W. EASTWOOD

Why do you do that if, in your view, gangways are merely
a convenience?   A.  The 10 per cent is a convenience.
So someone who wants to get out to go to a toilet can do
so. The crowd will be that much looser.

I think that is what I was suggesting when you told me I
had got it ail wrong, Dr. Eastwood.  A. I'm sorry.

I put it badly* >I do not doubt. The purpose of having
gangways and having ready access to a gangway was to
enable those who wished to get out of a crowd to do so
with greater ease?    A. Oh yes.

Is that right?   A. Yes.

And that is, of course, to some extent a safety consideration,
is it not, because if someone gets in distress or someone
wants to get out, then the easier that is made the better?
A. Yes.

The reason, as I understand it, that you said "reduce by
10 per cent", was to reduce the density of the crowd so
that people would mere easily be able to move and thus
the fact that it was not 12 metres but was a considerably
greater distance to get to the tunnel did not matter?
A.  "Did not matter" would not be my words.

Was not of importance?     A.   Yes.

Is that right?   A. Yes, not of such overriding importance
as to condemn that area to in effect not beings used.

And, of course, the figure of 8,000 was actually slightly
below the multiplication of 1480 by 5.4, which would have
been the capacity on the maximum allowed by the green
guide - is that right?   A. I don't regard these figures
to the nearest decimal point when you scale off a plan,
and so on.

So you were giving a slight leeway in any event?     A. I
did throughout this exercise.

It was, of course, essential, as you point out, that the
barriers be changed or the configuration of barriers be
changed and extra barriers be inserted?   A. Yes.

Of course, one of the points and indeed an important point -
and it appears on our page 41, page 6 of your letter - the
last sentence deals with the 12 metre point:  "We feel
this is of no consequence as movement horizontally along
this terrace will be easy and quiis&l. I think effectively
that is a summary of what you have been saying earlier as
I was asking you questions a moment ago?   A. Yes, I think
I should have added there "at the end of a game";  "easy
and quick at the end of a game".

Yes.  One is obviously thinking mainly in terms of evacuation
at the end of a game? A. Evacuation or at the end of a game.
                            86

                                                 W. EASTWOOD

Q.   But one is also thinking and must  think in terms of enabling
     people who need to get out in the  middle of a game, for
     whatever reason/ to do so if possible?   A. Yes.

Q. I appreciate the difficulties and one knows how crowded
   these terraces get, but that is what is aimed at? A. Yes.

Q. Of course, at this stage you were dealing with a terrace
   which had no radial fences, was open from end to end?
   A. Yes.

Q.   And there were access points from the tunnel in the middle
     and from either end of the West Stand?  A. Yes.

Q. As far as these original barriers were concerned, Dr.
   Eastwood, you say in your statement that you cannot speak
   from your own knowledge but you believe that they had been
   installed in 1965, the time when the West Stand was
   constructed just prior to the 1966 World Cup, or at an
   even earlier date?   A. Yes.

Q. Am I not right ins saying that your view in fact, until
   further investigation has been needed as a result of this
   disaster, was that they were not earlier than 1965?
   A.  Unlikely to be earlier.   1965 simply because the
   concrete of those terrace steps goes right up to the new
   building of 1965, concrete of the same quality and the
   same kind, which speaks for that concrete having been
   cast up against the building in 1965.

Q. I think that that did happen undoubtedly, that the terrace
   was reconcreted and thus realigned in a sense in 1965?
   A. Yes.

Q. You now know, do you not, that the barrier which failed
   was clearly considerably older than that?   A. Yes.

Q.    And that suggests that the other barriers or some of them
     may well be of a similar age?    A. They are so alike,
     they are obviously contemporary.

Q.    We know     it must be before 1931? A. There would have to be
     a great practical joker about for it to be otherwise.

Q.   Because of the newspaper that you    have seen?   A. Yes.

Q.   We have all seen the barrier.   A.   I have no doubt that
     it is of that vintage.

Q. And that surprised you, did it, when you realised that?
   A. Surprise is too strong a word.

Q.   What word would you use?    A. It was interesting.

Q. Did you appreciate that they were made of wrought iron
    until you realised their age?   A. It's only the horizontal
   rails that is wrought iron.  The answer is no.
1^(t<o
                                       87

                                                       W. EASTWOOD

         Q. You did not realise?       A. So.

         Q. You thought it was what, steel?     A. Mild steel.

         Q. Of course, the fact that it was so old would have made some
            difference to the likely degree of corrosion, would it
            not?   A. Yes.    The age would lead to greater corrosion.
            The fact; that it is wrought iron would lead to significantly
            less corrosion, and I think that the wrought iron factor
            is winning ---

         Q.   Is what?   A. Winning.

         Q.    Winning? A. That the corrosion has been less than you
              would have expected of a mild steel barrier put in, say,
              25 years ago.    I should explain that I have inspected the
              wrought iron tube in the last few days at the Health
              and Safety Executive's Laboratories and they agree with
              me that it is absolutely remarkable how little corrosion
              there has been of the wrought iron except under those
              clips at the end. Wrought iron is noted for havingga
              very high degree of resistance to corrosion compared with
              mild steel.

         Q. But there is that unfortunate pocket underneath the clip
            which is liable to corrosion because water can accumulate,
            can it not?   A. Yes.

         Q. And the tube at    that point is not painfe&d, so it   is not
            protected?   A.    You can't get at it.

         Q. Exactly.  I suppose you could have painted it before you
            put it in, but once it is in there is no way you can either
            paint or re-paint it?   A. That is so.

         Q. In fact, it is, I suppose, is it not, a design defect in
            that sort of barrier, or in that barrier? A. For the age
            when it was built, no.

         Q. That may be, but --- A. Compared with the barriers that
            I designed, which are near it, which d o n ’t have any pockets
            of that kind.

         Q. I was going to put that to you.  Yours do not have that
            defect and that pocket, and indeed it is obvious from
            inspection that that defect exists in the old ones but
            it does not exist in yours?   A. That is so.

         Q. One of the problems of wrought iron - and this is a matter
            that is dealt with in the Health and Safety Report at paragraph
            3.3 --- A. I am going to take a minute, please, just to
            find it.

         Q. I am sure we have got another copy if necessary.  If you
            have not got it with you, we have a spare copy. (Handed
            to the witness).  Do you have it, Dr. Eastwood? A. Yes,
            I have it now.
                             88
                                                    W. EASTWOOD

Q. Paragraph 3.3, where they deal with the tensile strength
   of the wrought iron tube?   A. Yes.

Q. I am not going to ---

Q-       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      What page are you on?

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:   Page 2 of the report, paragraph 3.3.
     It is a long time since I was at school and I cannot say
     that I can think in terms of Megapascals, so I will not.
     If one looks at the tensile strength of mild steel compared
     with wrought iron, they are approximately the same, are
     they not?    A. In this case, yes.

Q.    I mean in this case.    A.    Yes.




                              /Q.    But there is a distinct
SN
                               89

                                           W. EASTWOOD


     Q. But there is a distinct difference in what is on the one
        hand called the elastic limit and on the other the yield
        stress, but I am told that they are addressing the same
        concept in slightly different language because of the
        different materials? - A. Unfortunately not. They are
        not.

     Q. You tell me. - A. I have inspected the stress/strain -
        this is not a criticism of the Health and Safety Executive
        - what they tell you here is factually correct but they
        do not know what it is the Structural Engineer looks for.
        Might I sketch, sir? I think it is going to be necessary.

     Q. Yes, it is a point that needs to be explained otherwise
        the wrong conclusion might be drawn from it. - A. Professor
        Maunder may wish to see what I am scribbling, sir.
        First of all that is a diagram of what happens if you
        stretch at the load a piece of steel,  the load vertically
        and the stretch along there, and for a long time as you
        increase the load the stretching is straight line simply
        proportional to the load and you reach what is called the
        yield point and suddenly the load drops and then it starts
        to go on again and finally it breaks, so that is what
        happens with mild steel and we base our working stress on
        a proportion of that yield point, so that is a factor
        of safety against yield.

     Q. If I can ask you for a little explanation.  That is the
        yield stress of the 18.6 tonne force/sq. inch.  Is that
        point where you have marked the squiggle in the graph?
        - A. Yes, so that would be a load of 18.6.

     Q. Does that effectively mean that it becomes vulnerable
        after that point? - A. Yes, it will yield such a lot that
        it will distort very rapidly and in other words it will
        probably collapse even though it has not reached its full
        load.

     Q. Indeed.  So if a pressure equivalent to that is applied
        to it then you are in the danger zone of collapse? - A.
        That is right.

     Q. That is the mild steel and the 18.6. What is the elastic
        limit in relation to the wrought?*iron? - A. I am gtxfcng to
        try to draw this diagram accurately but I am not very
        good at drawing nearly straight lines.

     q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I have no doubt, before you
          go any further, Prof. Maunder may be able to explain it
          later but whilst we have got it here, you get to that
          point where you say in effect you get collapse? - A.
          If you took the load much above that you would get so
          much deformation that at any rate it becomes useless,
          most structures would become useless and because you get
          a lot of deformation it then brings an instability
          and you may get collapse.
                      90
                                   W. EASTWOOD


It looks as though, at any rate for a while on your graph,
it continues to take more load and stretch? - A. I have
not taken it over quickly enough then sir.  It should
yield much more rapidly.

It should not rise above that point? - A. Well it does rise
above, oh yes sir.  It continues to go up and that is the
value of .... Yes, the mild steel goes up to 23.3 so the
yield point is 18.6 and then the top of that curve is 23.3.
That extra strength beyond the yield point is not much
use to you.

      Now sir the curve has a different shape for the
wrought-iron.  It does not have that squiggly yield point.
It goes up nearly in a straight line but does bend over
very slightly or starts to bend over very slightly at a
stress of 9.7 tonnes/sq. inch.

      Now the yielding is so minor that you go right up
to 15.5 tonnes before you get the equivalent of yield.
To the Structural Engineer we don't mind strains of 2%
so with our high tensile steels, our pre-stressing steels,
if we stretch it and let it go and it has not increased
in length by more than .2%, it is good for our structural
purposes.

      If you take the curve up and then come back down
to 0.2% strain as I have done here, that gives you the
equivalent of the yield point in the mild steel and it
is that stress of 15.5 which should be used rather than
the 9.7 and that is what I would use, or any other
Structural Engineer would use.

^ w f a ^ y o u are saying is that it is 15.5 that should be
the figure which roughly is equivalent to the yield stress
in respect of wrought-iron rather than the 9.7 figure?
- A. Yes and if I might add to that, the British Standard
yield stress for mild steel in the days when it was in
tonnes/sq. inch was 15^, so this wrought-iron will pass
as mild steel of the same age.

So what you are saying is there is no material difference
in your view between the ability of the wrought-iron and
the ability of mild steel to meet the forces which are
going to be applied to it? - A. You still have to have
enough wrought-iron or enough mild steel, but this wrought-
iron can be considered as a mild steel.

I shall not pursue that any further.  Dr. Eastwood may
I ask you one other thing about the barrier. We know
that it collapsed partly because of the horizontal which
gave but also of course because one of thestanchions
gave as well? - A. Yes.

The supports to the stanchion at the bottom were quite
badly corroded.  Is that correct? - A. There are two
                                  W. EASTWOOD


places which might be called the "bottom". As you quite
rightly said, the level of the terrace was brought up
by pouring some new concrete on top of the old concrete
and in examining the legs it is clear that there had been
a lot of corrosion at the level of the bottom of the legs
in the original insulation level.  It does seem that this
was appreciated by the Engineers in 1965 because wherever
there was severe corrosion they had plated, you can see
onl think the Health and Safety diagram it shows the
plating on the legs.

Figure 1 you are referring to, are you? - A. It may well
be when I come to it. Yes, you can see sticking up above
the concrete deck along the front row three out of the
four have had some steel added to them which goes right
down into the concrete and two of the back four have.

      There had been a fair amount of corrosion, probably
not enough to be dangerous because you don't get that
big a tensile force in the back leg and there was probably
enough, adequate amount of steel still left at that time
but it would not have gone much longer.  They were plated
up which made them safe.

      Then we have some further corrosion which has taken
place since 1965 which is not at all severe and is not
a cause ft>r concern.  I examined all four legs and there is
still a great deal more metal still there than is needed,
so there was bad enough corrosion to cause concern before
it was buried; that was taken care of as far as we know
and the other thing I can say is that in testing all these
barriers three times, we have not had a single leg failure
at that position.   We have tested them three times,
'79, '83, '88, so at any rate it has not shown up as being
some hidden danger.

If I correctly understand what is set out in paragraphs
3.6 and 3.7 of the Health and Safety Report, the bad
corrosion was in fact concealed in the concrete.  Is that
correct? - A. Yes, the worst of the two.

And had to a degree but not entirely been covered by
the plates that you have described? - A. The plate had
taken over the role.

It was intended to have done? - A. Yes, it was intended
to and it had taken over the role and because that plate
was embedded in concrete whilst it was still a fairly
new plate, if it is thoroughly embedded in concrete the
rate of rusting is very small except the surface.

So far as your investigations are concerned you would not
have been able to see any of the corrosion of course under­
neath the concrete, that was hidden by the concrete? - A.
No, it was a little trap that was set by somebody.
                                  W. EASTWOOD


What you are saying is that such corrosion as you could
see, which was not covered by the concrete, was insufficient
to cause any real concern? - A. Well at the time when the
plating was done it was certainly needing to be done but
now that is has been done, if it has been done everywhere
where it was needed, there is no cause for concern.

Obviously one is concentrating on this barrier for obvious
reasons? - A. Yes.

I don't think there is anything I need to ask you specifically
about your statement until we come to the question of the
new barriers and this you deal with at the bottom of page 11,
paragraph 27.  You say there:

     "Our scheme for new barriers was prepared on
     the basis that they would be Class A and that
     where necessary existing barriers would
     also be brought up to Class A . "

I want to refer to the plan, the second of the three plans
that you have introduced, drawing 11424/7 which shows the
new barriers in blue and the old barriers in red.

      In fact what you have done is effectively to add a
third line at the top.  Putting it very very broadly, you
have added a third line at the top.  You have linked up
the middle and lower ones, in some cases so as to form
more continuous lines.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

And you have added in the middle two extra barriers which
are of course in the path down from the tunnel.

      The purpose of putting those in and the configuration
were intended to, and I don't doubt, did comply with the
configurations recommended in the Green Guide so as to
achieve the maximum capacity of 54/lQsq.m.  Is that right?
- A. To all intents and purposes, yes.

If there is a qualification please tell me? - A. There is
just a slight one that obviously around the entrance area
the configuration has slightly wider gaps.   The justifi­
cation is on two different grounds in the two guides.
In 1976 it was done on an area drawn behind the barrier
which had an up and down dimension equal to the permissible
spacing of the barrier and you marked those areas out and
you added up times 5.4. Now you don't do that, you start
off with the basic 5.4 if you have got a good barrier layout
and therunake a judgment depending on any imperfections
or any good points about the particular terrace as to whether
it comes below the 5.4.

I should have asked you this for the avoidance of any
doubt.  There was in existence at all these times the
perimeter fence, was there not? - A. That is so and it
has in fact been drawxrVed to bring attention to the fact
that it is in fact a barrier.
                                  W. EASTWOOD


It is treated as a barrier and you had to in fact strengthen
it to comply with the strength requirements of the Green
Guide? - A. That is so.

Indeed the evidence will be, I think, that that perimeter
fence was constructed some time during 1977 I think? -
A. I don't know the exact date.

Still on the barriers:   all of course were Class A, were
they not? - A. Yes.

Either brought up to Class A or created as Class A? - A. Yes.

Did you test all those barriers in 1979? - A. Yes, or '80.

Well I think you tested them all before the Safety Certificate
was granted, did you not? - A. Yes, we must have.  The report
on the test is dated January 1980 and the tests were done
a day or two before the Safety Certificate in December.
That is correct.

That was my understanding.   Did you manage to test all of
them, each and every one? - A. On this terrace I think the
answer is yes, but there   is anote in my report about one
or two barriers on the Kop, I think, but I don't recall
one on this area.

The reason I ask you that is at a later stage, and we can
turn it up if we need to, you are saying that there are
some barriers in this ground which you can't test because
they are too close to the back wall.  Would tihose include,
I think they did include, did they not, the new barriers
at the back of the terrace that were erected or not?
- A. I have forgotten if that is so.

But can ypu remember whether they did or not? - A. No I can't,
I am sorry.

I must turn that up then and I confess I can't find the page
number where you deal with that.   Somebody will find it
and I will come back to it later so we don't waste time upon
it, but what was the problem with the barriers that you
could not test, was it simply they were< too close to the
wall? - A. Yes, you need the space to get the mechanism
in between the wall and the barrier and of course jacking
against the wall is difficult.   You really need to jack
against the concrete step and that would mean the equipment
would be too inclined, it would not foer.at the horizontal.

      Having mentioned it I think you are right, that that
row could not be tested.

Presumably you were able to test them originally in 1979
because you put them in. When I say "tested them,
were new.  They were put in by you so you knew what their
                                 W. EASTWOOD


strength was.  Is that right? - A. Yes, when a new barrier
goes in you have to design it as a structure for the design
load of 5kN and you have to use normal structural steel
factors of safety for the steel and a factor of safety of
2 for the foundation and that is what was used, so you know
that is all right from the beginning, as has been proved
time and time again with all the others which are tested
on the same design.  Not one has ever given the slightest
bit of trouble under test.




                          /Q. Of course, that
T t
                                   95

                                                         W. EASTWOOD


      Q. Of course, that does create, does it not, a potential problem
         if you are unable to test certain barriers because of where
         they are placed?     I appreciate it was not one of those
         barriers that failed on this occasion, but that does create a
         problem, does not it? - A. There will be a problem perhaps in
         another 25 yea r s ' time when you begin to worry whether there
         might have been some corrosion which is beginning to eat into
         the strength, but just as you would not test this building, a
         properly designed structure, you would not test load it,
         provided the design has been properly done and has been
         properly checked independently and properly fabricated, it is
         safe.  That barrier is as safe as this building.     The other
         barriers have to be tested because there are so many unknowns
         about them.

      Q. It was, of course, part of your duties on behalf of the club
         to test a proportion of the barriers each year,  that was a
         requirement as you knew of the safety certificate? - A. Yes.

      Q. And in fact the proportion was one-fifth? - A. Approximately
         one-fifth.

      Q. The reason for that being that you chose a 5 year cycle to
         test all barriers.  Now, the 1986 Green Guide requires a 4
         year cycle, does it not? - A. Yes.

      Q. But in     1976, which was the guide in force when you devised the
         scheme,     it was left open.  I think if we look at paragraph 4.3
         of the     1976 guide it refers to testing of barriers.  You have
         a copy     I don't doubt somewhere, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, I
         ha v e .

      Q. Paragraph 4.3, the last sentence:

               "Further testing of barriers should be necessary only at
               intervals of several years unless circumstances arise to
               raise doubts as to their strength".

         - A . Yes.

      Q. And the "several years" was interpreted in the case of
         Sheffield Wednesday as every 5 years? - A. Yes.  I would      now
         change that.

      Q. Of course, it would now have to be 4 years.      Indeed, since
         1986, 4 years? - A. Yes.

      Q. Sadly, that does not seem to have been taken on board, does
         it? - A. No, it was not.

      Q. Because instead of 20%, 25% of all barriers ought to have been
         tested since that came into force? - A. Yes.  We don't do it
         that way, of course,  We don't do 25%.  We do a section of the
         ground.

      Q. I follow that. - A. What we have got to do is to amalgamate
         the two smallest.
                             96

                                                  W. EASTWOOD



Q. Of course, doing it a section of the ground, I appreciate this
   was a matter which was raised initially with what I will call
   the safety committee - you know what I am talking about;  the
   working party? - A. Yes.

Q. This was raised originally, but in fact was permitted as a
   temporary measure initially, was not it, doing this block
   rather than a representative sample around the ground? - A.
   Yes, but it was not really a concession.   It was a sensible
   thing in that if you do a block rather than ever fifth, there
   is very much less chance of getting mixed up and doing a wrong
   one or missing one.  It is better to do the whole of the
   terrace one year and another another year.   So although it was
   as you say a concession it was not one that had any great
   significance.  It was convenience.

Q. Yes, although of course if you look back at 4.3 of 1976, it
   talks about a representative sample of all types and all areas
   of the ground, admittedly when the guidelines were first
   supplied, should be selected, and further testing of barriers
   should be necessary at intervals of several years.  Surely the
   implication behind that is that you should choose for your
   sampling purposes always a representative sample? - A. This is
   why I wrote my letter asking the licensing authority's
   permission.

Q.   I appreciate that. - A. Which was granted.

Q.    And permission was given, but it was given on a temporary
     basis.   For some reason nothing seems further to have been
     done about it.   - A. Yes.  I would see no reason to change
     from continuing a temporary basis.   The local authority have,
     of course, been involved every year in the testing.

Q. Correct me if I am wrong, as I read the correspondence it was
   allowed initially as a temporary measure ;because it seemed
   sensible at the outset, and it simply carried on from there
   without anyone ever re-applying his or her mind to the
   problem? - A. I think that because the barriers on the Kop
   are the same as these, not all of them, but many of them
   are, your representative sample becomes the same kind of
   barrier next year and next year.  There are so many
   barriers of the same type.  There are my new ones.  The
   type of barrier which is on this terrace is repeated in
   considerable numbers across at the Kop end, and there is
   another type of barrier on the Kop.

Q. I appreciate you say it is wholly justifiable to do it in the
   way you did it.  All I am seeking to point out as a matter of
   fact is that the safety committee permitted it as a temporary
   measure, and it simply continued.  There does not seem to have
   been any agreement to it becoming a permanent measure.  You
   simply carried on doing it, and they appeared to carry on
   accepting the way it was done? - A. Yes.

          MR. TOULSON:   Sir, if a substantial matter is going to
3   ■
                                  97

                                                          W. EASTWOOD


           be made of this and we are going to be turning to the
           construction of the terms of the consent, perhaps it is a
           matter for you but the document is at page 66 in this bundle.
           I think we can argue about the meaning of it later if need be.

                MR. COLLINS:   Well, all right.     Page 66 of Dr.
           Eastwood's?

                MR. TOULSOHs   18th July,   1980.

                MR. COLLINS:   Y e s . I would have thought the language
           "This year with the course of action which you propose and
           without prejudice as to what may be required as to the
           future" is fairly clear, but it matters not:

        Q. The fact is you are telling us, and at the moment I an not
           seeking to say you are wrong, that in your view, doing it in
           the way you did, namely taking a group together, was a
           perfectly reasonable way of doing it? - A. Yes.  If I can go
           just a bit further, just to clear the matter up for you
           finally.  The three or may be four different types of barrier
           on the ground, you automatically test two in this area.   On
           the Kop, because we take a slice, we test all four, some of
           each as you go up.  So we do take not in terms of geographical
           distribution, but in terms of type we do take a spread.

        Q. One other matter I would to deal with about your annual
           testing, and it is this.  Did you do it in the presence of the
           representative of the County Council or the City Council? - A.
           They don't stay the whole time.  the procedure is that I write
           a letter giving due notice of the times when we intend to do
           the testing, and inviting that they be present.   There is
           usually telephone liaison to make sure if it is a wet day they
           don't turn up and we are not there.   The senior charter
           engineer, the principal structural engineer in the department
           I believe pays a visit at some time every testing, and then
           the district surveyor who does the inspection of buildings in
           the area, as he is in that area, which may be once or twice
           each day, he has the opportunity to call in as he wishes and
           watch what goes on, and he does that.

        Q. Because you are no doubt aware of the requirements in
           paragraph 15 of the safety certificate as to the method of
           testing? - A. Yes.

        Q. Page 114, or if you have the safety certificate separately.
           114 of our bundle, what we have been calling the core bundle
           which you are about to get.  Paragraph 25(2)(i) is the
           relevant one:

                "The holder (the club) to ensure that not more than 7
                months after the date of this certificate and thereafter
                not less than once in each period of 12 months, a
                representative sample of crush barriers and hand rails
                amounting to not less than 20% of the total number of
                such barriers and rails is tested in accordance with the
                guide by a suitably qualified chartered engineer,
■e*   .

                                      98

                                                             W. EASTWOOD


                    structural or civil",

               which was you:

                    "in the presence of a representative of the County
                    Council, and the results thereof notified in writing".

               N o w , that requires a number of things. The only two with
               which I am concerned is (1) that it is a representative
               sample, and (2) that the testing is done in the presence of a
               representative of the County Council and now the City Council.
               You say you notified always, and they used to arrive, did
               they? - A. No, obviously I am not at the ground, but as far as
               I know they attend on more than one occasion over the three
               days.     Two people share it.  Mr. Sheriff, who is the senior
               man I write to, so far as I know goes and has a look himself
               at some time, and his assistant, who is the district surveyor
               for that area and is out visiting buildings takes the
               opportunity when he is in the area to call in.

          Q. Is the testing done in the presence of a representative of the
             County Council, is all I am asking? - A. Not the whole of it.

          Q. Just part of it? - A. Just part of it.

          Q. And that is always the case as far as you can recall, and has
             always been the case since 1979? - A. I think so.  I can't be
             absolutely certain about the early years, but I think so.

          Q. Of course, it requires a representative sample, and if I
             understand correctly what you were telling me a moment ago in
             your view doing it in the block form was a representative
             sample? - A. Reasonably representative.

          Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:Did I gather you said you      worked
               on 25%? - A. The new rule now sir is 25%.    It used to be 20%.
               Now it has become 25%.

          Q.   That rule being.... - A. This   is from the 1986 guide, and we
               are having to switch.   We did a bigger number.

                    MR. COLLINS:   I am sorry, sir, it is my fault.  I did
               not refer you to the relevant paragraph in the new guide.   It
               is 38.  It is the 5th line, the middle of paragraph 38:

                    "Thereafter testing of barriers should take place every 4
                    years unless from visual inspection doubts are raised as
                    to their strength/integrity".

                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    So that puts a higher requirement
               on the safety certificate.

                    MR. COLLINS:    That is simply one of the respects in
               which the safety certificate has not been updated to meet the
               requirements of the new guide:

          Q. You say from now on you are going to do 25%, is that what it
■$   ■
                                     99

                                                           W. EASTWOOD


              boils down to? - A. It has never been exactly 20% and it won't
              be exactly 25%.

         Q. I follow that. - A. Sometimes you get a year when it used to
            be 28% anyway.

         Q. I follow that entirely, but you will aim for 25%, i.e. a 4
            year cycle, each barrier must be tested every 4 years,
            effectively? - A. Yes.

         Q. All I am getting at is in your view you are saying a block is
            representative? - A . Provided it has more than one type of
            barrier.  It may be not representative of every type.   This
            was thought to be reasonable.   I still believe it is
            reasonable because of the manhandling of this massive
            equipment to take it all over the ground for spot tests.    The
            second reason is that I do fear with this mass of barriers if
            you do one here and one there there is a greater risk that one
            will be missed when its turn comes, whereas if you do a whole
            line and another line somewhere, that is better.

         Q. Can I break that down a little.  You would I think agree with
            me it would be more representative to do a number round the
            ground so you get a sample from each part of the ground? - A.
            That would be fully representative.

         Q.    You say that was difficult because of the nature of your
              equipment it would have taken much longer.    Is that right? -
              A. Yes.   It takes three men to lump it around.

         Q. Which means instead of staying let us say in the Leppings Lane
            end they would have to take it to the Kop end as well? -A.
            They would have to take it right to the Kop, the top of the
            Kop every year, yes.

         Q. And that is difficult but by no means insuperable? - A. No.
            It is laborious.

         Q.   The other reason for doing it that way is you think otherwise
              barriers might be missed.   That is merely a question of having
              a proper system, is not it, because each barrier is numbered?
              - A. Unfortunately it is difficult to enforce this.    They are
              numbered.  We have them numbered.   We have them painted.   The
              barriers are very well maintained by painters, and you
              persuade a painter not to now and then paint the number o u t .

         Q. I follow that, Dr. Eastwood, but you have got a plan which
            shows the numbers and position of all the barriers.     All i am
            suggesting to you really is this was a matter of convenience
            to you, and really was not following the requirement of a
            representative sample? - A. Convenience to me is not the way
            to put it.  In having regard to public interest o n e ’s client
            is part of the public interest too, and it is an expensive
            business, and always in the public interest you have to
            balance, an extra £1,000 or whatever it would cost each
            testing to do it.  So all in all I asked permission, and
            very reasonably I thought was given it.  If it is withdrawn
                       100
                                               W. EASTWOOD


   I won't complain.

Q. It was a convenience for the club because it was clearly
   cheaper for the club as well, because it took you less time to
   do the test? - A. In my view negligible, absolutely negligible
   increased risk.  Absolutely negligible.  It would be absurd to
   go down that road.

Q. Does it not mean that, do you do it by staying at the Kop end
   one year and then staying at the Leppings Lane end the other
   year? - A. The Kop will be done - because the Kop is about
   3/5ths of the who l e....

Q. So you spend three years at the Kop and two years at Leppings
   Lane end? - A. Yes, we do three slices of the Kop.

Q. Is that the effect of it, three years at the Kop and two years
   at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

Q. Which means, therefore, that the barriers for example at the
   Leppings Lane end could and presumably do miss a year to be
   tested at all? You see what I mean? If you have two years
   out of every five for the Leppings Lane end, and three years
   out of every five at the Kop end, that means in every five
   year cycle you are missing out three and not testing any of
   the Leppings Lane end barriers in three years out of five? -
   A . Yes.

Q. Which means that some barriers may have to last for longer
   than the twelve months that the Green Guide and indeed the
   safety certificate considers to be compatible with safety? -
   A. 4/5ths of the barriers have to last for more than that.
   All the barriers have to last more than 12 months, but in any
   particular part 4/5ths, now three-quarters, have to last more
   than 12 months.

Q. I see.  So you say that there is not likely to be any
   difference, that you are not likely to miss anything more by
   dotting your sample around the ground than you would by doing
   it in this way? - A. Not at all.  I believe that
   statistically we are just as likely to turn up the one which
   needs a bit of work doing to it.

Q. Can I come to your paragraph 31, Dr. Eastwood, in your
   statement.  You deal there with the barriers in pen 4, over
   the page on page 13, barriers 128 and 137, which were
   permanently bent but remained upright and effective? - A. Yes.

Q. I would simply like to ask you this.  It is perhaps a
   reasonable assumption but not certain, is it, that they were
   bent as a result of the events of 15th April? - A. It is a
   reasonable assumption.  They were both bent sufficiently for
   it to be quite visible, and we would not leave in a rail in
   that condition the amount that they had bent.  So it had
   certainly been bent since July 1988, and it is a reasonable
   assumption it was that day.
                             101

                                                     W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   Because the last testing      of all these b ar ri er s was,         as
     we know, in July of 1988.       A.   That's it.

Q.   You are no doubt aware, 0 r . Eastwood, of the r eq ui r em e nt
     in Par ag ra ph 39 of the u p- to - da t e Green Guide that there
     should be a visual i nspe ct io n of the ground after each
     event.     I am not s u g ge st i ng it should be c ar ri ed out by
     you but you are no doubt aware of that requirement.
     A.    It wasn't in ray mind.        It has not been our duty, in
     fact.

Q.   I am not s u gg es ti ng it was your duty. A. No.   I have
     obviously read it at some time but I had forgotten.

Q.   But one of the requirements, if one looks at that, is that
     crush barriers and b a l u s t ra d es should be e x am in ed for
     d e f o r m at io n or any other overt signs ofwsakness.      A.  Yes.

Q.   It is a matter of commonsense, is it not, that there should
     be such an inspe ct io n by s om eone after each event because
     s ometime s these b arrie rs show signs of w ea k ne s s which might
     not have been picked up on a test because it did not exist
     on a test, so it is a matter of c o mm o n s e n s e to inspect,
     p ar ti cu la rl y after c er ta in ly a big event when there might
     have been some p ressure on the barriers;           is that right?
     A.      Yes.

Q.   Is that some th in g   you drew to the Club's    a tt en t io n ?
     A.   No.

Q.   Have you ever been n otifi ed by the Club that there has
     been an i n sp ec ti on and there has been s o me th in g wrong or
     noticed to be possibly wrong with, for example, a crush
     barrier?     A.      Yes.

Q.   How often does that happen in your e x p er i en c e? A.  Not
     very often but I will be told from time to time or we will
     be told that, "The barrier on the Kop we would like you to
     have a look at;  it looks as if it is a bit c or r od e d or
     it is a bit bent" or whatever.

Q.   Is it your u n d e r s t a n d i n g that that has arisen as a result     of
     a regular i n s pe ct io n or simply as a result of s om e th i ng
     that has been drawn to s omeon e' s a t t e nt i on ?     A.   I just
     don't know.

Q.   C ertainly you did not suggest that the        Club d e vi se d any
     system of i ns pe c t i o n ? A. No.

Q.   I want to ask y ousabout your testing.          We have got a
     helpful p h o to gr ap h at page 59A of your bundle of what I
     call your m achine - your rig is the word you use.           What
     you are there doing, as we can see, is --            A.   I have
     not got the p h o to gr ap h in my s ec tion but I do have one,if
     I can find it, somewhere.

Q. Do dig it out.   Mr.        G lasg ow has very kindly d on at ed his
   on loan.   (Handed)         A.     Thank you, yes.
                                 102

                                                         W. E A S T W O O D

Q. Dr. Eastwood, can I look at that in conjunction, please,
   with Appendix C of the Green Guide because I want to see
   exactly what it is that you are doing and how you are
   a chie ving what you are after. It is either Annexe C of
   the new or Appendix C of the 1976.   A.   I have it.

Q.   Correct me if I am wrong, I do not think there is any
     m ateri al d i f fe re nc e betw ee n the two, is there? A. Not
     that I know of.

Q.   Good.   So we can look at the u p - to - da t e one then.   What
     you are trying to do is to apply an evenly d i s tr i bu t ed
     force, looking at P aragrap h 1, of in fact 6 kNs/metre;
     right?   A.   Yes.

Q.   Or for these of us who u n de rs t an d things better in Imperial
     measures, 400 lbs force/ft. width.         Ideally - I say "ideally"                -
     if you could do it in perfect conditions, you w ould be
     applying so me ho w by means of some m a ch in er y that force by
     a pplyi ng it to the whole of the length of the h or iz o nt a l
     b etween two stanchions.     A.     That's it.

Q.   But that is o bviously s om e th i ng which is d if fi c ul t to
     achieve on a football ground.         A.    V irtually impossible.

Q.   Or anywhere, for that matter.           A.      V i rt ua ll y i mp os s ib l e
     because the rail does deflect quite           m a rk ed ly up to 20 mm,
     that sort of order, and you would have to have some th in g
     which was s u f f i c ie nt ly strong to s pr ea d the load on to
     the rail and yet was s uf fi c ie n tl y flexible to follow the
     rail.

Q.   So what you are doing is to apply              the pres su re       at four
     points.   A.   Four points.

Q.   On the relevant       piece of rail.         A.    Yes.

Q.   In fact it is eight points because you do it to two
     s im ultaneous ly. A.  To two spans of points, eight                      points.

Q.   Is that right?   A.           Yes, exactly as you see here.
     There are two times         four and one pump serves both these.

Q.   So you can do two at once, is really what it ---         A. Well,
     it is more than that.    It is e s se nt ia l you do two at
     once because that post in the middle has to take load
     from both sides, so you would not test that leg prope rl y
     if you only did one bay at a time, so we test two and
     only move along one so every rail does get tested six
     times on our equipment.

Q. Each    one six     times?      A.     Yes,   three plus three.

Q.   I can u nd er s t a n d that, for example, looking at this one,
     it is fitted up so as to be the l e ft -h an d one at the end
     and the r i g ht -h an d one at the next to end of that p ar ti c ul a r
     crush barrier.          A.   Yes.
                             103

                                                       W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   P re sumab ly what you w ould then do is this,            is it, that
     you w ould go along one to the right?      A.              That's it,
     so you test 1 and 2, 2 and 3, 3 and 4.

Q.   But that means that 1 only gets three times, the rest
     get ---   A.   The first one only gets three times.

Q.   I am simply q uerying when you said each              had six, that
     was all.   A.    Yes.

Q.   So 1 has three,     the rest have six.       A.           That's it.

Q. Except for the one at the far end which again only has
   three, p re su m a b l y ? A. Each end one jast gets three
   times.

Q.   So depe nd in g on the length    of the barrier d e pe nd s on the
     number of tests each gets;        is that right?     A.     Yes.

Q.   By doing it that way, that is applying four in the
     c on fi g u r a t i o n that we see, that gives you an e q ui va le nt
       to the evenly d i s t r i b u t e d force.  A.   Very close to it.

Q. Do you, in fact, apply the force of six or do you apply
   a p e r ce nt ag e of the  six because you are only apply in g it
   to those four p oints?        A.   No, you apply the w hole
   of the six.         If it is, say, 3m ing, you apply 18 kNs,
   which is 4% each.         They all get an equal shares    I can
   e xplain how it ensures that every one of those press ur e
   points con ti nu es to give the same pressure.

Q. For my part, I do not think it is nece ss ar y to ask you to
   do that.    It s uffices that you indi ca te that it does.
   May I say, there is no quarrel, as I u nd er s ta n d it, that
   the method that you adopt is not a p er fe ct ly r e as on ab le
   method of a pplying the force.    A.    Health & Safety
   observe these tests, sir.

Q.   I am not quarrelling, I am simply seeking as necessary,
     I hope, to get an e x pl an a ti o n because for those of us
     who are not bright in e n gi ne er i ng it is not n ec es s ar i ly
     easy to follow just by looking at the picture.            Now,
     that applies the force, as we can see, and what are you
     looking for in the form of the d e fo r ma t io n or the move me nt
     rather?   A.    The Guide is rather ---

Q.   The Guide is not as clear as it ought to be, this is why
     I am asking you about this.             A.   What we do is to m e as ur e
     the d ef l e c t i o n at the fftiddleof the rail.

Q.   Is that where the post is?    A.          There is a post there,        yes,
     set up to m easure the deflection.

Q. N orma lly would there be a post on the r i g ht - ha n d one as
   well?     A.   Yes, that p a rt ic ul ar one there was, I think,
   the one that was b ent,an d so this was the one that we
   put this post against to find what load it had been bent at.
                               104
                                                 W. E A S T W O O D

Q.   And what does that post do?             A.  The post has a pointer
     on it and that is against the scale ---            This is going to
     get complicated, but it m ea s ur e s how much the rail of the
     barrier ----      It is not a t ta ch ed to the rail at all;    it
     is just at ta ch ed to the g ro un d and as the rail comes forward
     the di st an ce from that post is m ea su re d to the nearest
     milimetre, nearest half milimetre, I suppose, nearest
     m il im et re and that is what is recorded.

Q.   And that simply records, does it,            the m o ve me nt forward
     of the rail at that point.   A.               Of the rail at that point.

Q.   Correct me if I am wrong, there are a number                      of factors
     that would create that movement.  The first                       is obvi ou sl y
     a bowing of the rail itself.  A.  Yes.

Q.   You attach p ressure to the rail, it forces it out in the
     way that we saw on 138, was it, or w h at ev er the numb er s
     were, the two that had deformed.   A.     Yes.

Q. And that is simply because the tube itse lf is too weak,
   perhaps because of cor ro si on or what ev er reason, and bends.
   A.   Rea ches the yield point.

Q.   That is one reason for the bending or the deflection.
     Another reason could be, could it, a movem en t of one or
     other of the s ta nc h i o n s ? A. Yes.

Q.   So that if the s t a m h i o n moved f o r w a r d           A.       It does.
     It always does.     It is elastic.

Q.   There is going to be some m ov em en t of that.                   A.   Yes,     less
     than the bending but there is - a c om po ne nt                  of it is
     the stanchion.

Q.   It could be either end or both ends.                 A.          All three,
     the middle one.

Q.    I am sorry?      A.    It can be all three, the end ones or                     the
     middle one.       There are three stanchions.

Q.    Yes, I follow that but the m ov em en t of the rail at the
     point where the post is, the post in the m iddle of the left-
     hand one here would only measure the d ef le c ti o n of that
     p art ic ul ar part of the rail, would it not?    A.     Yes.

Q.   If you are doing both, you w ould have another similar
     stick in the other one which would m ea sure its deflection.
     A.   You only have to do that once per run of barrier
     because as you move along one at a time every span in turn
     gets the post and it is only when you come to the end that you
     need the second post.

Q.   I follow, so what you are telling me is that you w ould not
     put the post aainst the r ig ht - ha n d one necessarily, to
     use an example of this.    A.      Yes.

Q.   It would have its three but you would not know what                       the
ixs iy*

                                           105
                                                                            W. E A S T W O O D

               deflec ti on was on that first one;   its test would be on
               the next occasion.     A.   Tha t is so.

          Q.   So it has already had three with an u nk nown m ov em en t                        and it
               gets its second three when you record the movement.                                A. Yes.

          Q.   Can the a pp li c a t i o n of the force in the t es ting w eaken the
               barrier?     A.       If they are taken well over the /yield point
               then repeated loading could at some time, if you kept on
               doing it, cause failure.

          Q.   But pres um ab ly it can weaken as well, can it not?
               A.       Only very marginally.             This is not normal fatigue
               but f at i g u e - t e s t i n g is dom in a te d -- fatigue failure is
               d o m i na te d if it is varia bl e loads by the very few big
               loads.         If you were putting on a t h ou sa nd of this and
               then a bigger load a hundred times and then an even bigger
               load say ten times, it is that big load which w ould domin at e
               the fatigue failure and putt in g on the smaller loads would
                 have very little effect on how many big loads it took to
               cause the failure.

          Q.   I follow that but you are, of course, p ut ting loads on above
               the design capacity, are you not?   A.     Yes, but w ithin ---

          Q. Not an e normous         amount above,        I accept that.           A.      About
               20%.

          Q.   Can you tell when you have a movement, a defl ec ti on , what
               is causing that deflection, w he ther it be a bending of the
               rail or whether it be a m ov em en t of the s t an ch io n or
               s t an ch io ns ?         A.    Yes, the bending of the rail is usually
               sufficient to be appare nt visually if you look along it,
               you can see that it has b an an ae d - take the load off, it
               s t r ai gh te ns up.          If you have these t w o -l e gg e d s t an ch io ns
               by and large, because of the stab il it y with having two
               legs, they do not move forward very much, wher ea s my
               s i n g l e - l e g g e d ones, you can see them.        You can detect
               that they move forward and then come back.                       The f oundation
               component, often we are sure the majo ri ty of the m o ve me nt
               is a s s oc ia te d with the f oundation because under these banks
               it is just ash and in the course of time it b i o - d e g ra d es
               and becomes loose.               It does not c o ll ap se if it b i o - d e g r a d e s ,
               they just become a bit loose, you put a load on and it
               s quashes a bit the first time you load, and seco nd and
               third times, for that matter.                You cannot see much move me nt
               on the f oundations mostly.               If you get a f o un da ti on that
               is going to lift, then you may see the c on c re t e lift in g at
               the back and that is a w arning sign, even if it does not
               go o v e r .

          Q. Also, if one sta nc hi on is the weak point and is giving
             you the movement, the m oveme nt at the s t a n c hi o n will be
             greater, will it not, than the move me nt r e co rd ed at
             the centre of the h o r i z o n ta l ? A. Yes.

          Q. And so if you are g etting that sort of a movement, if I
             can see what I mean, you — -    A.   The s t a n c hi o n move me nt
Ut(

                                  106

                                                       W. E A S T W O O D

           is going to be mainly when that s t an ch io n is in the
           middle, if you look at this picture.

      Q.   Of course it is that s ta nc hi on which carries the rnueh
           greater -- twice the load to the others.       A.   Not twice,
           one and a quarter times.

      Q.   I am sorry, one and a quarter times.             A.   It is not even
           a quart er at each end.        It is more than a half on the
           middle stanchion.         It tends to m o v e c- we have done
           e x pe r im en ts on this - maybe three times as much.




                                          /But what   I am gett in g at.
                                              W. EASTWOOD

But what I am getting at is that you could have a situation
on your m e t h o d , could you n o t r where you have a much greater
movement of the stanchion       than is recorded in the middle,
and there may in fact be problems at the stanchion because
of the greater degree of movement?           A. No, no, the bar
must always move more than the stanchion.

Even at the middle point?     A. Yes. The movement is
dominated by the bananaing of the horizontal arc.   By
far the biggest component tends to be the banana shaping
of the arc.  The movement fofward of the stanchion is
smaller, any settlement of the foundation is smaller.

There are some who do what you do for other football grounds
whose test involves applying force at the stanchion points,
in order to test specifically the movement of the stanchions.
Are you aware that there are others who do that?   A. We
usually test the stanchions as we go along with the second
upright.

I am sorry, the second upright ...?    A. We have two of
these uprights with this gauge on and we put the second
one usually against the middle stanchion, so we have
another reading, but of course there is no guide there
as to what you should do about the stanchion only, which
is dominated in its settlement by the earth.   Obviously
it is a very different kind of test from that which also
involves a: horizontal arc? bsta we do look out for signs
of trouble there.

So are you saying that it is routine that you oat only
apply your rig as is shown in 59A but you apply also,
if we can evisage the left-hand one being moved along,
that the middle bit and the post is against the stanchion
itself?   A. Whenever we are testing a new barrier, we
test the stanchions.

But not with these?      A.   Not with these.    It's not called
for.

You say it is not called for.      Why not?     A. We check the
barrier itself.

But surely you are concerned wfiSh the integrity of the whole
construction which includes the stanchions as well as the
horizontals? A. The stanchion has had the load on it and
gets it fully when the two bars either side are there.
The deflection which we measure is that of the horizontal
bar because that is what dominates.     The amount of
movement in these stanchions is very, very tiny.

But on the barrier that went, one of the things that went
was the stanchion?   A. Not until after the bowing had
occurred.

Tfiati may be, Dr. Eastwood, but it seems plaip, does it
not, that not only did the horizontal member break but
also the stanchion broke?     A. It would not have broken
1 ^ 2

                                 108

                                                       W. EASTWOOD

             if the horizontal leg hadn't gone first.         What happened,
             I am fairly sure, is that when the horizontal rail bent
             and got to the stage where in one case it was 200nun out,
             by that time it had distorted so much that it had twisted
             the stanchions at each end. As a result, when it finally
             came out at one end, as it did, it then swung round and
             twisted the first leg and, because it had broken, the second
             span was now also bowed out and it did the same to its leg;
             and probably the thing which saved the third one - add we
             haven't got a photograph here but if we lookiat the Health
             itnd Safety Report I think their d r a w i n g ---

        Q. We have got a photograph of the barrier as it is collapsed
           in Figure 2, or Figure 1 which is the --   A. If I can
           refer you to Figure 1, you will see that there is a third
           leg there on support 2.

        Q. The bracing leg on support 2?   A. The bracing leg. I think
           that that was the critical thing which helped support 2 to
           not go over.

        Q. You mean if it had not been for that, the next leg, that is
           1-2, might well have gone as well?    A. Yes.  It's the
           twisting action of the tata*on the legs.

        Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Can I just understand what you
             are saying? You are saying that 3 - 4 goes first? A. Yes.

        Q. And canes free from the collar?      A. At one end or the
           other.

        Q. And swings round so as to twist this leg here?      A. Yes.

        Q. And do I understand you to say that when that came out,
           horizontal 2 - 3 sprang out as well?     A. Whether it
           sprung out at that instant, I don't know, sir, but if it
           was being bowed outwards - and there is a difference in
           the bowing out, because one went 200nsnr and the other I
           think is 130-plus t so the two rails are rather different;
           the 200 one is the one which I think probably precipitated
           the collapse because it was so bowed (if Professor Maunder
           will listen for a second) the 2G0mm on a span of 3,1 metres,
           which is about l-s-15 deflection to span, deflection to half
           span Wai,,I-7|r because it's a parabola, the inclination at
           the end was 1 in 3f, which is 20 degrees;    so before that
           rail flew out, its ends had turned through an angle of 20
           degrees and would obviously have twisted the legs with it.
           Then it came out at one end and spun round and the leg was
           then twisted into that collapsed shape. As that happened,
           up to that time, the support 3 had probably not been
           twisted out of line because both the bars either side
           were both two bananas.    At this end, this banana was
           twisting that support;    but      there are two bananas
           and that support probably wasn't twisted by it. When
           that came out, this now bananaed arid twisted that support
           and it collapsed.    The third one, I believe, was possibly
           saved by having an extra leg.    It may or may not have.
                       109

                                                  W. EASTWOOD

Q. Of course, also there was quite bad corrosion of the
   horizontal bars particularly at the end under the collar
   in support 4?   A. Yes.

Q. And at the end of support 2?      A.    Yes.

Q« Where it had snapped?    A.    Yes;    not so bad at the end of
   support 2 I don't think.

Q. Not quite so bad*  So far as support 4 was concerned - and
   I am looking at 3.4 of the body of the H.S.E Report -
   there was evidence that the tube wall had been perforated
   by corrosion, producing holes of about 10mm and 20ram in
   diameter before the collapse? A. Yes.

Q. So far as support 2 is concerned, the residual thickness
   of the tube was found to vary from .4mm to 4.4mm around
   fch& circumference.  So, as you say, it was not quite so
   bad at 2 as it was at 4?   A. No.

Q. And equally   not quite so bad at 3 as it was at either 2 or
   4?   A. No.

Q. The holes, of course, would have been an indication, to a
   visual examination, of something wrong, would they not?
   A. Yes.

Q. And no dbubt if those holes had been spotted, had been
   there, the barrier would have been condemned, would it?
   A. Oh yes.    If you read the annual reports, John Strange,
   Chartered Engineer, inspects every year every barrier on
   the ground, and our annual reports first have a section
   about where we have tested and anything that needs correcting
   and then there is usually a note saying that at three
   other barriers we have found some corrosion and at four
   others we have found ---

Q. Indeed, because you were no doubt alive to the problems of
   corrosion underneath the collars, and indeed because you
   thought they were mild steel, you thought the corrosion
   would be worse than in fact it was going to be for wrought
   iron? A. Well, mild steel 25 years old equals wrought iron
   50 or 60 years old.

Q. All right.   Can I come back to your testing, just to follow
   this through.   What is required by the guide - and this of
   course is the method that you had to adopt because of what
   the safety certificate says - is that you should apply for
   three conservative* days for five minutes each and then
   re-load?    A. Yes.

Q. Record what happened and then re-load?         A. That's right.

Q. Paragraph 5 is the important ones

        "If on the removal of the force for the third time
        the recovery of deformation is at least 75%, the
        barrier or hand-rail may be deemed to have satisfied
        the loading requirements."
                                            W. EASTWOOD

Can I ask you, Dr. Eastwood,    how you measure the recovery
or from what point you measure the recovery on each of the
three tests?   I am sorry; I am not making myself clear.
Going back to your 59A, we have your upright post's That is
presumably yourir datum point from which you measure the
movement when you apply the force for the first time?
A. Yes.

So let us assume that when you have applied your force your
post shows that the movement when the force has been applied
was, let us say, 20mm, and let us say that when you release
the pressure it goes back to, let us say, 5mm.  That means,
does it not, that you have a recovery of 75 per cent? A. Yes.

You then apply the force again.   Now, where is yourrpost
when you reapply the force?     A. The post has not changed
its position but the gauge of course will still have a
reading of 5.

So if it then moves let us say 25mm on the gauge, is that
recorded as a movement of 20 or a movement of 25? Do you
start wfifiih the 5 that you have already got and add to that
when you record the movement for the second@tfest? A. This
is where there is ambiguity, lack of clarity, in the guide.

I follow that.   I simply want to know at the moment what
it is   that you do.    A. The one that I take is that each
of the three tests is a discrete test. In other words, the
75 per cent would apply to the last test only.   The
alternative interpretation would be that you add together
all three of the readings of permanent deformation and
divide between the distance from where you first started
to where you have got to at the top of the third cycle of
loading.   Now, that is more onerous.  It has not been our
interpretation.   It has not been the interpretation, I can
say with confidence, of the Building Surveyor’s Department
of the Town Council.   We have had discussions on this since
the matter has been raised.   We believe that this is what
was intended.

I am sorry, what is what was intended?    A. That our
interpretation is what was intended.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can I just be sure that I have
understood this?   Does that mean that when it says here
on the third occasion the recovery is at least 75 per cent,
you do not take as the datum for that last test where you
began;  you take as the datum where you last left off?
A. That*$&so, sir.

      Mr. COLLINS:   Dr. Eastwood, let me put to you what
I krkow is an extreme example which I perhaps may suggest
may illustrate where your theory or your method could be
said to go wrong.   It is this: Let us assume you have a
movement of say 25mm the first time and you have a recovery
of only 25 per cent.   You then apply the force again and
you get a further millimetre with a recovery of 25 per cent.
                         111

                                              W. EASTWOOD

     §6 fou have had a movement already of what - I have forgotten
     what figures I have put  - of about an inch and a half?
     25mm is about an inch, is it?   A. I ’ve not caught up with
     you yet!

Q. I will start again.  This is because I am being asked to
   think in millimetres and I cannot.  I can only think in
   inches.  Let's start again.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Do it in inches if you wish.

Q.        Mr. COLLINS:  1" on your first goes back by only 25
     per cent, so you have got a three-quarter inch movement
     recorded on your first test - right?    A. Yes.

Q. The next one records an    inch and a quarter, so you have
   got a full ---- A. That is highly unlikely.

Q. It may be that it is highly    unlikely.  A. No, it's impossible.
   I'm going to be firmer with    you.  This is getting to be so
   so unlikely ---

Q.   I am just testing your theory.   Let us see where we go. If
     you get that sort of movement, you may say to me "Well,
     you would in any event have rejected that barrier because
     it would manifestly be unsafe" - right?   A. Yes.

Q.    But if that happens, you get a total movement at the end
     of the second test of 2* from your original, but it has
     come back a little bit, so let us say an inch and a half
     from your original.   Now, if you start from that point and
     apply your third force and it ernes back to the inch and
     a half, you have got 100 per cent recovery on the third
     test, have you not?     A. Yes.

Q. But in fact you have had a movement of an inch and a half?
   A. No.   It is my belief, you see, that it is the third
   test which matters.   The first time you've got these ashes
   or whatever thtey are under the foundation which over the
   previous four or five years have been biodegrading and
   you put a load on and the first time you load you get quite
   a lot of movement of those ashes, and that movement is
   reduced the second time and the third time it w o u M   be
   virtually zero;   and it is not a sign of danger that the
   ashes are going to go, because they do compress but they
   just compress and the barrier does not go over;    they only
   go a few millimetres but the rotation in fact shows up.
   Now, what we are re&lly looking for is what is happening
   to the ste^l structure.   Obviously you have to be on the
   look-out for what is happening to the foundation but it's
   the steel structure.   Now, the steel structure will tighten
   up. ;If you take it over the yield point, you will not have
   full recovery.   The second time, if it is the steel which
   is yielding, you will get virtually no movement;    and
   certainly by the third time you would expect the steel to
   give virtually no movement.    Now, it is that thiid test
   which is the one that I regard as the most important.      If
   it gives you zero, you are all right.
                                   W. EASTWOOD


      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That means you start with
your barrier let's say in the vertical, and although you
may say it is only ashes, you end up at the end of your
test with it out of the vertical but you say it is all
right? - A. They usually start out of the vertical anyway,
sir.

Well out of whatever approximation the vertical it began
before you did your test? - A. These movements are not
that big sir, and there is some recovery of course on the
ashes, but can I I hope sir save everybody's time, on the
third loading of this particular barrier, the one which
failed last year, there was 100% recovery on the third
loading.   That is a sign to me that that barrier now has
settled down and was perfectly all right.   Now that barrier
also did not fail even on the interpretation you are putting
on it ....

Well I am not so sure? - A. No, no, it had the 75 recovery
if you take the addition of the three. Shall we do the
sums?

I was going to ask you to look at these records because
I think it is important that we should follow this one
through to the end. They are either at page 466 in the
core bundle or at page 200 in your bundle, Dr. Eastwood.

      MR. TOULSON:  Sir, I think it would   help if my
friend were to ask him on one and not the   other because
I have noticed that they are not quite in   the same order
in the two? working off different bundles   they will be
at cross-purposes.

      MR. COLLINS:  I am simply giving Dr. Eastwood the
number and everyone else the number so they can choose
which they work from.

That is why I have said 200 in your bundle, Dr. Eastwood,
or page 466 in ours because that is the test sheet I am
after.  As we know  it was 124A which was the barrier which
collapsed.

      Can I just ask you, before we go into the details of
the figures I want to see how these records work.

      There are in   fact three spans,are there not,   to
barrier 124A? - A. Yes.

Each of which, am I right, ought to be separately tested
and recorded? - A. Yes.

In fact what we have here is a record of 1-2 and 2-3.  Is
that right, which is two spans? - A. No, we test spans
1 and 2 and then we test spans 2 and 3.
• -»

                               113
                                             W. EASTWOOD


       Q. The movement which is recorded is of what then? - A. It is
          usually done on the leg nearest the end when you start.

       Q. So that if you start as you have here at the end of 1?
          - A. It would be halfway between supports 1 and 2.

       Q. Halfway between supports 1 and 2. In fact exactly the
          equivalent of the one we saw on Photograph 59A? - A. Yes.

       Q. What about the 2-3. What point is that record of deflection?
          - A. That is almost certain to have been in the middle of
          the span between supports 2 and 3, in other words in the
          middle of span 2.

       Q. Which means there is no record for the middle of the span
          running from 3-4? - A. It is possible that that is so.

       Q. It appears to be so? - A. Yes.

       Q. And the same applies if we look to or would appear to apply
          to all the barriers which are tested.  There are records
          only of the deflection of one less than the number of spans
          of each barrier? - A. That is so.

       Q. So that one span is omitted almost? - A. It has been test
          loaded but has not had the deflection measured.

       Q. Why is that? - A. I think it should have been.

       Q. Well why hasn't it been because this seems to have been
          the common practice in your records? - A. We have had
          the test load only in that span.

       Q. What this means is that the records of one span in each
          barrier has not been taken? - A. That is so.

       Q. That could be crucial, couldn't it? - A. It could be.

       Q. Well why hasn't it been done, that is what I am asking?
          - A. There has been an error in the testing.

       Q. There seems to have been an error that has been in
          existence ever since you have been doing the testing
          because all your records appear to be in the same formi
          It seems a somewhat extraordinary error, that is all.
          - A. It is extraordinary.

       Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I mean is it a matter of
            policy to do two out of three as being sufficient or was
            it an error and if it is an error it seems to be a remarkably
            recurrent error.  That is the point? - A. It is an omission.
            Many of the people who test these barriers test only one
            span at a time and that is of course inappropriate because
            you don't get the double load on the leg in the middle.
                         114
                                       W. EASTWOOD


           We test two at a time and we should have been taking
     deflections on both the spans and we have only been doing
     one and it does mean that one has not had its deflection
     measured on it.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:  You are not saying it was but it could
     be the case that it is that one which showsthat the barrier
     ought to be rejected? - A. Could be.

Q. That is why it is important to do each? - A. Yes.

Q. For some reason this is something which the City Council
   has never spotted? - A. Yes.

Q. Because it is apparent from the face of your records that
   there are only two out of three spans recorded, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can you tell me on 124A which
     end do you start numbering from? - A. I don't know sir,
     unless it is shown on one of the drawings.  I don't think
     it is.

q.        MR. COLLINS:   No, we have taken it in our drawing,
     well it is the HSE has put one at a particular end, but I
     am not sure whether, let me just check ....A. It will
     be possible to tell from the drawings.

Q. I think it is actually and I am looking now at your 1610/64E
   Dr. Eastwood, in fairness to you.  It would seem that 1
   is the one which went, the one out Into the middle.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  So the two that went had been
     tested and the one that was not tested was the one that
     stood up?

           MR. COLLINS:  On this occasion it happened to be
     the one that stood up.

Q. Let me now go to the figures which I think in a sense speak
   for themselves.  Looking along the line and I am looking
   at 1-2, on the first test it moves 29mm. under the loading;
   springs back to a point 12mm. from the original and thus
   you record a 59% recovery rate. Right? - A. Yes.

Q. That I think speaks for itself.  Now Test 2, the rest
   point 'O' effectively reads 12 because that is where you
   are starting, so under the load it moves 19, but in fact
   from the original base that would be 19 + 12, i.e. 31?
   - A. Yes.

Q. It recovers to 5 but you have got to add in the 12 so you
   have got a recovery to 17 from the original datura base
   at the first test? - A. Yes.
                            115
                                         W. EASTWOOD


Q. In fact on the second test taking it in the way that you
   did, you have as we can see a 74% recovery rate.

           Therefore at the beginning of the third test 'O'
     is in fact, as we have ascertained, 17 away from the
     original.  Under the load it moves a further 19 making
     36 from the original but it recovers all that 19 so the
     amount that it has moved from its original is 17? - A. Yes.

Q. It has in fact moved a total of 36 from its original and
   has recovered to 17, right? - A. Yes.

Q. So what is the percentage recovery rate? - A. 17 over 36.

Q.   Which is what, round about 50%? - A. Over 50%.

Q.   53% I think? - A. No    sorry, it is 19.

Q. I hope my sums are right apart from that last percentage,
   which means it has failed if you approach on the basis
   that the point to which it must recover is the point at
   which you first start? - A. No, it has not failed.  It
   will be a retest.

Q. If recovery is less than 50% on the first test the barrier
   shall be deemed to have failed.  If it is 47% it is less
   than 50? - A. There is 17 of permanent deformation.

Q.   17 permanent deformation to which you add*.the 19 to get the
     36. You cut off the 19 again and go back to the   17 and it
     is 17 out of 36, isn't it? - A. No, the recovery is 19 out
     of the 36.

Q. I beg your pardon.   You are quite right, I have got it the
   wrong way round.   The recovery is the 19 and that is what
   you get the percentage from so it is 53%? - A. That is
   more than 50%.

Q. You are absolutely right and that means, as you say quite
   rightly, a retest? - A. A retest.




                      /Q. But it is pretty close
                        116

                                                W. EASTWOOD


Q. But it is pretty close to the border, but certainly a
   retest? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed, I suspect probably if you had a 53% recovery you would
   probably fail it, would not you? - A, Oh, no.
Q. You would retest, would you? - A. It is a variable thing, but
   firstly our-^argument is it is not a retest.   Having said that
   the one conclusive thing to my mind is that on the last test
   there was not permanent set at a l l . In the last test it
   recovered absolutely 100%, the third time.    It defected to 19
   and came back 100%.   If it had been retested another three
   times we would have got a similar result.

Q. You don't know, because you did not do it? - A. No, but
   experience shows this.

Q, Let- me put it this way, I appreciate there is an argument
   about which is the right way to do it, but if you do it your
   way you get 100% recovery, no problem. - A. Yes.

Q. If you do it the way i have suggested, namely taking the first
   point, you get certainly a retest required on this barrier? -
   A. That is so.

Q. Although you say your experience suggests the retest would
   have given it a clean bill of health, but no-one can be sure
   of that, can they? - A. No.

Q. And at the very least there would have been a question mark
   raised, a possible question mark raised about the stability of
   this particular barrier? - A. I doubt it.    At that full
   recovery on the third tes t , 0 to 19 back to 0, is so
   comforting it is 100% recovery, and if there was some
   permanent yielding going on in the steel over the 5 minute
   period that the load held on there would have been some
   permanent deformation.  It would not have recovered 100%.

Q. It does mean or indicate if one looks at the figures that this
   is a relatively speaking quite substantial deflection in this
   barrier.  I am simply looking through the records of all the
   barriers that were tested in these ones we have got, and a
   total of 36, I won't say   it is the largest but certainly
   among the larger, is not   it? - A. Yes, but you see if you go
   over the page to 131, we  have got 32 mm on the last load with
   100% recovery.

Q. Indeed, but that is the total, 32, because you have never had
   anything to add to start.  It has always come back on each one
   to its original datum base, has not it, and therefore the
   total is 32 as opposed to 36 with certain failures to recover
   on the other? That is right, is not it? - A. Yes, but this
   one had been recovering 100% each time.  Now, looking at 124,
   on its third loading it only deflected 19.  Look at the one
   above it, No. 123, it deflected 21.

Q. Yes, but again I appreciate that that was the deflection of
                          117

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


     that particular one, but it has in the course of your testing
     deflected by 36? - A. This is a sign of movement of the soil.

Q. It may be.    It may be a sign of something else.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, I don't follow how it
     is any better for the people who are going to use it that the
     soil was giving than the barrier was giving? - A. Because the
     soil, sir, these granular materials in the base, in effect
     they virtually will not collapse.  They will settle modestly,
     but they will not collapse.

Q. So you will get a bit of movement but you won't get collapse?
   Is that it? - A. Yes.  It beds down.   It is rather like
   pushing a plate if you like into a bed of sand, and sand -
   forget the Bible and the man who built his house on sand - is
   a very good bearing material, and you will get very highs
   bearing pressures before it will fail, but it will bed down.
   These are not as good as sand.  It is the ashes from the
   fireplaces of the turn of the century.   They would not build
   houses on it now because of the methane.   This biodegrading
   means it does settle, and this is one of the major causes of
   the settlement.  When it disappears like this and you get then
   fully elastic behaviour on the third occasion, that is a sign
   that the steel is all right.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:    Can we go back to 131 which we were
     looking at a moment ago.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are you just about to finish with
     this point?  If you are then we will finish it.

          MR. COLLINS:    Within 5 minutes I hope I will be finished
     with the barriers.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   We don't want to break records for
     sitting hours.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:   I would just like to ask you this.  You
     see the first two tests are roughly within the same bounds, 19
     and 21 mm.  The third one it jumps up to 32.  Is that slightly
     surprising in the light of what you told me a little time ago
     that it was unlikely to go higher on the third? - A. Yes.   In
     fact, if you look at the one immediately above it you see the
     same thing is happening, 15, 17, 20.

Q.   I am isolating 131 because there is a high jump from the
     second to the third. - a. It is a greater jump, but the one
     above is going up.

Q. Yes, it is going up, and so indeed was 124A. - A. Yes, but the
   important thing is the 100% recovery.

Q.   Can we look at 137, which is one of the ones that deformed in
     pen 4.  It is your page 204, Dr. Eastwood.   That one we see a
     very considerable movement, do we not? We start with 32.
     There are 4 left.  There is a 30 on the second, but that
                         118

                                                 W. EASTWOOD


     should be 34 from the first base, 4 left, and then it goes 25
     plus 8, which is 33 on the third.  So there is a very
     considerable movement of that one, is not there? - A. No, even
     on your interpretation of the test it passes.

Q. I am not suggesting it does not pass.  All I am pointing out
   is there is a more than usual substantial movement, that is
   all. - A. No, movements of 4 mm twice, with none at all in the
   final test.  That is quite a reasonable test result.   It is
   not one of the most marvellous, because a lot of these
   barriers did not move at all, but there is no cause for alarm
   there.  Indeed, let me remind you that one was loaded up the
   following day, and I don't know whether this is the stronger
   one or the weaker one of the two, but to either 1-and-a-
   quarter times the test load or 1-and-a-half approximately, and
   still did not push over.  At that load it was just starting to
   yield again.  It was bent so it had yielded.  We took it up to
   the yield point again so we would know what load it had had
   and the people that were crushed against it.  Depending on
   which it is of the two it had had either 1-and-a-quarter times
   the test load on it or 1-and-a-half.

Q.   Can I ask you finally on this subject.  Corrosion is an
     important aspect, and as we can see and you point out and it
     is clear from your records, if you spot corrosion you will
     fail even if it appears to pass the loading.   These holes on
     124A must have been there on the testing in July? - A. Hidden
     under the clip.

Q.   So what you would say is there was no way they could   have been
     spotted? - A. I would need to know which end it was.    Was it
     at the very end?

Q. Yes. - A. If it was at the very end it probably was possible
   to spot it, unless it was sleeved there.

Q. This was a barrier that was cut by the creation of the central
   fence down the pen, do you remember? - A. Yes.

Q. Does cutting weaken or not? - A. No, it won't have any
   significant effect.

          MR. COLLINS:   Sir, I hope I can leave the question of
     testing the barriers, subject to anything that may be fed to
     me overnight.

          MR. JACKSON:   Sir, just before we adjourn for the
     evening, I understand that those behind me are far more
     sensitive than I am, and in my absence at lunchtime when i was
     speaking with Mr. Collins outside on other matters, a document
     was put into the Inquiry which was alleged to have caused me
     embarrassment.  May I say, charming as no doubt it was put by
     my learned friend, it caused me no embarrassment....

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I rather think it was my phrase.=

          MR. JACKSON:   Even more charmingly as it was put, it
                                              W. EASTWOOD


caused me no embarrassment at all, but I am able to assist to
this extent.  If I may use the phrase, ground safety, the
reason those tickets were returned by Liverpool I am told was
because that portion of the tickets at £12 had been allocated
to season ticket holders.   When they had 220 unsold they dare
not put them on sale because of the thousands they would
expect pouring in to demand the tickets, and for the safety of
control of the fans at home they returned them to
Hillsborough, so I am told.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.   10 o'clock.



         (The Inquiry was adjourned until 10 a . m .
                  the following morning)
