From: EDW ARD CREW QPM                                                  WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
    CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                     HEADQUARTERS
                                                                        PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                        Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                        Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                        Telephone:   0121-626 5000




    Our reference EMC/APF



    29 July 1997



    His Honour Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate, room 528
    London SW 1H 9AT




    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    This Force conducted the investigation into this disaster on behalf of South Yorkshire
    Police, and for that reason all of the material gathered has been deposited with South
    Yorkshire.

    At the conclusion of the Inquests, and following the verdict at the Coroner’s Court,
    arrangements were made for all original material to be returned to South Yorkshire
    Police for retention and file. This is normal procedure when a Force is called in to
    investigate matters at the request of another Chief Constable.

    South Yorkshire Police collected all material from West Midlands between 3 and 7 June
    1991, and are in possession of the necessary documentation detailing the material
    concerned. This investigtion was conducted using the Home Office Large Major
    Enquiry System (HOLMES) which is a computerised data system used in all major
    investigations. As with the original documents, the computer data was downloaded
    from the West Midlands mainframe and subsequently handed to South Yorkshire, who
    inputted it onto their own system.

    The original paper file submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions, together with
    all video, photographic and other relevant evidence is presumably still lodged with the
    DPP. All of the ninety five original Coroner’s files referring to those who died were
    submitted directly to the Coroner, Dr Popper, for his attention together with an exact
    copy of the DPP file. This Force did not complete the Coroner's investigation in relation
    to Anthony Bland, the ninety sixth victim, who died after the original inquests were held.



                                                                            Continued.../
Separate files in respect of alleged specific criminal offences by individual Police
Officers were submitted to the DPP and to the Police Complaints Authority and
subsequently referred back to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police who
remained the disciplinary authority for all such offences.

You may be aware that Mr Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable at South Yorkshire
Police, is the nominated Senior Officer in relation to all Hillsborough matters and I have
therefore copied your letter, and this response, to him.

I note you seek the assistance of West Midlands Police in relation to your scrutiny and
we will offer any assistance we can on the investigation process we undertook. The
Senior Detective Officer who completed the file to the DPP and the files to the
Coroner is Detective Chief Superintendent M J Foster who is the Regional Co-ordinator
of the Midland Regional Crime Squad, which is based at Bournville Lane Police Station,
Bournville, Birmingham B30 ( telephone number 0121 626 4052). D/C/S Foster can be
contacted there if any clarification is required on the content of this letter or the
procedures undertaken.
