h s .1.22/taylor.peb

                                              Mr   Yates
                                              Mr   Chilcot
                                              Mr   Moriarty
                                              Mr   Boys Smith
                                              Mr   Turney
                                              Mr   Goddard
                                              Mr   Mower
                                              Mr   Mould
Mr Walters
Miss Snow


TAYLOR REPORT

I thought it might be helpful, for the Home Secretary's meeting
at 12.15 today, to set out very briefly the broad content and
implications of the Taylor report and to list some of the actions
which should probably be considered at the meeting.
THE REPORT

Part I of the report is an overview of British football.  From
our viewpoint chapter 1 is not controversial. It paints a sad
picture of the state of professional football.   It criticises
clubs for complacency about safety and facilities for fans and
considers the extent to which these poor conditions have
contributed to bad behaviour by fans.

Chapter 2 concludes that the future must be in the direction of
all seated stadia and massive improvements in standards and
facilities for spectators both on grounds of safety and of
encouraging improved crowd behaviour. It points to ways in which
the football industry can finance these improvements itself but
mentions, without recommendations, one or two aspects of taxation
which the Government will at least need to consider. Though this
part of the report will be of interest equally to the Secretary
of State for the Environment and to the Treasury, it must be said
that the move towards all seated stadia was something which was
strongly supported by the former Home Secretary.
PART II

Chapters 3 and 4 are concerned with detailed matters relating to
spectator safety, building on the recommendations of the interim
report.   Most of them are unlikely to be controversial and can
be dealt with without primary legislation. There is one obvious
exception:   Taylor proposes the setting up an independent body
to supervise the responsibilities of local authorities for safety
at sports ground which goes beyond the powers available to the
Football Licensing Authority under section 13 of the Football
Spectators Act 1989.   It might be possible, in the short term,
to agree with the Local Authority Association that the FLA should
extend its responsibilities voluntarily towards rugby grounds
etc. The proposal that these supervisory responsibilities should
be extended to district authorities (who deal with indoor sports
facilities under entertainments legislation)       raises other
problems which will need to be considered separately.
PART III

This part is concerned with crowd control and hooliganism.    It
contains recommendations addressed to the police, proposals for
some new offences and for possible measures against hooliganism.
They are matters which will need to be carefully considered.
Some of them were raised previously by Popplewell but rejected.
However these proposals hang on whatever decision the Government
makes about the future of the football membership scheme in the
light of Sir Peter Taylor's comments in Part IV.
PART IV

This part of the report provides potentially the greatest source
of embarrassment to the Government given Sir Peter Taylor's
observations in paragraph 424. After a details analysis of the
possible effects of the football membership scheme, the judge
concludes that he has grave doubts about the feasibility of the
scheme and serious misgivings about its likely impact on safety.
For these reasons he says that he cannot support Part I of the
1989 Act.      The implications of that recommendation are
considerable and are not discussed in this note.       It should
perhaps be noted however that since Sir Peter's recommendations
are made on grounds of safety, maintenance of public order and
the effect on police resources, it will fall to Home Office
Ministers to support his arguments against the implementation of
the scheme.

NEXT STEPS

In the light of the report, the Home Secretary's meeting will
probably need to consider the following matters:

     1. Whether the report should be published immediately, in
     order to avoid premature speculation, or at a normal pace
     (ie within 2-3 weeks) to provide more opportunity for a
     considered response.

     2.  Because of the sensitivity of the recommendations in
     Part IV, the Home Secretary will probably wish to impress
     on his    colleagues  and officials   the   importance of
     confidentiality until the report is published.

     3. The question of which Ministerial colleague should be
     consulted and how.

     4.  The timing and content of either an arranged PQ or a
     statement.

     5.  An interim line to be taken by press officers in the
     Home Office and DoE.




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        G2 Division
22 January 1990
