          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007


Superintendent A M Hepworth
Discipline & Complaints Dept                                  Your reference:
South Yorkshire Police
Windsor Road                                                  0 u r reference:
SHEFFIELD S8 8UB
                                                              Date:       IS ’    October 1997




This replies to your letters dated 30 September (two letters, one recorded delivery), 8
October, 9 October, and 10 October. It also responds to the ‘audit trail’ o f police officers
statements which you sent us recently and asks for your advice on a letter which I must send
to Mr Fallon, a Hillsborough relative.

2.      On your 30 September letters. I confirm that we will arrange to have the Coroner’s
Inquest transcripts sent back to him at the end o f this exercise (which will be when the
Judge’s report to the Home Secretary has been published). We are grateful for the composite
plans showing locations of the deceased.

3.       We agree with what your 8 October letter says about our requests we made during and
after Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s visit to Sheffield last month. We now have your 9 October
letter about the approach by Granada TV to a Hillsborough Inquest juror - we are happy with
your conclusions and do not propose to take the matter any further for the moment.

4.      We will approach Hammond Stoddards about the civil actions direct, but would be
grateful if you could alert them that we are about to do so and instruct them to deal with us
direct.

5.       We are grateful for the ‘audit trail’ relating to altered statements which you have sent
us since your 8 October letter - as I recall, you have since told me over the telephone that
there is further information about this that you will put into a fresh report, and we look
forward to receiving that and also the results of your research into the suggestion that officers
were coached as to what to say in evidence to Lord Taylor.

6.     We are grateful for the description o f your policy on release of information set out in
your 10 October letter. As I see it the position is broadly as follows -


               B.odv files and other inquest material

       you release - to ‘properly interested people’ - everything except the summary, the
       sudden death report, and the addresses of people who made statements


G:\H ILLSBOR\MAIN\SYORKS.106
       B_-    N o n - i n q u e s t material

       if a person asks for his own statement - you release

       if a person asks for someone else’s statement - you release if the person who made
       the statement agrees

       if a person asks for his ticket back, you give it to him

       if a person asks for a photograph or video still you will release it, except that

              you don’t release mortuary or post-mortem pictures

              you don’t release pictures of the dead except to family and
              legal representatives

              you only release material which belongs to the police

       if a ‘properly interested’ person asks for a post-mortem report, you release it

       if a person asks for other material then

               you release it if it was submitted to the Taylor Inquiry or belongs to South
               Yorkshire police (i.e. it is ‘in the public domain’)

               if neither of these things applies, you seek the advice of the owner o f the
               document, and act on it.

7.      Perhaps you could let me know whether we have got this broadly right. I gave a
commitment while we were in Liverpool last week that I would let the families know
precisely what the position was in respect of the release of documents - especially from the
body files - and I would like to fulfil that promise.

8.     Finally, on the subject of release of documents, I must ask for your advice on the
attached letter we have from Mr Fallon, who is the son-in-law o f Mrs Sefton and hence the
brother-in-law of Andrew Sefton who was killed at Hillsborough. Mrs Sefton had a private
meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Liverpool last week and brought Mr Fallon with
her. He handed me the letter then. As you will see it seeks a complete copy of your VRM2
mortuary video.

9.     VRM2 is o f course yours to release or not as you see fit. I have concocted the
attached draft reply to Mr Fallon and would like your advice on it.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny

G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SYORKS.IO6
           CONFIDENTIAL - DRAFT, NOT FOR RELEASE

                 THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                 Room 1106
                 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW 1H 9AT
                 Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Leo Fallon                                                                Your reference:

                                                                          Our reference:

                                                                          Date:             October 1997




Thank you for the letter which you handed to me on 8 October during your family’s private
meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


You ask for a full copy of a video film showing the temporary mortuary which was set up at
the Hillsborough Football Stadium on the day of the disaster.                The video belongs to South
Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has no power to release it to you without their
consent.


I have however discussed the position with them. The video (which the Judge and I have
had to see as part of the Scrutiny) does as you say show scenes in the temporary mortuary,
with the bodies o f those who had died laid out on the floor. The police tell us that they are
willing to release to relatives’ families, or to others who have a proper interest, copies o f stills
from this video which show individuals who died.


But they will not release stills which show the bodies o f other people who died or copies of
the video itself.              These are distressing scenes and the police take the view that it would not
be proper, and could be upsetting to the surviving relatives o f many o f those shown on the
video, to allow others to have access to these pictures of their relatives or to moving images
from the video.




G : \H I LL SB O R\ M A I N \ S E F T O N . 1 07
      CONFIDENTIAL                  -   DRAFT, NOT FOR RELEASE

That as I say is the position which the police take and we cannot require them to surrender
this or any other material to you. If you or Mrs Sefton would like access to a still from the
video, or to take the matter further, I would suggest that you do so with the police.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




 G :\HlLLSBOR\MAIN\SEFTON.107
                               1 B * ~ \         Up             gallon,
     [' -i\S._-']

                                  d   t |




     ( F ax ):
     Em ail us at:




                          jScV * {dA, u^vUjhu
                     ^r*>n                uIaH                             aM



                          t   w       2     .

                                                      v|^5v\       vv^ Cx^J^L(i^^y^C^ ,




Uj                  'wi       tUvfl-                     <^6                 Ucr-J


                                                               13 ~ i o - e f t - .
