               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
              Room 1106
              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
              Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Trevor Hicks                                                  Your reference:
Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:        ^    December 1997




                     /W/t,


Thank you for your letter of 5 December.

When I began work in July, I understood that your Group had important new evidence for me
to see. You gave me your submission in September. I met you to discuss it with your
barrister, Alun Jones QC, and I have since considered it in great detail.

As you know I also visited Liverpool, where - in addition to the open session to which all the
Hillsborough families could come - 1 had private meetings with you and Mrs Hicks and with
many of the other families who were affected by the disaster. I have also had numerous
meetings here in London, some with relatives of victims and some with police, lawyers, the
Coroner and other people who were involved. These meetings continue.

I do not need to tell you that I am looking at very serious matters. It is important that I
should let the Home Secretary have a report within a reasonable timescale and you are quite
right that the work cannot be an ever-moving feast. My letter of 25 November nevertheless
made it clear that last Friday was not an absolute ‘deadline’, as you put it, for the submission
of material to me. I said when I began the scrutiny that I expected to report to the Home
Secretary by the end of the year, and I believe that I should be able to keep to that timetable.
But my letter said that this could change if further important new evidence is presented to me.

You say that you have new evidence which you regard as important (and information from
the video of the temporary mortuary). I should be grateful if you could let me know more
about the nature of this evidence and why you believe it to be important. Perhaps you could
also let me know when you received it, from whom, and when it was asked for. If it is, as
you suggest, under investigation or awaiting expert opinion, please let me know the nature of
the investigation or opinion and who is carrying it out or providing it. Would you also let

C:\HIL LSBOR\M A IN\HICKS. 2 0 3
me know when I can expect to receive it.

I note that you will be sending me the evidence relating to Sarah. I hope that you will do so
as soon as possible. I should also be grateful for any response you have to my letter of 21
November.




                                           La
LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
   ^ 3B0S%
                                                                                                     P-.



                                                                                     \      '^ y Scy
      S(/ppti?»                                                                            SyppO ^

                         Hillsborough Family Support Group

    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny
    Room 1106
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    LONDON
    SW1H 9AT
                                                                            BY FAX AND POST

    5th December 1997


    Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

    It is with dismay that I received your letter of the 25 th November (received 27th) regarding
    the introduction of a deadline for submissions to the Scrutiny.

    I appreciate that this cannot be an ever-moving feast and that you will have many other
    duties calling for your time. Your comment "I think this would be in the best interests o f
    all concerned" is certainly not true in mine or many other of the families cases.

     Having campaigned for more than eight and a half years, we believed that Jack Straw's
     announcement of the scrutiny would at last give us an opportunity to ensure matters were
     fully investigated and correctly acted upon. Sadly the ship is being spoiled “for a ha’pth of
     tar”

     You are well aware, from the many communications copied to your office, of the long
     delays we have encountered in securing the release of information from South Yorkshire
     police. Having finally got some of the information released, we are now being given a
     totally disproportionate time to consider and comment on many of the new and in our view
     important matters arising from the information only recently received. Some of these
     issues require us to seek external advice and expert opinion and this is proving impossible
     within the deadline imposed.

     This difficult and heartbreaking process is not helped when you discover body files are
     incomplete and statements relating to one person, cross-refer to other victims sometimes by
     name (e.g. my daughters!) Yet neither Sarah or Victoria's body files do not contain those
     statements.

     The Family Group, let alone individual families, do not have endless resources that can be
     thrown at matters of concern to ensure a speedy evaluation. I for instance have spent most
     of this week travelling overseas on business, hence the delayed response to your letter.

CHAIRMAN                                   VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                     TREASURER
T. Hicks                                   P H am m nnH
I wish to place on record that the Hicks family and indeed the Hillsborough Family Support
Group consider the imposition of a deadline only six working days from receipt of formal
notification is unrealistic and totally unacceptable.

Are you aware for instance that your press office told the Liverpool Echo only a couple of
days before your letter that there was no intention to impose a deadline!!

We note your comment regarding “important new evidence” and your timetable but 1/ we
reserve the right to submit any matters important to us, currently under investigation,
and/or awaiting expert opinion. The delays at the start of the process were not of our
making and we are not prepared to be disadvantaged by them.

I personally will be sending documents and an extract of the hand held “temporary
mortuary” video that Jenni and I have just confirmed shows Sarah receiving attention after
4.00 pm. None of this is in the bodyfile we received and is contrary to evidence previously
presented and I wish to register this before the deadline.

I repeat that we consider the scrutiny is now proceeding with indecent haste and that such
haste is not our wish, nor is it in our best interests. We will continue to press Jack Straw
on these matters and reserve the right to place the whole matter in the public domain.

Yours sincerely,




Trevor Hicks
Chairman

(and bereaved father.)
