                                          f*StTrunJbtn\r




                               aau-iutaiErai.
MMR266


NOTE K3R THE PTODRD
                                        cc      Mr Yates
                                                Mr Moriarty
                                                HMCTC
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                Mr Malone Lee
                                                Mr Norris
                                                Mr Addison
                                                Mr Soden
                                                Mr Whalley


HIIISBCKCIDGH POLICE ENQUIRIES - COSTS ETC


Mr Geoffrey Dear raised with me this inorning, in the margins of another
meeting, same aspects of the enquiries being conducted lay his force
into the events at Hillsborough.


2.   First, he said that same members of his Police Authority on the
extreme left were seeking to cause difficulty for him because of the
abstraction from policing effort in the West Midlands and what was
being portrayed as a burden falling on West Midlands’ ratepayers.
Mr Dear said that behind this lay same criticism by those members that
he was too close to the Home Office, that he should not so readily have
accepted the commitment by West Midlands, and the risk that they would
seek to restrain or inhibit the work of the West Midlands force in
conducting the enquiry unless they were satisfied on the financial
aspect.


3.   I showed Mr Dear the letter from the Clerk to the South Yorkshire
Police Authority to the Home Secretary seeking central funding because
of the expected costs of the enquiries; I said that in my view this
contained implicit acceptance that South Yorkshire had s n w or all of
the responsibility, at least initially.   While I was not in a position
to give any undertakings to the West Midlands (who should be looking to
South Yorkshire in any event at the first instance), South Yorkshire
had now formally raised the matter with the Home Secretary and it was
perfectly open to Mr Dear to tell his police authority that the matter

                              (I*iFlUfcNHRL                                1
                               aareiufcwriftL
lay between South Yorkshire and the Home Office.      Mr Dear (and neither
of us had then seen the letter frcrn the Clerk to his police authority
to the Hone Secretary received by fax today (25 April) seeking
assurances that West Midlands would not have to meet any of the costs)
thought he could get through his next police authority meeting later
  .                                  kvL
this week perfectly comfortably on tfeot footing that the issue would
need to be resolved fairly early.


4.   I then raised with Mr Dear the issue of the scale and duration of
the police enquiries.    Very large numbers of police officers hqd been
mentioned in press reports, and I said I should not be surprised if
Sir Peter Taylor (wham Mr Dear was to meet later in the day) would want
to form his own view about the necessary scope of enquiries.      Mr Dear
said that he was very ready to take direction from Lord Justice Taylor
on, for example, the range of people from wham statements needed to be
taken.   West Midlands have, in any case, initiated a preliminary
questionnaire procedure (which I thought very sensible and said so) to
get a first idea of the quality of information available from all those
who might respond to the free-phone enquiry system.      Once they knew how
many respondents there were to the free-phone enquiries, and then later
when initial questionnaires had been returned, it ought certainly to be
possible to categorise respondents and to limit further statement-
taking and interviewing to those who had something substantive to
contribute.   This would be for Lord Justice Taylor in conjunction with
West Midlands police to decide at a later date.


5.   Finally, Mr Dear said that much of the effort would be done with
police officers working overtime and there was a natural limit to how
long this tftould go on; but on present form he thought that by mid or
late May the great bulk of the work of processing questionnaires and
taking statements ought to be complete.   Thereafter it was not easy to
see how further police enquiries might develop, but I rather formed the
impression that these would be on a very much smaller scale than the
current initial round.

                                                J A
                                                25 April 1989
                              aHFiiramar.
