                                                                   H   om e   O   f f ic e

                                                                  QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                   LONDON SW1H9AT




Ms Maria Eagle MP                                Our Ref:   P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /7 7
House of Commons                                            PO 2 1 5 1 9 /9 7
LONDON
S W 1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 18 November 1 9 9 7 about Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith's Hillsborough scrutiny.

Trevor Hicks of the Family Support Group complained about difficulties in
obtaining access to information held by the South Yorkshire Police. This is
disputed by Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, who has said
that the force has made every effort to respond to requests for information
subject to the legal constraints which apply.

The Home Secretary asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for advice on the issues
raised by Mr Hicks and he has confirmed that he has not seen any sign that the
police are deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties.
He has assured us that he has been given full access to the material held by the
force and that the force has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From w h at we
have been told by the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith it appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the
material which should be available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
has been available to him, and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully
the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.

Although the Home Secretary indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we
hoped it would be possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year,
the timescale is ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. W e have told
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to
complete his work, this would certainly be within his discretion. However,
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has indicated that he expects to keep to his original
timescale for completion of the report.
The terms of reference given to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the Scrutiny will
allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence was
overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the consideration
of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to recommend any
other action which should be taken in the public interest. His terms of reference
are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they will allow him to
carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been submitted by the
families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.
I do, of course, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

i am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, the Home Secretary will make public the advice given by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith in his report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests
material evidence about the disaster has been overlooked.
                 Minister's Case - Draft Reply

Divisional       PW/97 5/2180/77
Reference:
Private Office   PO 21519/97
Reference:

Notes For        Ms Eagle writes to support the call from the
Minister:
                 families of the Hillsborough disaster to extend
                 the timescale for the LJ Stuart-Smith's scrutiny
                 because of alleged problems in the families
                 obtaining material from the police archives.

Enclosures:



Copy To:



Contact          M J Pyne
Details:         OPPU
                 Room 528
                 QAG
Maria Eagle MP                                 Our Ref:   P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /7 7
House of Commons                                          PO 21 5 1 9 /9 7
LONDON
S W 1 A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 18 November about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's
Hillsborough scrutiny.

Trevor Hicks of the Family Support Group complained about difficulties in
obtaining access to information held by the South Yorkshire Police. This is
disputed by Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, who has said
that the force has made every effort to respond to requests for information
subject to the legal constraints which apply.

I asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for advice on the issues raised by Mr Hicks
and he has confirmed that he has not seen any sign that the police are
deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties. He has
assured me that he has been given full access to the material held by the force
and that the force has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From w hat I have
been told by the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith it appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material
which should be available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been
available to him, and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the
issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.

Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that w e hoped it would be
possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his work, this would
certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for completion
of the report.

The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
Scrutiny will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they
will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.
I do, of course, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to Mr
Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, I will make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence
about the disaster has been overlooked.




                                  JACK STRAW
                                MARIA EAGLE MP




                            HOUSE               COMMONS
                                L 0N 1

                                                     Sa
The Rt Hon. Jack Straw MP                                 ep
Home Secretary                             r*
50 Queen Anne's Gate                       A
LONDON
SW1H 9AT

                                                                      18 November 1997


                                      u t [ ° \           h   i




I have been most concerned to hear o f the difficulties that are being experienced by
the Hillsborough families, in their endeavours to present evidence to the scrutiny
being conducted by Lord Justice Stuart Smith, as detailed in their letter o f 9
November 1997 (copy attached for ease o f reference).

I am sure you appreciate how vital it is in Liverpool that this exercise is seen to be fair
after so many years o f unfairness. I would therefore urge you to ensure that the
Hillsborough families are able to complete their quest for justice unhindered.


   \




                     lU A C i
> 13-11-97 13:SS FROM:PHIL HfiMMOND. H. F. S. G 01S1 SSI 1B16                                           TO:44B0376                             PFIGE:01

         10-NOU-SH 10:44                    TREMOR HICKS
                                                                                                      E3 0153S 591403




                                                                                                                             v,aBOfi%




                   sv??cfr
                                              Hillsborough Family Support Group

                  Rl. Hon Jack Straw MP
                  Home Secretary
                  Horne Office
                  SO Queen Anne’s Gate
                  London
                  SW1T1 9AJ

                                                                                                               9"' November 1997
                                                                                                            J1Y FAX AND POST
                  Dear Mr Straw,

                  ro t Hillsborough Scrntinv

                 It is with deep regret that we Jeel we have no alternative bm to write to you lo seek your
                 intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement o f the scrutiny on the
                 30 June the problems o f slow or non-disclosure o f information by South Yorkshire Police
                 and others have continued unabated.. It is ofsuch scale and regularity as to render any
                 arguments o f mistake, oversight or pressure o f work totally untenable. We believe it is a
                 deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and Is clearly a cynical attempt to inlluoncc the
                 outcome: o f rl»e scrutiny.

                 Wc have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
                 Justicc Stuart Smith’s team /' the 1Jorae Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
                 our attempts to gather information vital lo proper presentation o f our case are being thwarted.

                \ on will recall Irom our meeting at the Coiumons thiit lamiiie'i expressed concern that custody
                (and apparently control!!) o f the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
                Police when clearly thsir rolo in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
                Rather than the spirit ol '‘openness” so vigorous!)' espoused by New Labour the continuation
                o f the problems o f the last eiglil and a half yeara Is realising our worst ffcars.

                They appear to have absolute power to determine what wc see and when, i fever, we see it.
                It cannot be right. Bur or just that they have the scopc to manipulate the proceedings by denial
                or delay o f information.

                F.xamples o f the problems we arc encountering ure:-

                1) As late as the 6^ Novcmncr wc received font important photographs * they were requested
                over three months ago!!!


C H A IR M A N                                             V iC li-C JlA lR M A V     sr< HI- I.VKV
-:.l» .v k n                                               I*ll;nr:Mnt'itl                                           M f». i ‘W asuoi1
IVmIliUUciii                                                                                                         IJ                 KtuU
Ki.'v.li»iu»v' L u iv i I ■>«£ r>ii"ln ri                  Ti'vBijVinl                                               H iik c iilu a !
SKIpum |l!)2.»40i;                                                                                                   VlurNcy^ute
k ’lV .is: Ol 720 X4()«-1<l                                'fcl/Knx: H I,-;|-/^ 4 ,1/7;                              Tel. 0 1 ? I
VIoMlii: IW T.M I lOSl                                     M oblU'i W J - .4 M U 1
.13-11-97 13;53 FROM:PHIL HAMMOND.H.F. S.G 0151 291 ISIS                        10^4400976                    PAGEs02
    lU-NOy-SH 10:44  TREMOR HICKS '                                         m    01535 ¥37403                P02




        written authority irom the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

        4)Medical records o f the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
        Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such rccords did uot exist.

         I he initial “deadline” for submissions was iwSeptember but thi* had to be relaxed when u
         became dear that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests tor
         information until late August. The IJFSG made preliminary submissions mid-September and
         lodged others on the 25l" September. Both o f those documents made U clear that our efforts
         were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

         Clearly if the scrutinv attempts to report “at the turn o f the year” full consideration ol newly
         disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it eould not form pail o f any deliberation or
         conclusion.

         K is our belief thill Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control o I' all the
         documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
         parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families oi the deceased.

         We farther submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale fur submissions and
         their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the lanulies am, the
         public as lair and exhaustive.

         All o f us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the fiimilw.s implore
         vou to introduce a one or two month extension to the limescale u» ensure all our concerns can
         be properly investigated and “scrutinised”. It is the families view that this is our ksl chance
         for justice to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be dyne property” if feuh in the judicial
         process is to be regained by the many thousands o f voters who wrote tu you, attended the
         justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support o f our cause.

          Wc shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
          Terms o f Reference you have set down lor Lord Justice Stuan Smith and these may also give
          rise for revision o f the scrutiny programme.

          Yours sincerelv.



          Trevor 1Ticks
          Chairman. - lIFSCi
