   1 7 /0 2   '9 8   16:20   FAX                          TREVOR HICKS EWL
                                                                                                         /   O '




           v SBO R0&




              SUP?&*                                                                       Sup?^
                                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                          PRESS RELEASE

           Re: Hillsborough Scrutiny

           We would advise that the Hillsborough Family Support Group have in place the
           following arrangements in respect o f the expected statement by the Home Secretary,
           Jack Straw MP.

           A coach containing approximately fifty members of the HFSG will leave Crosshall
           Street, Liverpool (adjacent to the council offices) at 0800 hrs on Wednesday 18th
           February. Prior to departure families will be prepared to comment on their hopes and
           expectations. The spokespersons for the Group are Mrs Rose Robinson and Mrs Joan
           Traynor. The party will travel to London arriving Westminster at approximately 2 pm.
           We hope to obtain access for them to the House of Commons to hear M r Straw’s
           statement.

           Myself, Phil Hammond, Vice Chairman, and our Solicitor, Ann Adlington, will travel to
           London this afternoon/evening and will join families at the House o f Commons.

           A press conference has been arranged in the Media Room, W estminster Central Hall,
           Storeys Gate, Westminster SW1H 9NH where the Group’s formal response will be
           given. W e assume the statement will follow Prime Minister’s questions, but have no
           indication o f content or duration of M r Straw’s address.

           We are aware of the need to meet evening news deadlines and will endeavour to
           commence the press conference at the earliest opportunity. Access for press to set-up
           equipment will be from 2.30 pm.

           Officers and members o f the Group will be available for individual interview, responses
           etc., immediately after the press conference.

           For further details and/or clarification, please contact the undersigned on 0973 411051
              ‘       ■   tugh office on 0151 236 1919.




           Trevor Hicks
           Chairman




CHAIRMAN                                     VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                 TREASURER
T. Hicks                                     P. Hammond                                Mrs. J. Traynor
?* Jl
