  From: Paul Pugh                                      cc Mr Michael
        Head of Operational                               Mr O’Brien
        Policing Policy Unit                              Permanent Secretary
        Room 529                                          Mr Boys Smith
        Queen Anne’s Gate                                 Mr Granatt
        S 273 3141                                        Mr EdmujjeKson
                                                          Mrs Underhill
                                                          Mr Warner
                                                         Mr Owen

  20 May 1997


  Home Secretary


 GRAHAM KELLY: CHIEF EXECUTIVE, THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

  Issue

 The Chief Executive of the Football Association, Mr Graham Kelly, has written
 to request a meeting to discuss matters of mutual interest.

 Timing

 2.          Routine.

 Recommendation

 3.    I recommend that you agree to meet senior representatives of the FA,
 and that you write to Mr Kelly as set out in the attached draft.

 Consideration

4.     Mr Kelly writes to congratulate you on your election success and to
request a meeting to discuss, in particular, the campaign by the Hillsborough
Family Support Group (HFSG) for the re-opening of the inquest into the
disaster, and security issues relating to England football supporters travelling
abroad. There is no urgent need for a meeting, but no reason to refuse one.

Hillsborough

5.       You are currently considering whether there are sufficient grounds to
order a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. My submission of 8 May
covered in detail the matters raised in the Granada television programme in
December about Hillsborough, and the subsequent representations received
from the HFSG and other interested parties. We have no indication of the
official view of the FA about the issue.


f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0203pd.doc
 6.      There have been two recent developments in the HFSG campaign
 which have attracted increased media attention, albeit more locally than
 nationally. Firstly, a “Hillsborough Justice Campaign Day of Support” was held
 on Saturday 3 May, at which supporters attending the match between
 Liverpool and Tottenham Hotspur were invited to send pre-printed cards to
 the Home Office requesting a fresh inquiry or inquest; a total of 8,245 have so
 far been received. Most recently, the "Hillsborough Justice Concert” was held
 at Anfield on Saturday 10 May to raise funds for the campaign to re-open the
 inquiry, and featured several high-profile bands. Highlights of the concert
 were shown on television on Saturday 17 May.

 English football supporters abroad

 7.    Although Mr Kelly raises the issue of England’s supporters travelling
 abroad, we understand the FA do not in fact have any specific concerns in
 mind in this area with which the Home Office might be expected to help.

 8.      For important matches played abroad, the FA and the police from the
 Football Unit at NCIS make pre-match visits and liaise with the local police
and football authorities about such matters as ticket allocations and the
location of English fans in the stadium. When they can they also negotiate to
improve safety features. For the match itself English police officers who are
familiar with the particular English supporters work with the local police acting
as “spotters” or intelligence officers. However, not all countries are as
advanced in safety and crowd control techniques as England, and the
facilities would not always satisfy the standards required for the issue of a
safety certificate in England.

9.      The police in other countries often have a more aggressive approach
to policing football matches. Sometimes things do go wrong, as in the case of
the F.C. Porto v Manchester United match in March when the Portuguese
police injured some Manchester United fans with plastic bullets. A FA
representative and two English police liaison officers were present at that
match. The Foreign Office responded to enquiries arising out of this incident.

10.    There are several European committees concerned with violence at
football matches (Council of Europe, the Police Co-operation Working Group)
and the British representatives (including one from the Home Office) continue
to encourage other countries to adopt our standards of safety and security at
football matches.




                                    PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0203pd.doc
     DRAFT LETTER TO GRAHAM KELLY FOR THE HOME SECRETARY’S
                          SIGNATURE




 Thank you for your letter of 8 May, and for your kind comments on my recent
 appointment.


 I agree that a meeting would be useful to discuss the matters you raise and I
 shall ask my office to find a mutually convenient time. It would be helpful if
 you could let my office know in advance of the meeting of any particular
 issues you would like to discuss.




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0203pd.doc
                             THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                             LIMITED
                                                              Founded 1863
                                                Patron: H e r M a je s t y T h e Q u e e n                                             I jSz1 *V'JM 't f
                                              President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                                  Chairman: K . S t . J. W is e m a n
                         *.* r« -* j|^ * -i« -e A
    ChiefExecutive:                                                                            Pfome: 0171-402 7151/0171 262 4542                 a 1^
 R. H. G. K e l l y f c is            pT)£                    JfO * O ' .*«•*                       Facsimile: 0171-402 0486
                                       1°) l^ l t)s*'               o ' o.

                                                                                                         cc.           \ji/           yjUCJkael
                                    16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

   Our Ref:                                                 Your Ref:                                                 yj(S


8th May 1997                                                                                                           ^          \J0C3J^
                                                          :V \
                                     \A S
Home Secretary                                                     .A           Private & Confidential


                                 x-r«<3«*-*
Home Office                                                      au r\»
Queen Anne’s Gate                                                                                          j^r
London
SW1H 2AT                                                                                           ^              p               1
                                                                                                                 V(r                    - l^v   l^ r - f
                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                        U ^u                    >c.
Dear Home Secretary                                                              CV S
Many congratulations on your new appointment. Football has always appreciated your
support. We are delighted that such a long standing friend of the game should have attained
high office.

I know David Davies has recently discussed with you the possibility of a meeting.

We would be grateful for the chance to discuss subjects of mutual interest notably the
campaign by the Hillsborough families for a new inquest and the security issues surrounding
England’s supporters travelling abroad.       '

I can only try to imagine the demands on your diary in the near future. But perhaps you
would indicate to us when it would be appropriate for us to come and see you.

Many congratulations once again.

All best wishes



        .Kelly
C hief Executive



                                                                                        *\£CaVEDBYi
                                                                                    ,        - 9 MAY 1997

                                                                                    I FRiVATE OFnCEj

              Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW. Incorporated in London. Registration Number 77797
