GRAHAM McKAY

DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT

SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE, ECCLESFIELD POLICE STATION


In April 1988, as Detective Superintendent at 'F' Division, I attended a

football match being played at the home ground of Sheffield Wednesday Football

Club, Hillsborough.    The game was a Cup Semi-Final and was played between

Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.    There was a capacity crowd and

admission was by ticket only.




My remit on that day was to organise and supervise all elements of crime

prevention and crime detection.




At about 2.40 pm that day I found myself outside the ground in the Leppings

Lane turnstile area.    The crowd using those turnstiles were mostly good

natured but, about 2.50 pm, there was a build-up in the numbers of people

using the turnstiles and a sizeable queue developed.     There was increasing

evidence of drunkenness amongst the supporters who were all Liverpool fans.

There was a good deal of pushing and shoving and police officers on horses

were necessary to control the crowd.     An ideal opportunity for pick-pocket

activity.   It took this build-up of supporters several minutes to clear

through the turnstiles but without problem.




On Friday 14 April 1989, I took part in a 'phone-in programme with Radio        ,

Merseyside, when I spoke with the presenter of that programme in relatioii'.ito

 the Semi-Final to take place on the following day and passed on various

 of advice for fans who were travelling to Sheffield.    One of the areas which.I

 stressed was that it was an all-ticket match and that fans who did not have

 ticket should not come.   At 3.00 pm that same afternoon I gave similar adv

 by telephone, which was recorded by a member of staff at Radio Nottingh)
On Saturday 15 April 1989, I was responsible for all matters in relation to

crime at the Cup-Tie Semi-Final between Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC.

As it was a carbon copy of the match which had been played before it made

sense to use what had previously been successful arrangements as the bulk of

the supporters would have attended the previous match and would be aware of

the locations of the various facilities and the various systems operating at

the ground.



On the day my staff were split into two teams.   A team of 12 officers, under

the command of Detective Inspector Towell, who were to operate in and around

the ground.   Eight of those officers were to be engaged on observations,

looking out for pick-pockets.



Outside the ground Detective Inspector Scaife had charge of a team of 14

officers who were to be responsible for the prevention and detection of street

crime.   Two of these officers were in plain clothes on non-descript motor

 cycles and it had been envisaged that, whilst the game was in progress, these

 officers would patrol the quiet streets lined with parked cars in an effort to

 prevent and detect theft from cars.



 I attended the briefing at Sheffield Wednesday FC at 10.00 am and following
                                                                                     C



 this briefed my own detectives.   I was accompanied through the first part of

 the day by Police Constable 2439 Bocking, who was in civilian clothes.




 At 10.50 am, together with PC Bocking, I went to a mobile police radio
                                                          .   .   .          :r> r
  control, who were monitoring all CID transmissions on channel 19.          This

  caravan was placed on land at the side of Hillfoot bridge and only a few yards

  from the frontage of a public house called 'The Owl'.           Even at that stage

  supporters were queuing outside, waiting for ’The Owl’ to be opened, and at
I remained in and around that location for some 40 minutes and during that

period, trade at the public house increased as football fans gathered there.




The location of this public house would lead me to believe that the majority,

if not all, of these fans were Nottingham Forest supporters.    I had nothing to

do with them and cannot say for certain.    I patrolled in my own vehicle with

PC Bocking and at about 1.00 pm had a meeting with Detective Inspector Scaife

and some of his staff in the parking area for Wadsley Bridge Section Station.

This lasted a few minutes and after the departure of Detective Inspector

Scaife and his staff I was joined by the two motor cyclists and I gave them

further instructions.



At about 1.30 pm I went to the South Yorkshire Police Sports and Social Club

at Niagara as traffic was building up and it was my intention to leave my car

 in the car park there and spend the time between then and the start of the

 match, on foot.    Whilst at that location I went into the Club with PC Bocking

 and sought out the Deputy Head of Merseyside CID, a Detective Superintendent

 Baxter - a man who I knew would be lunching at the Club with some of his

 family and for whom I had arranged nearby parking.    I had not met Mr Baxter

 before and, having introduced myself as a matter of courtesy, PC Bocking and I

 left the Club.



 Whilst I was in the Club I noticed that there was a large number of supporters

  of both football clubs who, I assumed, were all police officers.   It was

  apparent that most were dining or waiting for meals they had ordered or having


  a casual drink.



  About 1.50 pm PC Bocking and I went to the gymnasium at Sheffield Wednesday FC

  where we had a meal and, at about 2.15 pm, we left and I decided to spend the |

  remaining   time until kick-off outside the ground in the vicinity of the
Leppings Lane turnstiles, as I considered this to be the most likely place for

pick-pocket activity.



With PC Bocking I walked out onto the perimeter track surrounding the ground

and walked across the front of the Spion Kop, where the Nottingham Forest

supporters were gathered.     There was still plenty of room in the Spion Kop

but, nevertheless, there was a large number of spectators present and there

were very few barren places.



In contrast, looking over to Leppings Lane end of the ground there appeared to

be very few spectators in evidence in the terraces or the stand at the back of

the goal.   Equally, the seating in the North Stand was sparsely occupied.       I

went down the players tunnel and through onto the service road and car parking

area at the rear of the South Stand.     We made our way through a sterile area

up to a light portable barrier which was near to a pair of metal concertina

type gates, marked 'C' at the Leppings Lane turnstiles area.




This turnstile serves the North Stand and the West Stand and terraced areas

behind the goal.   There are three lots of turnstiles and it immediately became

 apparent that the seven turnstiles, serving the terraced area and between the

 concertina type gates marked 'B' and the ones previously referred to marked

 'C', were in heavy demand.    A large crowd was backed up right out onto

 Leppings Lane and there was angry pushing and shoving taking place.    There

 were several police officers in evidence and in particular t       w      o     ''

 officers who I believe were from Merseyside.    The officer in charge, of a    .■

 serial of men was Inspector Purdy, a man I have known for a numberTof.years          .

 and recognised immediately.     Inspector Purdy and his serial were having a    '

 great deal of difficulty in controlling the crowd at this point ;v"|ihe

 turnstiles ’A' to 'G' were arranged on the left .by the gates marked: *B*;

  into a high wall and on the right by a metal barrier some 20 yards ]|ong and at
chest height, the crowd was contained behind this barrier.




It was apparent that the turnstiles were not coping efficiently with the

crowd, which was swelling by the minute.



Throughout the next 30 minutes or so I remained mostly at that location but)

on two occasions, walked back through the sterile area to where a serial was

employed at another barrier at the Nottingham Forest turnstiles into the South

Stand.     They were having no difficulty with the people in that area and I

spoke to a man I know as Sergeant Hodgett and told him that I anticipated

that, as the crowd increased at the Leppings Lane turnstiles, more police

officers would be required and I asked him to post an officer from his serial

nearer to the turnstiles at Leppings Lane and in view of the turnstiles in

order that he could respond should the occasion demand.




At Leppings Lane the build-up of crowd increased, tempers became frayed and

evidence of drunkenness became more and more pronounced.        I remember at one

 time, Inspector Purdy standing on the barrier with his back to the turnstiles,

 while in the manner of a tight-rope walker, vainly trying to address the

 crowd.     He was beginning to look frightened and, frankly, I was not surprised.




 A young boy of some 10 or 12 years climbed to the top of the wall near to gate

 'B' but apparently what he saw on the other side deterred him from dropping

 over and he returned to the crowd on this side.        I was dismayed to realise

 that in this swelling mass of people there were such young children.         There

 were many people standing about not attempting to join the queue       (if   it can be

  described as such) and I wondered at that time whether they had arranged to

  meet    friends;   whether they were waiting for the rush to die down or whether,

  in fact, they were opportunists without tickets.       The gates marked 'C' were

  opened and closed on a number of occasions by stewards on the


                                                                         -PxwvVV
either to allow officials and police officers to enter or leave the ground, or

to admit people who were in distress.    I remember on at least three occasions

these gates were opened at the request of police officers outside to admit

people with injuries.    One of these was a child who was carried bodily in and

who had been removed from the crush at the turnstiles.




At some stage, I would guess at about 2.40 pm, I saw Superintendent Marshall

directing police operations in this crush.    He was having to shout to make

himself heard on the radio and I heard a shouted request from Inspector Purdy

for the gates to be opened to relieve the pressure on the turnstiles.      Even at

that stage I could understand the reason for this request.     I did not see

Superintendent Marshall again.    I was later to learn, in fact, that he

remained there continuing to direct operations in the area of the Leppings

Lane turnstiles but such was the thronging mass of people that I did not see

him even though he must have been a matter of yards from me.    Not long

afterwards I spoke to Inspector Purdy and said I thought the gates should be

opened.



At some stage it was decided that some large wrought iron gates which lead out

 into Leppings Lane should be closed in order to prevent the now seething mass

 of people in Leppings Lane from continuing to apply pressure to the queue to

 the turnstiles.   This was done successfully but it seemed to be only minutes

 before the gates were forced open again and the pressure resumed.    At one

 stage    still pre-occupied with the pick-pockets, I moved nearer to these blue

 eates but immediately became engulfed in the crowd and I had to push and

 struggle to get back into a relatively clear space near to the light portable

 barriers.                                                                         ,




 During these few brief moments I was frightened for my own safety and it made \

 me realise what conditions must have been like in the more severely packed .


                                                                     wl
area behind the barrier leading to the turnstiles.     I was getting quite

concerned and remember remarking to PC Bocking that they were going to have to

open the gates.




PC Bocking was carrying my radio at this time which was tuned to the channel

designated to CID, number 19.    Uniformed officers were being directed from

control on channel 25.




Conditions deteriorated, missiles were thrown, a beer can with a drink

spilling from it striking a police officer on horseback.     There was another

surge from the crowd which appeared to be a concerted attempt to unseat this

same officer and the horse started dancing about in fright.     Throughout I

could hear demands over a loud speaker system pleading with the crowd to stop

pushing, to be patient.     I could recognise the speaker as PC 1035 Ryan.




As it got nearer to 3 o'clock it became apparent to everyone that it was

impossible for this vast crowd, which now stretched out of my sight in both

directions of Leppings Lane, to gain access to the ground before kick-off and

I heard some uniformed officer remark that kick-off had been delayed for 15

minutes.



The crowd became more and more unruly and nasty and I could hear officers, who

were caught in the press, shouting loudly into their personal radios.




 I began to have grave fears that the situation could only end in disaster.

 The crowd were beginning to swarm over the walls into the ground.     People in

 the crowd were shouting and screaming for assistance and yet the thrust from

 Leppings Lane continued.


                                                                   \


                                                             •Oimsv— ^
At various times during this period the mounted police officers had been

supplemented by a number of others and I would estimate there being in the

region of eight to 10 mounted officers in that small area.   They were, for the

most part, engulfed in the crowd and unable to contain it.




A few minutes before 3 o'clock, perhaps three or four, I heard the message

given over a uniformed officer's radio "Open the gate" and almost immediately

the concertina doors of gate 'C' were opened.   I was standing only a few yards

from the gate.   I should say at this point that these gates had never been

under severe pressure as the crowd had recognised that there was no

probability of entering through that gate.   The people in the immediate

vicinity of the gate began to go through it and it seemed to take the bulk of

the crowd 30 seconds or so to realise what had occurred.




The trickle of people going into the ground through this gate increased and

for a short period there was containable entry through the gate.   It was a

relief to me to see the gate opened and, at this point, I remarked to PC

Bocking "That gate should have been opened earlier".




 Over the next two or three minutes the flow through this gate increased and it

was apparent to me that the situation at the turnstiles would soon be eased.

 It was about this time that I heard a roar from the crowd inside the ground

 and assumed that either the players were out or that the match had commenced.

 This surprised me, having thought that the game was going to be delayed.      This

 roar increased the urgency of the people entering the ground.   I turned to

 walk back with PC Bocking down the service road and made by way to the south

 east corner of the ground, where I walked onto the perimeter track of the

 pitch, behind the Spion Kop goal.
The game was in progress and as I looked up towards the Leppings Lane end I

could see the crowd spilling out from the terraces onto the pitch.     I could

not understand this but, as there were large numbers of uniformed officers

making their way along the perimeter path in front of the North Stand towards

that area, I assumed that the matter would be contained and I left the pitch

at the north east corner.   I walked back to the gymnasium which was being used

as a dining room, where I spoke to Detective Inspector Towell, and a few

minutes later someone called to me that play had been stopped and that there


were injuries.



 Uniformed officers were hurrying out of the gymnasium and I returned to the

 north east corner of the pitch to see what was happening.     The scene was one

 of confusion at the Leppings Lane end with some people climbing from the

 terraces into the seated stand above and people continuing to spill out onto

 the pitch through gates in the fencing which were now open.     It appeared to be

 an invasion of the pitch which should be contained by uniform officers but,

 after a minute or so, I decided to walk over.   I had gone only about 40 yards

 when I met Detective Sergeant 727 Lindley coming the other way and he called

  to me "There’s about 20 dead in there boss".



  I went Immediately to the Police Room under the Horth Stand, from where I

  contacted Detective Chief Superintendent Addis by telephone.     I would estimate

  the time to be somewhere in the region of 3.15 pm.   I informed Mr Addis that I

  believed there were deaths and we discussed that we would need to be thinking

   in terms of setting up an Incident Room and activating a Casualty Bureau.




   I have to say that from that time I have no clear recollection of the sequence

   of events or of any timescale.   I returned to the gymnasiu. and .y return      /

   coincided with that of Chief Inspector Beal who shouted "He are-going to set

   up a temporary mortuary in here, clear these tables".          V
One half of the gymnasium had been set up as a dining area and there was a

temporary partition down the centre of the gymnasium.     It was this area that

was cleared and there was a rush by police officers to put tables to one side.

I believe that Detective Inspector Towell was in the gymnasium at that time

and I am certain that I was the senior officer present.



People started arriving into the gymnasium carrying victims.     The first victim

to arrive was a young man and I believe he was carried in by two police

officers and a civilian.     He was taken to the wall opposite the door and laid

down.   Other people were now flooding into the gymnasium carrying victims.

The first man was apparently dead and I touched one of the officers,

introduced myself, and explained to him that that body was his responsibility

and that under no circumstances was he to leave that body.      He was to ensure

 that no-one else had any dealings with the property or clothing or

 identification of that body.     These were instructions that I was to repeat

 dozens of times on that afternoon.



 Brought in with the dead were the injured and these were directed to the far

 end of the gymnasium at the other side of the partition.     The dead were

 arriving in such numbers that it was impossible to try to establish whether,

 in fact, they were dead, but I have to say that every body that I saw bore

 what I recognise to be classic signs of asphyxia and I am satisfied that every

  body that I saw and directed into the area designated as a temporary mortuary

  was, in fact, dead.     Although I saw most of the bodies I have to say that I

  did not see them all.     Indeed they were arriving in such numbers and with such

  frequency that on many occasions it was impossible to give instructions before

  the officers who had brought the body in had departed.



   Some of the bodies were carried in by members of the crowd.    Some of these

   people were distressed, weeping openly, screaming, aggressive and .1.saw
several fights and scuffles break out in the area around, between and over the

bodies that were being deposited.




Many fans were giving assistance to bring the dead and injured persons into

the gymnasium and it has to be said that whilst some were apparently drunk

they were not causing trouble.    Officers and civilians were attempting to

resuscitate some of the victims and I saw at least two such groups attempting

to revive, what were quite obviously to me, dead bodies.




Of the people arriving in the gymnasium many were standing around, remaining

there.   Police officers were going back out to fetch more casualties and the

scene was one of general confusion with bodies being put down haphazardly.




At some stage I saw Detective Inspector Charles, apparently having come into

the gym with a body, about to leave the gymnasium.     Mr Charles had attended

the match on duty in full police uniform.     I shouted to Mr Charles and when he

came to me I told him that this public order situation in the gymnasium had to

be controlled and told him to get some men and get on with it.         He immediately

started gathering police officers to him and giving them instructions and I

noted that he gave priority to the gymnasium floor.      It was impossible to

count the bodies as they arrived, but when there were about 20 I remember

thinking that there could not be many more dead.      As the bodies were laid

nearer and nearer to the gymnasium door someone, I believe it was Detective

Sergeant McSloy, said to me "If we don't start laying the bodies out neatly we

will never get them all in".     I told him to grab some men and get on^with i t . ;




 Two officers in uniform from the Underwater Search Unit came to me at some

 time.   They were carrying a hand-held video unit.    They told me t h a f e ^ h ^ h a d ^

 been recording the scene in and around the area of the Leppings Lane [goalmouth’
                                                                                *
they had had to retreat for their safety.   I recognised need for evidence

gathering and told them to start filming the scene in the gym.    I do not

remember seeing them again.




I find it very difficult to recall the events in the gymnasium.      My overall

perception is one of dead bodies arriving and being carried by shocked and

perspiring police officers;   by distressed people who were obviously friends

and relatives and by drunken people, some of whom were shouting and wanting to

fight.   Injured people were arriving and being directed to the far end of the

hall and the scene was one of increasing confusion.




Some degree of regulation began to take place as Inspector Charles and his

team regulated the people in the gym and ejected the unruly ones.      It would

have been folly to try and separate the grieving relatives and friends from

the bodies and many, many people were left standing around in the gymnasium

helplessly, in all stages of distress.   On several occasions I went through to

the Police Room   to make use of the telephone which was in there, but the

Police Room was   busy, the telephone was in use and when I bullied        my way to

the telephone the numbers I tried to get were engaged or unobtainable.




At some stage I recall having seen a police officer sat on a chair by the

telephone in the Police Room.   He had a big tear in his trousers.    He was

weeping openly.   He was quite obviously shocked.   I had a few words with him

which seemed to me to be totally inadequate and left him.




 At a very early stage I had deputed someone to arrange for the major incident

 boxes to come from Hammerton Road and Ecclesfield and I asked Detective

 Inspector Scaife, at some stage, to contact the Medico Legal Centre, assess

 their available capacity for bodies and to ring round the   various hospitals

 and mortuaries in the district with a view to establish!
                                     -   13   -




capacities for dead bodies.   I bad also asked for the Coroner to be informed -

which seemed at the time to be an absolutely incongruous request.




At some stage, I think after half an hour, I needed to make contact with the

control box inside the ground to inform them of the situation in the gymnasium

and as I was unable to contact them by telephone and I knew that any radio

message passed would be relayed over every officer's radio in the ground, I

went on foot.   I am now informed by Detective Inspector Towell that he

accompanied me, but my recollection of events is so blurred and distorted that

I cannot remember him doing so, although I have no reason to doubt that he

did.



At the Police Control Box I spoke to Mr Addis and, whilst I cannot remember

what I said to him, I must have told him the situation in the gymnasium.     I do

remember speaking to the ACC Operations, Mr Jackson, and mentioning that

amongst other problems we would have were the press, who were present in

numbers.   Mr Addis asked me to take him back to the gymnasium and as we left

the area of the Police Box I remember hearing the Liverpool Manager, Kenny

Dalglish, addressing the crowd and a ripple of applause went round the ground.

 Other than that I have no idea of what time it was.




 On my return to the gymnasium with Mr Addis I saw senior ambulance officials,

 in particular Alan Hopkins who I introduced to.Mr Addis and we discussed the

 eventual removal of bodies from the gymnasium and who woul




 Mr Addis then took charge in the gymnasium and after a fev

 assessing the situation he stood on a chair, called for     01


 told police officers what he intended to do.      The gymnasii

 with rows of bodies and I remember someone telling me whei

  "Seventy odd and more at the Northern General"
 Most of the bodies by this time had been draped with what appeared to be white

 shrouds and I remember wondering where on earth they had come from.        I was

 later to learn that they were, in fact, the paper tablecloths which had been

 removed from the wooden tressle tables, now piled up at the side of the

 gymnasium.




 It was about this time that I remembered that my youngest son was somewhere in

the crowd and almost all of the bodies, the feet of which were protruding from

under these tablecloths, seemed to have trainers on identical to his.        I had

to resist the urge to go and look at each of the bodies.




It was decided that I should return to Hammerton Road, assist in setting up a

Major Incident Room there and also arrange for the friends and relatives to be

bussed to Hammerton Road Police Station.    I arranged to be taken to Hammerton

Road by a marked police car and Detective Inspector Towell travelled in what I

believe was the prison bus, with anxious relatives and friends.




On arrival at Hammerton Road I found the place under virtual siege.    Liverpool

supporters were wanting to make urgent enquiries, many were standing   around

not knowing what to do and someone had put out a call for all off-duty social

workers to report to Hammerton Road and there were many social workers.      My

first reaction was one of dismay at the thought of so many social workers

being directed to this area but, in a very short time, it became apparent that

they were to be invaluable and provided a buffer between distressed relatives

and fans, who had lost contact with relatives and friends in the crowd, and

the police.




I called together the Incident Room staff, who had arrived at the Station to

set up the Incident Room, and briefed them as to what had occurred at the

ground and the situation there.   I should say here that I was aware that            ••
                                        15

arrangements had been made for the Casualty Bureau to be activated.          I was

shortly to be informed however that all numbers to the Casualty Bureau had

already gone out over the radio, jamming all of the lines, and as a result

there was to be no police contact by telephone with the Bureau for many hours.




Having told the Incident Room staff what had occurred they went about the

business of setting up the Incident Room at Hammerton Road.       I tried to make a

telephone call to my home but could not get an outside line.       I later went to

an adjacent building where I knew there was a direct outside line.       I

telephoned home and established that my son was safe.    I think the time was

then about 6.30 pm but all I can say for certain is that it was still

daylight.



I was surprised to see Superintendent Sleath at Hammerton Road Police Station

in civilian clothes and he told me that he had responded to a call for all

off-duty police officers to go either to Hillsborough or the closest police

station.    Mr Sleath had assumed responsibility for relatives;     liaison with

Social Services and with the temporary mortuary.




 During the course of the evening there were three other events unconnected

 with this incident, which required my attention.   One was a potential firearms

 situation in 'FI' Sub-Division;   another was a potential firearms situation in

 'F2' Sub-Division; and, the third involved the body of an old lady which had

 been found in a fire at her home under suspicious circumstances.      I asked

 Detective Chief Inspector Addison to go to Ecclesfield Police Station and deal

 with the body and deputed Detective Inspector Scaife to deal with the firearms

 incident there.



  I needed to speak to Detective Chief Superintendent Addis on many occasions

  during the evening but contact with him was only possible by contacting people
                                      -   16   -




with him on channel 25 of the police radio and then requesting him to return

to channel 19, in the hope that our conversation would be more secure.




At some time during the evening, but not long after Mr Addison had left for

Ecclesfield,   I returned to the gymnasium for a conference with Mr Addis and

found that the Coroner, Mr Potter, and the Home Office Pathologist, Professor

Usher, were in attendance.    Professor Usher said that there was little he

could do at the scene and agreed to go over to Ecclesfield to look at the

scene and the body there.    I arranged transport for him.




The scene at the gymnasium was now much more orderly.     The bodies had all been

certified dead.    There were a number of doctors in attendance;   there were

social workers;    many grieving relatives and many many police officers, all of

whom looked shocked, drawn and tired.      I believe that it was at this stage I

 saw a man I recognised as Dr Duckworth, psychologist, who lectures at police

 establishments on trauma connected with major incidents and, in particular, in

 his involvement with police officers following the Bradford Fire.




 Mr Addis discussed with me his plans to photograph, with a polaroid camera,

 each of the bodies;    to display these on a wall at a different part of the

 gymnasium and to have relatives brought, one lot at a time, to the gymnasium

 to be shown the photograph and, if a photograph was picked out, to have the

 body relating to that photograph removed from the hall in

 viewing room and identified.



  We also discussed at that time our priorities and decided

  enquiry
  enquiry could commence that night and it was imperative t

  efforts should be directed towards the situation at the g

  identification of the bodies and providing what assistanc

  relatives.
I returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and closed down the Incident Room,

which had already commenced feeding the basic information into the system.

For example, a copy of the Operational Order of the football match.




During the evening the relatives had been removed first to Hillsborough Boys

Club premises across the road from Hammerton Road Police Station, and then to

the Church Hall on Forbes Road.



The only occasion I can definitely set a time for is 9.00 pm when I had a

conversation by telephone with the Deputy Chief Constable, Mr Hayes, to update

him of the operation.



He requested that a conference be set up of all senior officers involved with

a view to being able to supply the Chief Constable with a factual account of

 events in order that he could be properly prepared to meet the inevitable

 barrage for information from the press.    Mr Hayes asked me to arrange for all

 senior officers concerned to be at the Conference Room at Headquarters for

               I remember looking at my watch at that stage to assess how much

 time I had.     I had at least two other conversations, during the evening, with

 ACC, Mr Jackson to update him, but I cannot remember the content of the

 conversation.



 I returned to the gymnasium at Hillsborough, spoke to Mr Addis and told him of

 the conference.



  I decided that I ought then to have a look at the stand and terraces where the;,

  disaster had occurred (even though it was in darkness) in order that I could; "

  be properly informed for the conference which was to follow.            Although t h e ^ -

  light was not good it was light enough to give me some indication of the

  devastation which had occurred.     I was accompanied by Detective Inspector
                                                     .......s-   •   ■.     .   - . ...   • •.
Towell.   We went from there through the tunnel and round to the turnstile area

and on our way back to the gymnasium saw the Chief Constable with a group of

people at the scene.



I informed the Chief Constable of the meeting being set up at 11.00 pm.    I

returned to the gymnasium.    I had a further conversation with Mr Addis and the

Chief Constable then visited the gymnasium.    He was obviously looking at the

scene carefully and was speaking to as many officers as he possibly could,

offering words of encouragement.    I believe shortly after this I returned with

Chief Superintendent Addis who had not had the opportunity to visit the area

of the disaster and together we went from there into the service road at the

back of the South Stand where we discussed the prospect of approaching the

many television crews now in attendance with a view to obtaining video

recordings taken by them.    Mr Addis decided against it.




After I had returned to the gymnasium I went to Hammerton Road Police Station

with Detective Inspector Towell.    I made arrangements for video recordings to

 be available at the Conference Room at Police Headquarters.   I travelled to

 Headquarters with Detective Inspector Towell only to find that the conference

 had been cancelled for that night and was re-arranged for 9.00 am the

 following morning.    I returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and went off

 duty at around 2.15 am.



 On arrival home at about 2.30 am I discovered that my youngest boy had picked

 up two distressed Liverpool fans, one of whom had been parted from his

  brother, and these two young men were sleeping at my home.




  I returned to work for 7.30 am the following day and during the days that

  followed I was in charge of the Incident Room at Hammerton Road Police

  Station.
At 12.30 pm on Tuesday 18 April 1989, as a result of a conversation I had with

Inspector Sykes, I returned to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and examined

the blue wrought iron perimeter gates which I have previously mentioned.

These gates had by this time been turned into a shrine and flowers were piled

up against them and scarves tied to them.   I saw that one of the bolts, which

secured a gate by dropping into a hole in the asphalt, was bent and that

another such bolt on a different gate had gouged out a groove in the asphalt

some 18" to 2' long, and that this damage was quite obviously recently caused.

I returned to Hammerton Road Police Station and made arrangements for the

gates to be photographed.




At 2.30 pm that same day, at a conference between Mr Jones, Assistant Chief

Constable of West Midlands Police;   Chief Superintendent Pemberton of that

Force, Detective Chief Superintendent Addis and myself;     Mr Jones formally

assumed responsibility for the enquiry into the disaster.
