•    ~ fc o   H iJ W   sW   Tx   j A-.           — '
                                                                             •bt>   «j(p
                                                                                    s

      p(jL**S                      tQ ^ 'j S '                                 Mr Malone-Lee
                                                                               Mr Angel
                                                                             / Mr Head
                                                                             ^ Miss Maurice (o/r)
                                                                               Mrs Tuck
                                                                               Ms Jayasundera

    Mr Faulkner



    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:                              ADJUSTMENTS TO VOTE     .3

    1.   Thank you for your note of 18 May.   I shall shortly be
    putting round a note explaining that Vote II.3 faces severe
    pressure for various reasons, only one of which is the
    administrative costs of the Hillsborough Inquiry.    What
    distinguished the action taken on those costs was the need for
    decisions at short notice in order to be able to make substantive
    supplementary provision.   I am grateful for your recognition
    that that had to be done quickly.   When my more general note
    issues, we can all takerather more time to consider what would
    have to be done to livewithin our means on Vote X**3.
    2.   I am grateful alsofor the welcome you have given to
    progress on Vote structure.   I understand that, in the event,
    your Budget Support Group had no comments on that.    It is only
    fair to say (a) that the amount of re-structuring which is
    feasible is much less than hoped for last year? but that (b)
    what was hoped for last year was not realistic, because it went
    far beyond the bounds of acceptability to Parliament.    Whatever
    re-structuring is done for 1990-91 onwards will not of course
    diminish the difficulties which arise when savings on the Vote as
    a whole have to be made at short notice.   But I hope that it
    will be of some help in its own right.




                                                         G K SANDIFORD
                                                          22 May 1989

    Finance Division 1
    Queen Anne's Gate
                                              cc:   Mr Malone-Lee
                                                    Mr Angel
                                                    Mr Head
                                                    Miss Maurice o/r
                                                    Mrs Tuck
                                                    Ms Jayasundera




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:   ADJUSTMENTS TO VOTE II.3

My Management Group reviewed the present position on my budget and
the relevant sub-budgets and in particular the situation reported
in your note to Mr Yates of 4 May at our meeting last week.

We recognise of course that it was necessary to make provision at
short notice for the Hillsborough Inquiry and we accept that
subject to any decision which may be taken to seek supplementary
provision later in the year, my budget must be expected to
contribute to the cost. What has I am afraid proved impossible in
the time available is to identify a sub-budget or sub-head from
which we can say now that the savings can in fact be made. I
understand that the administrative costs of CICB were mentioned in
discussion between Ms Jayasundera and Finance Division 1 as a
result which Finance Division 1 has allocated our share of the
cost of the Inquiry to that sub-head; but Mr Angel could not agree
that we could offer cuts under that sub-head or elsewhere in his
sub-budget and I was not myself available at the time.

The purpose of this note is therefore to record that

     (1)   The cut in CICB's administrative costs was imposed, not
           offered.

     (2)   We doubt whether the cut can in practice be achieved.
     (3)   We will be prepared, as the year proceeds, to seek cuts
           to an equivalent amount from the this or other parts of
           my budget but we may need virement for that purpose.

     (4)   Attempts to negotiate cuts of this kind with budget
           support groups, especially at short notice, places
           budget support groups under intense pressure which my
           group for one is simply not equipped to handle.

The situation illustrates the inherent tension between delegated
budgets and the present Vote structure and rules for operating it.
We have of course discussed this before and I welcome the progress
you have been able to make with the Treasury in achieving a more
sensible Vote structure. We will be considering during the course
of this week whether we can usefully comment on the draft note
which you circulated to budget support groups on 12 May.




                                  r
                           D E R Faulkner
                            18 May 1989
