           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Detective Chief Superintendent M J Foster                     Your reference:
Midland Regional Crime Squad
Boumville Lane Police Station                                 Our reference:
Boumville
BIRMINGHAM B30                                                Date:              November 1997




     ^X){20J                         r

HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER - DEBRA MARTIN & PAUL TAYLOR


We have spoken over the telephone about evidence which has been given to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith by Paul Taylor and Debra Martin. I should be grateful for your assistance in
arranging for him to see Mr McCombie and Ms Appleton o f the West Midlands Police.

2.     Both Taylor and Martin were witnesses to events at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15
April 1989. Ms Martin was a Special Constable with South Yorkshire Police. She was in the
gymnasium being used as a temporary mortuary at around 4 p.m. and says that Kevin
Williams, a 14-year-old victim of the disaster, died while she was taking care of him at that
time. Mr Taylor was a spectator on the Leppings Lane Terrace. He survived the crush and
helped in attempts to resuscitate Victoria Hicks, who also died.

3.      Since Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquests Ms Martin and Mr Taylor have made
statements to the Hillsborough Family Support Group which make allegations about the
investigation by West Midlands police. The statements claim that they were put under
improper pressure to change what they said, or wanted to say, respectively by Ms Appleton
and Mr McCombie. I attach copies of these statements. Ms Martin of course appeared on
the 'C ook Report’’ TV programme in 1994 making similar allegations.

4.      I discussed the Debra Martin case with you and Ms Appleton over the phone on 18
November, before Ms Martin’s meeting with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on that day. In her
interview with the Judge Ms Martin stood by what she had said to the Support Group. She
said that Ms Appleton wrote out the statement ‘DM 2’ at her (Martin’s) home on 17 March
 1990 - she had not done so at Debra Martin’s dictation but had devised it herself and then
asked Martin to sign it. Debra Martin told the Judge that she had done so without reading it
just to get the interview over with - though she said she neither read nor signed the caution at

 G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WESTMIDS. 158
the top o f the statement. She said she had been ‘harassed’ by Ms Appleton, who had phoned
her at work several times and paid four visits to her house at weekends, sometimes (though
not on 17 March) with other, male officers.

5.     The Judge also spoke to Mrs Martin, Debra’s mother, who said she was elsewhere in
the house at the time. She said she heard raised voices while Ms Appleton was with her
daughter and that her husband - who has since died - wanted to eject Ms Appleton from the
house.

6.     The Judge will be seeing Paul Taylor tomorrow and I will let you know if he adds
anything to what he has said in his attached statement.

7.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would very much like to see Ms Appleton and Mr
McCombie to discuss these matters. He has no power to compel them to attend and I
should stress that it is entirely for them to decide whether to do so. It would however be
of great help to him. We have already written to you about the scope of his scrutiny into the
disaster and his terms of reference, but I would be happy to discuss them if you, Ms Appleton
or Mr McCombie would like me to.

8.     It would be helpful if we could arrange for any meeting with the Judge to take place at
our office here in London within the next week or so. (We are in the main Home Office
building at Queen Annes Gate). There would be a transcript, o f which we would provide
copies. The Judge would like to see Ms Appleton and Mr McCombie separately, but there
would no objection to their having somebody else with them if they wished to, such as a legal
representative or yourself (or both).

9.    I look forward to hearing from you.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\WESTMIDS. 158
I am Debra June Martin, a former special police constable with South Yorkshire
Police.    There is now produced and shown to me exhibit ‘DJM 1’, appended to this
my statement.        This exhibit is a statement which I made on 8 May 1989, in relation
to my involvement at Hillsborough Football Stadium on 15 April 1989.


I confirm that the contents of the statement dated 8 May 1989 are true.


In relation to exhibit ‘DJM2’ appended hereto, I would like to point out that the
statement contained therein, dated 17 March 1990, was compiled by WPS 7844
Appleton, a member of the West Midlands police force. WPS 7844 Appleton visited
me at my home on 17 March 1990 and tried to convince me that my original
statement dated 8 May 1989 was untrue.


After exerting considerable pressure on me WPS 7844 produced a dictionary which
she referred to whilst compiling a statement which I believe is the one appended
hereto as exhibit ‘DJM2’.       In relation to exhibit DJM2 I was unable to read the
statement prepared by WPS 7844 Appleton due to my state o f distress brought on by

her behaviour.


I signed the statement which she had prepared because o f the pressure exerted by her
and because I wanted to put Hillsborough behind me.


          This statement has been signed
          by ex-SPC D J Martin


          (signed)


          in the presence of me Ann Marie
          Adlington a solicitor. 22 February 1995

  (Retyped by C Bone, Hillsborough Scrutiny, from a copy o f the original. 17.11.97 )




G:\HILLSB0R\MAIN\DJMSTATE.149
                  1.      I Paul   Taylor will   say:




                  2.      I make this statement further to my statement dated 4th

                  May    1989 to the Hillsborough Enquiry (Appended her et o).



                  3.     On page 4 of that statement I refer to a girl who I pulled

                  out of the mass of bodies and tried to resuscitate.          I also refer

                  to a boy who I helped.



                  4.                Approximately 4-6 weeks after the disaster I spoke to

                  Mr and Mrs Hicks.       It became apparent that the girl to whom I

                  referred was Victoria Hicks.          I told Mr and Mrs Hicks that when I

A-a TV            iay the young boy next to V ic toria a young police officer wearing

                  gloves came along.       He felt for a pulse in both Victoria and the

    ^        ,,   boy.    He then told me to leave both bodies as they were dead.        I

                  had not mentioned anything about this police officer in my earlier

                  statement nor did I specifically mention Victoria as at the time

                  of making my statement I was not aware of her identity.



                  5.     Mr and Mrs Hicks were keen that I added this information to

                  my earlier statement.       I therefore received a visit at home from

                  DC McCombie the West Midlands Police officer assigned to the

                  Hicks' case.       I explained wha t I wanted to add to my earlier
         0
                  statement.       He told me that unless I knew the name and number of

                  the police officer that I w o u l d be committing perjury if I made

                  another statement.      He told me I could go to jail foir committing

                  perjury.     At the time my wife had just had a baby.      I was

                  frightened by what
DC McCombie was saying to me and agreed that I would not make

another statement.    I did not want to put my family at risk.   I

did not refer to any of this when I gave evidence at the inquest.



Dated the            day of September 1997.




PAUL TAYLOR
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




FAX
To:        Chief Superintendent J M Foster
           West Midlands Police

From:      C F BONE
           Secretary to the Scrutiny

Date:       20 November 1997

Recipient’s Fax Number:          0121 626 4160




N um ber o f pages (including this one): SIX



I attach a copy o f a letter I have sent you today following

our talk, and my talk with Jule Appleton , earlier this week.

I am busy for the rest o f today but p i ring tomorrow if you

wish.



CB



                         IF A N Y P A R T OF T H IS F A X IS U N C L E A R
                            P L E A SE T E L E P H O N E : 0171 273 2512



G :\H ILLS B O R \M A IN \ WESTMIDS. 159
