                                                       I
      INQUIRY     INTO      THE        HILLSBOROUGH

             STADIUM               DISASTER




                          Before


                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

■ M                     ------------


                       MR. B. JOHNSON
          (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                             and

                     PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                         (ASSESSORS)




                             At

                      The Town H a l l ,

                        Sheffield,

                             on

                  Monday, 5th June,    1989.




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                     (Afternoon Session)



           From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
            55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
t   b



                              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                              (Afternoon Session)

                                                    Page


        R. W. CREASER Re-Called

          Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward              53.
          Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                  66.
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr.Woodward       70.

        P. DARLING Called

           Examined by Mr. Goldsack                   70.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner               77.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow              81.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward             84.
           Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 90.
           By Lord Justice Taylor                     92.
           Further Re-Examined by Mr.Collins          93.

        D. BULLAS Called

           Examined by Mr. Phillips                   93.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner              103.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow             107.
           Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward            108.
           Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                114.
5

                                  53




                        FOURTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                           MONDAY,     5th JUNE.   1989

                            (afternoon Session^

                  CHIEF INSPECTOR R. W. CREASER,          re-called

                  Cross-examined by MR. WOODWARD,          (cont.)

    Q.    Mr. Creaser, I was about, having asked you about the
         turnstiles, to come on to some of the events that day.
         I do not want to ask you in detail about all of them
         but one or two matters have to be pursued.     You will
         recall that there was a time when consideration was being
         given to closing Leppings Lane.    A.   Yes, sir.

    Q.    I think your recollection of that is that it was at about -
         A.    I would estimate at 2.30, perhaps 2.35 ai? the latest.

    Q.    And the reason for thinking about it and putting at that
         time is - what?     A.   Because until that time there wasn't
         such a large volume of pedestrian traffic in Leppings Lane.

    Q.    Did you have conversation with anybody on that question,
         the question of closing Leppings Lane?    Were you involved
         in any discussion with anybody there?    A.   Yes, I believe
         I mentioned it to Inspector Sykes who is an Officer who
         frequently was on duty at that particular place and I
         believe a short discussion took place to say, "We are
         going to have to do something about the vehicular traffic."

    Q. Your firm recollection is that it was at about 2.30, 2.35,
       not before;  at about that time?   A.   It was certainly
       no earlier than that, sir.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I would like to be clear about
         this because it was mentioned this morning and you said
         you had heard it was at 2.17.   A.   Yes, my Lord.

    Q. But your recollection was it was later, and I think Mr.
       Hytner put it, "Yes, well, it did not happen then;   it
       happened about 2.30, 2.35."   What I want to know is, are
       you talking about now when Leppings Lane was closed or
       when discussion about having it closed took place.   Which
       was it?   A.   My understanding, my Lord, is that there
       is an entry on a log which says that a request was made
       to close Leppings Lane at 2.17.   I was somewhat surprised
       when I heard that evidence because my recollectio-n of the
       event is that that took place considerably later.

    Q. What - though - the request for it or the actual closing
       of it?   A.   The actual closing of it, sir.

    Q. This is what I am concerned about.  When do you think it
       was actually closed?   A.   2.30, 2.35, my Lord.
                                R. W. C R E A S E R

     MR. WOODWARD:   It   may be that it was a question from
Mr. Collins that caused   theconfusion.     You were asked about
the discussion you had with whoever it was concerning
closing Leppings Lane;do you follow?     A.     Yes, sir.

And your firm recollection is that that discussion, never
mind the closing of it, the discussion of closing it took
place at what time?   A.   The discussion took place very
shortly before it was actually happening.  Inspector Sykes,
I believe, directed some Constables certainly down to the
Leppings Lane roundabout to cause the traffic to be
stopped and within what I took to be a reasonable period for
those Officers to get there traffic was stopped, within two
or three minutes.

So we are talking about a discussion concerning closing
Leppings Lane and within a few minutes of that discussion
Leppings Lane being closed to traffic.   A.  Yes, sir.

And you put that "quite certainly" I think was your phrase,
at about 2.30/2.35.   A.   I am quite certain of that
fact, yes, sir.

You were not party to any discussion or consideration on
closing Leppings Lane before that time?   A.   I was not,
no, sir.

So what you are talking about is something significantly
later than that matter that appears in the log.     A.    It
certainly is.     I can be specific about this because I
have never known Leppings Lane be closed to vehicular traffic
prior to the match commencing.     I have obviously known
it to be closed afterwards when people are leaving because
of the large numbers but in my experience I can never
remember it being closed to vehicular traffic prior to a
game commencing.

So this conversation and the decision to close Leppings Lane,
is that something that sticks in your mind?  A.  Yes, sir.

What time was it that you came out on to Leppings Lane?

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Are you leaving that point?

     MR. WOODWARD:    I am not leaving it, sir, no.

What time was it you came out on to Leppings Lane?
A.   Shortly after 2 p.m., I think.

At that time was there any necessity to consider closing
the Lane?   A.   No, sir.

Was there any necessity at 2.15 or 2.17 to close Leppings
Cane?   A.   No, sir.

What was the situation at 2.20 on Leppings Lane?   A.    It
was quite safe for vehicles to continue to use the road.
                                             R. W. C R E A S E R

So the spectators were continuing to come in in reasonable
numbers, were they?   A.   Yes, sir.

And the traffic was flowing reasonably?            A.     Reasonably
well, yes, sir.

And there was no failure of accommodation between the two
flows, the traffic or the -- ?    A.    No, sir.

Was there anything    at that time that would have inspired
you to think about    closing Leppings Lane?   A.   No, sir.

If the decision had been made to close it at that time,
would that have in any way been surprising to you?
A.    Jt would, yes, sir.

Why?   A.   Because, as I have just indicated, I have never
known the road be closed prior to a match so it was something
particularly unusual.

Was there anything about it at 2.15,         2.17, 2.20 to call
for that matter to be contemplated?             A.Not from where
I was, sir, no, sir.

Where were you?      A.      In Leppings Lane.

     MR. WOODWARD:        Sir,   I am about to leave it.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Just a couple of points.
First of all, was Mr. Marshall involved in any way in
this discussion and the carrying of it out that you saw?
A.   Yes, I believe he was in the vicinity.

Was he involved in this discussion that you have talked
about?   A.  s He was not involved in discussions with
me, no, my Lord.

I had rather got the impression this morning that you had
talked of closing Leppings Lane in relation to the need --
the need for it was because you were going to put a cordon
of horses across   from the bridge to the sweet-shop.
A.     Yes.   That would in no way have restricted vehicular
tr a ffi c.

So the closing of Leppings Lane was not required for that
purpose?   A.   No, sir.   The organising of the line of
horses came after the traffic had stopped.

     MR. WOODWARD:     May I move on to ask you about another
matter, please, Mr. Creaser.     You have described the action
of the Police horses and the use of the Police horses on this
day.   A.    Yes, sir.

At the time that the Police were in the crowd before               2.30,
did you see anything to suggest that their use was
inappropriate or unnecessary?   A.    No, sir.
                                            R. W. C R E A S E R

 Or in any way dangerous?     A.      No, sir.

You saw the use that was made of the Police horses to try
and make a line and cordon across from the parapet of the
bridge to the shop?   A.   Yes, sir.

That line would, of course,        be by the gates and beyond
the gates, would it?   A.          Yes, sir.

Was that to the rear of the crowd?           A.       Yes,    sir.

You are saying that when that line was made there was space
then between the Police horses and the crowd going to the
turnstile?   A.   Yes, sir.   My idea in forming that line
was obviously to stop the crowd getting any larger.

Did it have that effect?      A.      It did, yes, sir.

Did it have any effect upon the persons at the rear of that
crowd, on the turnstile side?  Did it have any effect upon
their actions in pressing on?  A.   No, they were still
p us hin g forward but the ---

Was there anything behind them to press them on, to cause
them to push forward?   A.   Only the actions of the people.

But if they were at the rear and to the rear of the crowd
between the Police horses and the turnstiles, what was
causing those at the back - not at the Leppings Lane side -
on the turnstile side of the horses,  to push forward?
A.   It was the action of the crowd, of the people that had
arrived, who were pushing forward towards the turnstiles.

So here we have - is this right - the situation certainly
for some part of the time of Police horses and gates preventing
those in Leppings Lane coming on to the backs of those
waiting to go into the turnstiles?   A.    Yes, that was
the very purpose of forming the line, sir.

Space between the gates and the backs of those going to
the turnstiles.   A.   Space between the line of horses              and
those going to the turnstiles, yes.

And nevertheless those going to the turnstiles ©till
pressing forward.   A.   Yes, sir.

There would appear to be no reason why they should have
done that except of their own choice.   A.   That is correct,
yes, sir.

They were not being pressed on to push on to the people
in front of them;  they had space at their backs, is that
right?   A.   Yes, sir.

And that situation was achieved.       A.         Yes, sir.

In your statement you describe how that state of affairs
                                            R. W. C R E A S E R

was arranged.   You had Police horses and you had men as
well in the line of horses, did you? A.  Yes, sir.
There were some Police Officers there and I specifically
asked - I could not identify the Officers now but I
specifically asked Officers to in effect plug the gaps
between the horses because people were forcing their way
through the line of horses.

Into the space that you had made.   A.   Yes, but that
was not a problem because not too many were going through.

You were managing to hold the line?           A.     Yes, sir.

But it would appear that it had no effect whatsoever upon
the crowd wanting to push to the turnstiles?   A.  Yes,
sir.

In your statement you say that some minutes later you
attempted to contact Police Control by radio but could
not do so?   A.   Yes, sir.

That is after this line had been formed.             A.      Yes, sir.

Some minutes later you were wanting to contact Control but
the radio you were using did not seem to be very effective.
A.  That is correct, yes, sir.

So you went and used the communications system available
on the Landrover.    A.  No.   I was aware of the Officer
on the Landrover ---

That is Mr. Buxton?   A.   That is correct, yes, sir.
I know that he is a Community Constable who would be in
possession of a radio which was issued to himself rather
than one he collected on the day and I was reasonably
satisfied that he would be in possession of equipment that
was in A1 condition.

So the picture we should have is this, having made the
line of the horses and the gates, you then were able to
hold that for a while and during this time you went to
use your radio, were unable tovmake the communication you
wanted to, you got hold of Mr. Buxton and used his
radio.   A.   No, sir.   In fact I asked him to contact
Ground Control to pass a message.

Mr. Buxton was at the time that you went to him broadcasting
on the public address system from the Landrover.
A.   That's right.

It would seem if what you are saying is right that his
broadcasting to those people certainly at the rear of the
crowd between the gates and the turnstiles was not having
any effect.   A.   That is correct, sir.

It M o u l d s b b j l , i f what yoiij say is right, that his broadcasting
was having no effect on those people still coming along
from Leppings Lane to go to the perimeter gates.                A.   Yes.
                             58


                                            R. W.C R E A S E R

Q. Is that right?   A.   It might have had an effect on a
   minority but it certainly did not affect the majority
   of people.

Q. No notwithstanding the broadcasting, the line of horses,
   the gates, these  people were still intent on getting
   into the narrow area?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.    And they were coming in considerable numbers.              A.   They
     were at that time, yes, sir.

Q. And their demeanour was changing?        A.     Yes, sir, certainly.

Q. These are the people who are coming to join the crowd.
   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.    Youspoke of the possibility of drawing a graph and communicating
     their intoxicated state.     A.  Yes, sir.    As the  time
     approached near to the kick-off, I could see that people
     arriving in greater numbers were the ones that I earlier
     described as fighting drunk.

Q.   It may be difficult to answer this question, but given the
     conduct of these fighting drunk people, these who are adding
     themselves to the press on Leppings Lane, those who were
     struggling to get through between the horses, do you think
     but for their conduct the situation would have been saved?
     A.   I got the impression that using the horses in that
     fashion was having some effect, yes, sir.

Q. It seemed to be working?       A.   Yes, sir.

Q. But for these people continuing and these people behaving
   in this way, that in your view would have solved the
   problem?   A.    It would have solved the problem certainly
   getting any worse.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I rather thought you were saying
     before the adjournment that you thought that it was having
     effect but about the time that happened was when the gates
     opened?      A.  That's right.    It was having an effect
     and then, after that line had been ---      It was a gradual
     process in forming the line of horses, you will appreciate,
     it did not happen instantaneously.      By the time that had
     been organised, it had been in place two, thms, four minutes
     perhaps, there was a gradual filtering of people going
     through to join the throng, as it were, waiting at the
     turnstiles, and then the gates opened, relieving the pressure
     on the turnstiles and so the need for that cordon no longer
     ex i st ed .

Q.        MR. WOODWARD:    The cordon was broken, was it not?
     A.   It was breached by individuals but there wasn't a mass
     surge through that cordon, no, sir.

Q . What were those individuals doing?    A.   I did see one
    individual actually go underneath a Police horse, which I
    just couldn'^t comprehend, I couldn't believe, and I saw
                          59


                                      R. W. C R E A S E R

   people going through the gaps.  That is why I used Officers
   on foot to try and plug those gaps.

Q. May I remind you what you said in your statement about
   it?   "At approximately this time I was able to see the  large
   concertina gates known as A, B & C had been opened and
   that a large proportion of the crowd surged forward through
   these gates."   Do you follow?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. So you have a clear recollection of seeing Gate A, Gate B
   & C all opened?   A.   Yes.




                               /Although you had not such....
1   *


                                   60



                                                  R. W. CREASER



        Q. Although you had not such a good view of C because of
           your position? - A. That is correct.

        Q. You have no doubt about it, gate B was open? - A.
           Definitely, yes sir.

        Q. There were substantial numbers of people going in through
           it? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Indeed, it would be gate B which would provide the
           immediate relief for those people at turnstiles certainly
           A, and probably A to 6, because there is the barrier at
           G? - A. There is a barrier at G to the right hand side.

        Q. So the opening of gate B would provide a substantial
           relief, in effect, for the people in that quadrant? - A.
           It did, yes, sir.

        Q. That is what you observed happened, the substantial
           relief came from the opening of gate B to the people
           waiting in the quadrant A to G? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Unless, of course, there were individuals who managed to
           get down under the barrier to go round gate C? - A. Well,
           there were, sir.

        Q. Difficult to speak about it now, but is this the
           impression you clearly had, that the substantial relief
           to those people at A to G in that quadrant would be, and
           was, through gate B? - A. Yes.   It is very difficult to
           say at this stage, but certainly there would be people
           queuing for turnstiles A to G, who would be side on to
           that gate and a large proportion certainly went through
           gate B.

        Q. You then say in your statement:

                 "These gates were only opened for a short period of
                 time and I could see Officers/stewards at the rear
                 of the gates apparently struggling to close them,
                 which they were subsequently able to do.   It is my
                 impression that gate C remained open for a longer
                 period than the others."

           A. Yes.    Gate B, I saw people on the inside obviously
           trying to heave the gates closed.    By that time there
           appeared to be some sort of order at gate C.    I believe
           there was a mounted Officer there exercising some control
           over the people entering gate C, at which there was not
           at gate B.

        Q. You there speak of the gates being opened and then
           closed, do you follow? - A. Yes.
                             61



                                            R. W. CREASER


Q. That is your recollection of what happened, is it? - A.
   Certainly, sir.

Q. You do not recall seeing gate C opened again? - A* No,
   sir.

Q. However, you have a recollection of it being opened and
   then closed? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At which time a substantial number of people had gone in
   through gate B? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were asked, if I can move to another matter now,
   about the number of people without tickets. - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Just before you move on, was
     it your impression that gate C was not so readily
     available to the people at A to G? - A. Yes, it was...

Q. Did people rush towards that from perhaps behind that
   short barrier? - A. Yes, but...

Q. Those within it go through B? - A. There were Police
   Officers outside gate C - I believe there was at least
   one horse there - who could exercise some control over
   those entering in C.   There was nobody immediately
   outside gate B because that was where the throng of the
   crowd had occupied in the funnel to the turnstiles A to
   G, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes, I see.   Thank you.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   Your previous experience of the use
     of horses in crowd situations - had you any reason on
     this occasion, until it proved not to work, to fear that
     it might not work? - A. Yes, I was very surprised.    In
     my experience people shy away from a Police horse.  You
     can hear it clopping on the tarmac and the crowd on
     hearing that instantly draw back and it is said that one
     horse is worth ten men, and I would go along with that.
     In my experience there is nothing better than a Police
     horse for urging crowds not to push and for getting some
     order in a crowd quickly.

Q. Would you have grave reservations about any suggestion
   that Police horses should not have been available and not
   used on an occasion such as this? - A. There would have
   been a greater tragedy, I feel, outside the gates if
   those horses had not been deployed there, sir.

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not think anybody has
     suggested that, as far as I know, Mr. Woodward.  I think
     the suggestion was that it was inappropriate to have them
                                       R. W. CREASER


inside the area between the turnstile and the perimeter
gate when there were a lot of people there.

      R. W. CREASER:   I have heard that said and I was
present in this room on Friday morning so I heard the
evidence of a mounted Officer.   I would say those horses
were positioned perhaps sort of half way down the throng
outside the turnstiles and if they had not been there I
feel there would have been a greater push against the
walls of the turnstiles.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Yes.   The point may be made by
some that not only should they have not been there, but
to have them there was a positive disadvantage and in
itself a problem causer.   Do you follow? - A. Yes.   I
would say the opposite to that, that it is of
considerable benefit the horses being there in trying to
alleviate the pressure.

      MR. HYTNER:   May I make it plain what the point
was I was making because it may be that Mr. Woodward is
tilting at a windmill.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Maybe I have not understood
it either.   Have I not got it right?

      MR. HYTNER:   You have, sir.   The whole of the
point was once the area became jammed so that the horses
were enveloped like cellophane, as it was graphically
put, they were useless.   Before that time they would
have been better employed preventing the crowd jamming
the turnstile area rather than being within the turnstile
area.   That is the way I put it.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Ordinarily speaking, Mr. Creaser,
if you have horses, mounted Officers, dispersed in a
crowd, do they have that effect of preventing a crowd
becoming jammed and packed? - A. They certainly do.   For
any large match at Hillsborough there are always horses
outside those turnstiles A to G, and they have always
proved to do a first class job.

In the sort of positions in which they were being used on
this day? - A. Yes, sir.

They had a valuable function and have proved that in the
past in those positions in maintaining the crowd in some
sort of order? - A. Certainly, sir.   I mean, that is
obviously why they were there because they have proved
beneficial in the past.

Given your experience of horses being used, did you have
any reason to expect on this occasion that their use as
■
                                  63



                                                   R. W. CREASER


         being implemented, would be disregarded and result in
         those horses becoming engulfed? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Wrapped round like cellophane as Mr. Hand-Davis put it? -
       A. Well, he is obviously better qualified than me, but I
       have never witnessed that before, sir.

    Q. There would appear to be some singular determination on
       the part of some elements in the crowd? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    We   have already heard that,
         Mr. Woodward, that there was.      Three o'clock is
         approaching and people have got    tickets, there is a
         certain amount of determination    to get in.

    Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   Did they all have tickets,
         Mr. Creaser? - A. I have estimated the people I saw
         milling about without tickets to be about 200.

    Q. That is your estimate of the ones you saw, is it? - A.
       That is correct.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, that is not what
         you said.   You said that from the ones you had to deal
         with that was your estimate of the number who were there?
         Is that right? - A. That is correct, my Lord, yes.   What
         I could say if it helps, is that I would find it
         difficult to believe that people would climb over without
         tickets, but I cannot say that, and there seemed to be a
         lot of people climbing over.

    Q. I think you added it could have been 400? - A. Yes.

    Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   You saw a lot of people climbing
         over? - A. There were people - and I am talking at
         quarter to three - there were people climbing over
         directly above turnstiles A to G.

    Q. Did you see people who had climbed over passing tickets
       back down? - A. I did not see that, no, sir.

    Q. Are you aware that that was happening? - A. I have heard
       people say that happened, but I did not see it, sir.

    Q. I am not sure whether you saw this, but did you observe
       any individuals who having climbed up, instead of going
       off and mingling and go into the ground did in fact climb
       back up again on to the turnstile roof? - A. From inside
       the ground?

    Q. Yes. - A. No, sir.     I was outside at that time.
    o
&                                   64

                                              R.W. CREASER


        Q. You did not observe any of that.

                   The numbers:  forgive me if I do ask you about your
             estimate of the people without tickets.  You seem to be
             saying at least in part of your answers to Mr. Maxwell,
             that there were numbers of individuals^who came and you
             observed to be asking for spare tickets? - A. Yes.

        Q. And they would go off and being unsuccessful go back to
           join some colleagues? - A. Yes sir.  I saw at least two
           ticket touts who were selling tickets, one of whom was
           subsequently arrested and from where I could see them they
           would be perhaps 50 yards away from the ground down Leppings
           Lane towards Halifax Road towards the Leppings Lane rounda­
           bout and there were numbers around those people, presumably
           those people congregated there to buy tickets.  That is
           why those touts or that ticket tout would be arrested for
           causing an obstruction.

        Q. The Police do endeavour to move those away without tickets,
           don't they? - A. Yes sir.

        Q.   And to encourage them to leave the scene? - A. Yes sir.

        Q.   Go away from the turnstiles? - A. Yes sir.

        Q. So does it follow from that that in the nature of things
           those without tickets would not necessarily declare them­
           selves to Policemen? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

        Q. So it is fra®those that you observe that you make your
           estimate? - A. Yes sir.

        Q. And even those that you observed did you notice a persistence
           about some of them? - A. Yes, there were one or two individuals
           who I spoke to on more than one occasion and told them to
           leave the area.

        Q.   They kept coming back as it were to go through to the turn­
             stiles? - A. Yes sir, not to go to the turnstiles but to mill
             around in the area perhaps just back from the turnstiles, near
             the shops.

        Q. Non-ticket holders of course present a problem, do they not?
           - A. They do sir.

        Q. The ones at the turnstiles if they can't persuade someone
           to let them in in one way or another they are in the way?
           - A. They are, yes.

        Q. Did you see any of that happening? - A. Not at the turnstiles,
           no sir.

        Q. It would not take very much, would it Mr. Creaser, for a
           few determined individuals to cause the Police significant
                                   R. W. CREASER


embarrassment and difficulty? - A. By doing what sir?

By pressing ony ignoring requests to go away* flouting
the reasonable Tannoy and public address exhortations
to stop pushing and come back? - A. Yes, it is I suppose
like a domino effect.  You don't need many at the back
of the crowd to cause problems I suppose, yes sir.

And of course once that occurs. Well first of all you
can't foresee that that will happen, can you? - A. No sir.

And once it occurs is there very much you can do about
it?
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs    Sorry, you said you "can't
foresee that will happen*?

      MR. WOODWARD:  There will be determined individuals
who will not comply with your requests to the extent of
causing trouble? - A. When that has happened previously
the number of fans outside the turnstiles has not been
as great as it was on this occasion.

So are you saying that the opportunity for the determined
ones to cause trouble is the greater? — A. It would be
on that occasion, yes.

When there is the greater the throng, so the more the
Police have to do the easier it is for such elements?
- A. Yes sir. Obviously if it was a small crowd for
people who were somewhat the worse for drink they would
be arrested.

Was there some difference in relation to semi-finals
concerning the policy of arresting people who had been
drinking? - A. The policy would be one of commonsense
that you don't deplete numbers and Inspectors would have
briefed their Officers to says   "Look, ifit gets to a
situation where there are so many people then we use
discretion in the arrests that we make".

And what were the numbers like of persons who might
otherwise have been arrested? - A. Well if every Officer
on duty had made an arrest there would be no Officers
left.  They were greater than the number of Officers
available.

There were a greater number of individuals who ought to
have been arrested.  Is that what you are saying? - A. Yes
sir.
Than there were men available to do it? - A. Yes sir.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.    Thank you,?sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs   Thank you.
                                  R. W. CREASER


                Re-Examined bv MR. COLLINSt

Does that answer relate to the 40 Officers on duty outside
the turnstiles or more Officers than that? — A. There were
more than 40 people who ....

Yes, but your answer about more than the sufficient Officers.
You are referring, are you, to the 40 or 44 it would have
been including Sergeants etc. on duty outside the turnstiles?
- A. We would have needed more than that number to effect
all those, yes sir.
Tell me:  your experience of   policing football matches, the
impatient person who arrives   within 15 minutes of kick-off,
is he an unusual phenomenon?   — A. In the quantities that
there were on this occasion,   yes.

As a general principle? - A. T h e ® are obviously people who
rush to see a match at the last moment.

You expect, do you, that if there is a queue still as kick-
off approaches that there will be a certain amount of pushing
and Mhoving? - A. Well I would accept that, yes sir.

That is something that you would anticipate? - A. Well I
would anticipate that the Police would attempt to control
that.
I follow that, but I am just simply seeing what is fore­
seeable, that is all, because Mr. Woodward has been
referring to that. All I am wondering is whether individuals
who are impatient at about that time are what you would
expect.  Normally you can control them, I appreciate that?
- A. Yes, they seemed if you like more belligerent at this
particular match.

What you are saying is there were more of them and they
were more belligerent this time? - A. Yes sir.

Again the ones who have been drinking rather more than they
should, they tend to arrive on the late side, do they?
A. They certainly did.  I think I have said that the propor­
tion who were in drink increased as time went on but in
fact there were considerable numbers of people who did not
exhibit any sign of drunkenness whatsoever.

 But is the late arrival or the arrival towards the end
 of those who have been drinking again something which is
 expected or was it peculiar to this year? - A. No sir,
 since the legislation has been introduced which makes it
 an offence to be drunk on entering or attempting to *nter,
 there has been a decrease, considerable decrease in those
 who arrive somewhat the worse for drink.

 Yes, but what is suggested to have happened this year was
 that those who wished to drink waited in a pub or wherever
vj<   ‘
                                      67

                                                R. W. CREASER


               until rather late in the day so that they could do their
               drinking before they reached the ground.  Do you follow?
               - A. Yes.  I am sure that is what happened in this case.

          Q. All I am getting at is was this something new this year
             or was this something which had happened before although
             not to such an extent as it happened this year? - A. That
             certainly happened this year and I can express an opinion
             as to what I think happened and that is that public houses
             fei&l>tied later and people arrived, but it is not nowadays
             the norm for people to arrive in that condition.

          Q. What I am getting is were we witnessing this year something
             that was a difference of degree or was a difference in kind.
             Do you follow the distinction I am indicating? - A. What
             I can say is that in my experience it was unprecedented
             for such a large number in drink to arrive within such a
             short duration of time, so I think the answer to your
             question is yes.

          Q. You mean it is a question of numbers rather than anything
             else.  That is to say more arrived in that condition than
             had happened before? - A. I think it is a combination of
             I have never witnessed such a large number arrive so late
             and I have never seen such a large proportion in drink
             arrive so late.

          Q. So it was a combination? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. But that there might be late arrivals and that some might
             have been drinking was again something which of itself is
             not unexpected in a football crowd? - A. No, that would
             be expected, yes.

          Q. And if there had not been the large crush already you
             probably would have been able to cope, as you coped last
             year? - A. Yes sir.

          Q. Because we have heard, I think it was from Mr. McKay,
             that last year there was a build-up in the last 15 minutes
             but it was not in such numbers as was uncontrollable.
             Can you recall that? - A. The build-up was smaller and
             so it could be accommodated by the turnstiles.

          Q.   Exactly, but there was a build-up? - A. Yes   sir.

          Q.   And there was also    an increase in those who had been  drinking
               last year as well at that late stage.  Would you agree with
               that? - A. If I can recall my recollections of the 1988 semi­
               final, it was that there was very little drunkenness.

          Q.   Can I deal with two minor matters.   First of all you referred
               to the estimate of the non-ticket holders.   What you said was
               "Our best estimate was 200 or so" at one stage this morning.
               I wondered who the "our" was? - A. Well my best estimate.
                                  R. W. CREASER


You did suggest, as I understood you at one stage, that
you had talked with other Officers who had been out there
on duty? - A. Yes, some Officers I spoke to when I asked
them what the problems were, as you would expect me to do:
"Have we any problems?"  "Yes, we have a few non-ticket
holders about". A group was pointed out to me on one
occasion.

That is what you were referring to. What I was wondering
was whether you had discussed with ypur Officers since the
question as to how many non^-ticket holders they estimated
because obviously it is a matter .... A. Yes, I have
discussed it and I have heard estimates of 2,000.

So you had a sort of general discussion with Officers who
were there.did you about this and you have tried to get
some sort of sensible figure that accords with your
recollection and theiccs or is 200 simply your recollection?
- A. No, that is the factual evidence that I am giving
you.  I have heard other figures mentioned, but from my
own personal observations that is what I saw sir.

The only other matter is this:  you referred to a Sergeant
Higgins as being the Police Officer who was responsible
for shutting off the tunnel last year? - A. Yes sir.

That would be Sergeant 1483 Higgins, who was last year
responsible for Serial 14.  Is that right? - A. I can't
remember his Serial number.  I have seen a statement made
by him and I have a vague recollection of seeing him at
the match last year.

He has retired since, has he? - A. Yes sir.

And he was not at the match this year? - A. No sir.

You say you have seen a statement from him.  It is not one
I think that has reached us.  I was wondering where you
had seen it? - A. I have probably seen it at Police
Headquarters.

Well if it is available I would ask the South Yorkshire
Police please to produce it because it may not have been
produced hitherto because of course it did not coneeitn this
year as he was not on duty this year. - A. No.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Of course anything we can produce will
be produced sir.

      MR. COLLINS:    Yes, I am grateful.

Of course Inspector White does not appear to have been on
duty last year because it was an Inspector Walker who was
in charge of those two Serials 14 and 15 last year? - A.
Well it is very difficult because the policy is to use
the same Officers at the same locations for big football
matches because they are experienced.
                                       R. W. CREASER


It does not matter, it is just simply the question was
raised as to whether Inspector White had been doing the
same duties and all I can say is not according to the
Operational Order 1988 but that does not mean he did
not substitute I suppose.  That can happen? - A. Yes sir.

      MR. COLLINSi     Thank:   you.


                      Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Can you just   help   me about this:  as I understand it you
say that the   line   of horses was effective? - A. Yes, I
felt that we   were   actually achieving something in controlling
the crowd at   that   time.

I follow you say that the odd individual got through; one
chap went underneath to your surprise? others between the
head of the horse and the next horse.   Is that right? - A.
Yes sir.

But you said that really did not constitute an important
breach.  Is that right? - A. Well the turnstiles were still
accepting people and the people that got through this line
were what I would describe as a trickle and were having
no great effect, my Lord, on the size of the crowd.

You say that really that came to an end because the gates
were opened and it no longer was necessary? — A. It was
no longer necessary to withhold those people from joining
the large crowd because the crowd had certainly partially
dissipated through the gates.

What I am wondering is this: would it have been possible
do you think if horses had been deployed in that way or
Officers on foot and horses had been appropriately deployed
to have avoided this great build-up occurring in the
immediate area outside the turnstiles earlier on? - A. I
heard that suggestion put to this Inquiry to the mounted
Officer and I think you would just be removing the problem
further away from the ground into a residential area.   You
are probably aware that the housing on Leppings Lane have
got sort of front gardens that are four, five, six feet
long, terraced type housing, and you would be right outside
people's front windows.

You see what I had in mind was if you could filter people
through by having some sort of a cordon like that, you
would not have the sort of panic and frustration build-up
at the front which caused the fighting and probably slowed
down the turnstiles and generally aggravated the situation?
- A. Well I think, my Lord, that you would have that
frustration at the line of Police horses rather than at
the turnstiles.

Perhaps it is a similar question put another way.      You
                                  R. W. CREASER


say you were very surprised at the numbers that arrived late.
Supposing you had been told beforehand:   "There is good
reason to think that this number of people are going to
arrive late" was there anything that dould have been done,
do you think to deal with that situation as it arose?
- a . well I think it is rather like a similar question
where I think you would have to sit round a table and think
about it but obviously there would have been more Police
Officers deployed there.   It is a situation that has never
arisen before but if it were to arise again I think we would
have more Police Officers, more Police horses.

You are not saying it is unjsoliceable? - A. No sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, thank you very much.    Sorry,
do you want to ask something further?

      MR. WOODWARD:  Not arising out of anything you asked
sir, I am reminded of something I should have put to the
witness, if I may?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, certainly.


          Further Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Mr. Creaser, 1987, the semi-final? - A. Yes sir.

You have spoken of the Officer who was in overall command?
- A. Yes sir.
You say that was different from the Officer in 1988? - A.
The Officer who was in charge in Ground Control for the
1987 semi-final would be a Superintendent who has now
retired and he had a preference for filling the pens on an
individual basis.

The overall control in 1987 was under Mr. Mole, wasn't it?
- a . That is correct.

But the Officer at the ground you say had a particular
view about things and he had a preference for ....
A. It would be the Officer who was performing the identical
role as Superintendent Murray this year.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you sir.


               INSPECTOR PETER DARLING Called

                  Examined by MR. GOLDSACK:

 Inspector Peter Darling.    Is that right? - A. That is right
 sir.
 Mr. Darling, this year you were in charge of Serials 1, 2
 and 3, Serial 1 being those Officers who were on the
 perimeter fence? - A. That is correct.
                                 P. DARLING


Had you been present at the match the previous year? - A.
Not actually at the match, sir.  I had duties at Ecclesfield
Police Station in respect of prisoners taken there but
not in respect of the actual match.

Do you recall whether you had seen the Operational Order
last year? - A. No sir, I don't think I did, or if I did
I certainly did not read anything other than the detail
at Ecclesfield Police Station.

So far as Serial 1 was concerned, and it may assist if you
ha»e( open before you Tab 14, the first bundle of the
exhibits.   You will find Serial 1 about a quarter of the
way through Tab 14. You say in your statement that those
Officers were Fl Community Constables? - A. That is right
sir.

On the day was each and everyone a Community Constable? -
A. No, not everyone.  There were a couple of exceptions.
I think P.C. Farthing and P.C Croot ....

That is the last two on the list? - A. That is right sir
and P.C. Richardson, they were not.

Those who were Community Constables we understand would
have had their own personal issue radios? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Did you make any check on the day to ensure that they had
them with them? - A. I did not make a physical check, no
sir, but it is one of things they always have their radio
with them when they are on duty.

Those three Officers you have just identified who were not
Community Constables, what is the position as far as they
are concerned with radios? - A. I don't think they would
have one on the day.

Whose decision would that have been? - A. I   don't know sir.
Radios are in short supply at large matches   like this where
a lot of Officers are attending.  Community   Officers have
their own personal radios with them all the   time because
of their duties.  Radios are only issued as   a rule to
Sergeants and above.

Is not one of the reasons for having Community Constables
around the perimeter fences because they do have radios?
- A. That may be one of the reasons.  In addition it is
so that they can identify their particular part of the
ground because they go to the same part of the perimeter
track each week and get to know the fans at that end,
the layout of the ground at that end and so on, but it
is certainly an advantage that they have their own radio.

Now on the day itself, the 15th of April, what were your
responsibilities so far as briefing went? - A. I spoke to
                                 P. DARLING


each of the three serials.  Serial 1 I did not speak initially
with all the Constables together. I spoke to Sergeant Chapman
who was the Sergeant for that Serial. He informed me that
the regular Officers were working that brief and that there
were no problems that he foresaw.   Following on from that
I briefed individually Serials 2 and 3.

They are the South Stand? - A. That is right. The reason
for the difference there being those Officers came from a
wide variety of Departments and even Divisions on occasions
and would not be familiar necessarily with the set-up at
Hillsborough.

So far as Serial 1 is concerned you say you did not brief
them as a group initially.  Did you brief any of them
individually? - A. I spoke to them all during the build-up
to the match basically.  Once briefing was completed at
something like 10.45 those Officers went out to the positions
round the perimeter track and once I had briefed the °ther
Serials and the Stewards for the South Stand I then walked
around the perimeter track on a number of occasions and
spoke to all Officers.

If you have got that page still open in front of you, we
see at the bottom of the instructions for Phases 1 and 2
in bold print and underlined:

      "NO ONE IS TO BE ALLOWED ACCESS TO THE TRACK FROM
      THE TERRACES WITHOUT CONSENT OF A SENIOR OFFICER
      (EXCEPT TO RECEIVE MEDICAL ATTENTION)"

A. Yes sir.
Do you know why that is in such bold print? - A. Because it
is clearly most important that we don't have large numbers
of unauthorised people walking around the perimeter of the
pitch.
On the day did you as the Inspector make a point of bringing
that to the specific attention either of Sergeant Chapman
or of individual Officers as you went round? - A. All the
Officers on that Serial actually got a copy of that parti­
cular page of the Order, so they were fully aware of that.




                    /Q. Was that different
                             73


                                                    P. DARLING


Q. Was that different from other serials? - A. It may well have
   been.   Sergeant Chapman took it upon himself.

<3. I think it follows from that you said earlier, but I will just
    check, did you realise that the boldness of that particular
    instruction had been increased from the previous year? - A. I
    did not, sir, no.

Q. I think you made a call to the club control room at some
   stage? - A. This is the room at the back of the South Stand
   where the various monitors are and also the equipment for
   counting the crowd?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you just make the one visit? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you help as accurately aspossible on the time? - A. I
     find it very difficult, sir.    I think I put in the statement
     "Some time before 2 o ’clock” , and I c a n ’t be more specific
     than that.   It was just a case of I was passing.      I had not
     got a specific responsibility for that room.       It was obviously
     located in the South Stand where my Officers were, and as I
     was passing I just called in.

Q. I think whilst you were there was discussion about the number
   then in the ground? - A. That is correct.

Q. Being some 12,000? - A. Yes.  Someone mentioned, I d o n ’t know
   who it was, that there were 12,000 in the ground at that time,
   and at the same time the previous year there had been 20,000.

Q. After that you became aware as others have told us of
   difficulties with the radio? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Was it about 20-to-3 that you made a further tour around the
   perimeter track? - A. Yes, it was basically intended to be my
   last walk around the perimeter track before the start of the
   match.

Q. Can you help any more accurately as to the time at which you
   reached the Leppings Lane end? - A. It would be within minutes
   of 2.40, I walked from the players’ tunnel along the south end
   of the track.   So I walked along half a length of the pitch
   basically.  I probably spoke to a couple of the Officers
   who were there.   So it would be within 2, 3, 4 minutes that
   I was at the Leppings Lane end.

Q. At that stage was there an Officer near to each      of the
   perimeter gates? - A. There was certainly one,       I am pretty
   sure, at the corner between the South Stand and      Leppings Lane,
   and there was one behind the g o a l . Exactly who   they were I am
   not quite sure.

Q. Can you in fact help with the identify of any of the
   individual Officers there at that stage? - A. At that specific
   time, no.  I recall that earlier on I had spoken to P.C.
                          74


                                                P. DARLING


   Illingworth and P.C. Smith behind the goal, but there was a
   movement of Officers up to the match in order that they could
   take their meal.  So there was a movement from time to time.
   Exactly at 2.40 who was there I cannot recall.

Q. What was your assessment of how full the pens were at that
   stage? - A. Pens 3 and 4 were fairly full, not overcrowded by
   any means, and causing no problem, no concern, as far as I was
   aware.  In fact, since the match I have seen a video and I
   noticed that at about that time there were two or three
   balloons in those two pens, and there was enough room for the
   supporters to jump up and knock it from one to another.  So it
   was full, but there was room to move.  The outer two pens or
   the pens on the outside of 3 and 4, they were less full, as
   one would expect.

Q. Up to that stage had you been aware of any radio
   communications indicating the state of the crowd at Leppings
   Lane turnstiles? - A. No, sir.

Q. Did you at any stage pick up that information over   the radio?
   - A. I did not, sir, no.

Q. Given that you say at 2.40, 2.45, the middle pens were fairly
   full, did you envisage a need at some stage before 3 o'clock
   to ensure that people went to the outer pens? - A. No, sir.
   As has already been said this morning the policy was that the
   fans would find their own level.  I would only have taken some
   sort of action if I had thought the crowding of those two pens
   had got to such a stage the fans were in some sort of danger,
   and it was certainly nowhere near that stage at that time.

Q. If that stage in your assessment had been reached what action
   would you have taken? - A. I would have informed ground
   control.

Q. What would you expect them to do? - A. I would have expected
   someone would have been deployed to the back of the West
   Stand, be it stewards of Police.  That was a matter for ground
   control. We have got contact obviously with stewards through
   a radio network, but that would have been ground control’s
   decision, not mine.

Q. I think you continued your tour of the perimeter.  There were
   one or two matters that attracted your attention on the Spion
   Kop, and then you made your way towards the players’ tunnel? -
   A. That is right, sir.

Q. And were you there at about 3 o'clock when the game began? -
   A. I was, sir.

Q. And then shortly thereafter became aware of obvious problems
   at the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes.   There was something
   happening.   There was some sort of commotion happening there,
   so I walked to that end, some 20 or 30 yards behind
   Superintendent Greenwood who had been at the tunnel with me
   just before.
                             75


                                                   P. DARLING



Q. To which part of the terrace did you then go initially? - A.
   pen 3.

Q. How quickly were you able to assess the situation? - A. As
   soon as I got there it was quite clear that there were many
   people at the front who were having difficulty breathing and
   who were being crushed.

Q. Can you help as to the state of the perimeter gates when you
   first arrived there? - A. As far as I recall certainly gate 3
   was o p e n .

Q. Did you at that stage speak to any of the Officers who were in
   Serial 1? - A. I c a n ’t recall actually speaking to those
   Officers.   As I got there another serial joined us. Certainly
   there were Officers from Serial 2 who had fairly easy access
   to that part of the ground as they were in the lower South
   Stand.  That was the most adjacent part of the ground to the
   Leppings Lane end.      There were certainly Officers from that
   serial.   I c a n ’t identify them.  Then over the next few
   minutes more and more Officers came, but again exactly where
   from I am not sure.

Q. Looking again at the instructions to Serial 1 concerning the
   very limited circumstances in which individual Officers are to
   open those gates,  where reference is made there to a senior
   Officer who is in  mind? - A. At least myself.

Q. So you would not normally envisage the Sergeant being
   authorised to give that instruction? - A. No, the Sergeant's
   duties for Serial   1 are to remain at the tunnel throughout his
   duties, and therefore really I am the next Officer up in rank
   who would be walking past those Officers.

Q. It follows from what you said that your position up until 3
   o ’clock or very close to 3 o ’clock is mobile? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. So an individual Officer would not know where yotr were any
   particular time? - A. No.

Q.   Does it follow    that the only way to contact   you, therefore,is
     by radio? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    Are we to take   it you did not receive any    request by the radio
     to open any of those gates that day? - A. I received no
     request at all, sir, but as I have just mentioned the amount
     of information I was getting over the radio was very, very
     limited.   Apart from the problem the noise was absolutely
     deafening, especially after 2.30.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You say it was deafening.      Was it
     what you would expect at a big match? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. More? More than you would expect?   Any Semi-Final? - A. At
   any Semi-Final. I think it is clear the noise generated at a
                             76


                                                   P. DARLING


     Semi-Final is louder.  It is certainly the biggest crowd you
     will get at Hillsborough, and therefore the most noise.  Not
     only that, the actual event itself, it is one that is so
     charged up.

Q.    Yes, but I would like to understand what this implies, that
     even if radio is working correctly at a Semi-Final you may not
     be able to communicate by it? - A. It is difficult, sir.    I
     would say it is difficult.    I am not saying it was impossible,
     and in the past it has been good enough, but it is always
     difficult simply because of the volume of noise around you.

Q.        MR. OOLDSACK:   Following on from that, Mr. Darling, does
     it mean in practice that the individual Officers near to the
     perimeter gates have to make their own decision as to whether
     or not to open those gates? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. As you are no doubt aware criticism has been raised already
   that some Officers were slow to do just that, open the gates.
   I would like to ask you one or two questions as to what you
   would expect them to do in certain situations.   The
   instruction they have, of course, is very clear, is not it,
   only to open if medical attention is required? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   What would you expect an individual Officer to do if he is
     hearing cries, "Let us out, we are crushed” , but c a n ’t see an
     individual apparently in need of medical attention? - A. He is
     obviously going to look at the crowd, and he is going to
     assess if there is a danger there.   He can see the crowd very
     clearly.   He is immediately in front of them.   If he is of the
     opinion that people are in danger of being injured Iwould
     think he would open the gate.

Q.   So that despite the apparently clear wording of the
     instruction you would hope, would you, that the Officer would
     open the gate before anyone did in fact need medical
     attention? - A. I would hope we would prevent the injury in
     the first place, yes, sir.    But that will obviously be down to
     the individual Officer as to how he perceived the state of the
     crowd "there.  Just a cry for help, he might not act on that
     straight away.   In fact, I d o n ’t think he would.  He would
     look at the crowd, he would assess the crowd.      He would be
     able to tell, I a m quite sure, if people were being crushed if
     they were in difficulties, and if injuries were likely to
     follow from that.

Q. But at that stage the individual Officer is very much on his
   or her own? - A. Absolutely, sir.

Q.   In assessing that situation? - A. Yes.

Q.   Mr. Darling, I d o n ’t propose to take you through what you did
     so far as assisting those who obviously in distress is
     concerned.  Can I take you to one further matter towards the
     end of your statement, where you refer to criticism you heard
     of the Police.  This is after the events had happened.      The
     criticism you heard, what was it of? - A. Basically that the
T   ‘
                                    77


                                                         P. DARLING


           Police were to blame for the crush because we had not given
           the Liverpool supporters enough tickets, or that we had given
           them the wrong end.  They wanted the Kop end which holds more.
           That came from many, many fans.

        Q. What did you understand that to mean? - A. They were blaming
           us that the fact was there were more Liverpool fans wanted to
           come to the Semi-Final than either were allocated in tickets
           and more Liverpool fans wanted to come than Nottingham Forest
           fans, and therefore Liverpool fans thought it only fair that
           they should get the larger proportion of tickets, which in
           fact they had not.

        Q. But if only the number who had been able to buy tickets had
           come would there still have been the crush? - A. No, sir.   I
           didn't speak back to them at the time because of obviously the
           distressed situation a lot were in.

        Q. I am just wondering whether you interpreted that criticism as
           meaning k lot of people had come without tickets because they
           felt there should have been more tickets available? - A. Well,
           yes, that is the impression I certainly got.At the time I
           did not discuss with with those fans individually.

        Q. I follow that.    Thank you very much.

                            Cross-Examined bv MR. HYTNER:

        Q. Very briefly, I hope, Mr. Darling.  At 2 o ’clock you went to
           the club control room? - A. Yes, sir, or some time before 2
           o ’clock, actually, I think.

        Q. Even before 2 o ’clock. By that time you had observed yourself
           that the Nottingham Forest fans had arrived as expected, but
           the Liverpool end was slow to be filling up? - A. In
           comparison, yes, sir.

        Q. And that was your own personal observation? - A. yes.

        Q. But also, although it may not have been your particular
           business so that you would not have necessarily absorbed it
           and analysed it at the time, you were told by somebody who had
           a view of the mechanical check on entry Into the ground that
           whereas 20,000 had been there at that time last year there
           were now only 12,000 in the ground? - A. That is right, sir.

        Q. A shortfall an hour before kick-off of 8,000 fans? - A. An
           hour-plus, yes.



                                         /Q. Who would all within
                               P. D A R L I N G

Who would all, within the next hour plus, be coming in
addition to the ones who had come the previous year?
A.   That's right.

And it was obvious visually so far as you were concerned
that the bulk of that 8,000 would be Liverpool supporters?
A.   Yes.

So it would not have been very difficult for somebody whose j
job it was to absorb an analyse this information to appreciate
at least an hour before the kick-off that there was going
to be at some stage in the next hour or so a surge of
supporters coming, something like 8,000 or near 8,000
more than would be expected in the ordinary way.
A.  Not necessarily a surge.   There was still over an
hour before kick-off.   Obviously there were more going
to come in the last hour and a quarter but not necessarily
a surge.

At some stage they were going to have to be accommodated
with the crowd that would have been expected from the
previous year.   A.   Yes, but the extra people could have
come spread out throughout that hour, hour and a quarter.

Certainly, yes.   They might have come in the next five
minutes or they might have come five minutes before kick-
off or in a steady stream throughout.   Now, the next
thing I want to ask you is this and I do not want to put
questions to you that are in any way unfair.   Your
responsibility for the West Terraces, the filling of the
West Terraces, was that more than a marginal responsibility
in relation to all your other duties or was it, in fact,
one of your central duties?   A.   Well, certainly the
Officers who are on the Leppings Lane perimeter track,
their brief is to monitor the crowd in general so the
answer to your question is, "Yes".

Were you aware that whereas the crowd on the Spion Kop
being one entire terrace was controlled mechanically, that
is it would be known in the Control Room when they were
approaching capacity, the same would not be true of the
individual pens on the West Terraces?   A.   I did not
consciously think of that but clearly it is the case.

Well, when you say you did not consciously think of it,
was it something that was part of the briefing that you
had before the Semi-Final?    I do not want to be unfair
to you and ask you about what you have found out since.
A.   It was certainty mentioned that we would not be filling
pens one by one and that fans would find their own level.
That was the only reference in the briefing in that respect.

Did it impinge on your consciousness in the sense that you
knew it was something which might affect your duties
that in addition to the crowd on the whole of the terrace
which would be controlled by the computer, visual observation
by Police Officers and stewards was the only means of
checking when each individual pen reached its' safe capacity -
                                                P. D A R L I N G

pre-determined safe capacity.   A.   It wasn't the only
means.   Of course, we did have the video cameras inside
the ground which gave a view to Ground Control.

That is still visual, is it   not?   A.   Yes, but not to
the Officers on my detail.

I am not suggesting for a minute - this is why I want to be
absolutely fair to you, Mr. Darling,    There were many people
who could observe the crowd but did it impinge on you that
observation as opposed to mechanics and computers was the
only way of monitoring the safe capacity of the individual
pens?   A.    It is not something that went specifically
through my mind.    It is a general duty of ours to
monitor the crowd and had anything happened or any sort
of circumstances occurred within the crowd which needed
our attention, then we would have taken the necessary
action.

In order not to duplicate questions there are certain
questions I am going to leave to another witness and I
am not going to ask you about whether you were right or
wrong in your observations but certainly your own
observation was that at 2.40 or thereabouts the central
pens were almost full?   A.   Yes, but they were not
full.   Others could have got in, as I mentioned before.
People were jumping up which clearly illustrates there
was room for others to come in.

As I say, it may be that I will come on to that in due
course but I am not going to ask you.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not know, you see, I
wonder whether what you are saying amounts to this, that
if people could move it is not too full.   A.   They
were jumping up and down actually knocking a baloon from
one to another and, as far as I am concerned, if you
can do that, it cannot be that tightly packed.

     MR. HYTNER:   Sir, can I make it clear that I
have looked at the statements to come ---

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     You are going to deal with
it later.

     MR. HYTNER:    Rather than duplicate the same questions,
Mr. Bullas I think ought to answer other questions.    What
I really want to ask you is this:   if at 2.40 the pens were
nearly full, what did you envisage happening when the pens
became full in the next five or ten minutes?    A.  That,
as in previous years, as I understood it, the crowd would
find its own level.   In other words, people would not push
into that central pen or, if they did move into there, they
would move into the outer pens;   that it would find its own
level;  that other fans would go to the entrances on either
side of the West Stand.
                                            P. D A R L I N G

You see, what I want to find out, without in any way being
abrasive with you, is just what level of information
percolated down to those who actually had to do the work
on the ground.   Did you appreciate that those coming
through the turnstiles when Pens 3 and 4 were full would
not know until they reached the pens that the pens were full?
A.   They possibly wouldn't.

Certainly would not, would they?      A.   Not unless they
had been told but they don't always, of course, have to
go down the tunnel in the first place.      If you look down
the tunnel there and ^ou se^- a densely packed crowd then
many supporters would automatically turn round and go
to the outsides.

If they knew, of course, that there were entrances to the
wing pens on either side.    A.   I would think it is fairly
obvious and most of those fans - the vast majority - will
have been to Hillsborough before.

When they reached ---  Suppose they go down the tunnel
because they still think there may be room, because they
do not know the safe capacity, how would the fans then find
their own level when they are already in the pens with
their radial fences and they find they are getting more
and more tightly jammed against the barriers, against the
crush barriers?   A.   Those who were going in last would
presumably, finding it jam-packed, they would come out
of the tunnel and come round.   In addition, certain fans,
it is a fact they do climb over the fences.   I am not
saying that we advocate that in any way but that does
happen and some can move across at the back where the
gates are open.

So the levelling out would not occur until the pen was
jam-packed?    A.  Not necessarily jam-packed.   Some
supporters do not want to go into a part of a terracing,
a pen, which is full.   It doesn't have to be actually
ja m-pac ke d.

Had anybody ever briefed you to this effect, that there is
danger when a pen becomes overcrowded, even though the
supporters will still find room to be there?  E&ch pen
therefore has a limited capacity which is safe and the
pens must not be filled beyond that capacity.    A.   I
had not been*briefed on anything of that nature.    I had
not discussed it.  The brief was that the fans would find
their own level and obviously if Officers, including myself, y^o
were on the perimeter track thought that pen was getting
excessively packed and there was any thought of danger
occurring, then we would have taken some action.

You see, we all know by now from the unanimous evidence
given at this Inquiry that a large number of fans like
to go in the two pens behind the goal;   it is th^ir
favourite spot.   W e know that pens can accommodate people
in excess of the safe capacity, that is why a safety capacity
                                       P. D A R L I N G

is instituted.    Was it your understanding from all the
briefings you had had that it was left to the fans to
ascertain the safe capacity of the pens rather than have
it imposed on them, when the fans were anxious to be in
those pens?    A.   They to an extent would find their
own level but, as I have just stated, we were always
conscious or we were always vigilant for any problems
that might occur there and had we seen any problems developing,
then we would have taken action.    Additionally, there are
obviously stewards ---    I was aware there were stewards
at the back of the West Stand there and I would have expected
them to take some sort °^'action.   I was not involved
obviously in the briefing of the stewards behind the West
Stand.   I do not know exactly what was said to them but
that was regarded as far as I was concerned as part of
their job - the packing, the filling of terraces.

If you do not understand the next question please say so
because the last thing I want is to get you to answer a
question as a sort of trap and then regret answering it
but does it really come to this, that even though the
fans would be anxious to be in Pens 3 and 4, it was the
system that they were to be trusted to find their own level
to a safe capacity?   A.   Yes, but in addition I
considered the stewards had certain responsibility for
making sure that it did not get over-full and I repeat
what I said before, that if we got to a stage where we
thought that capacity was being exceeded, then we would
take action, but certainly there has got to be a certain
amount of trust in the behaviour of the supporters.

The next question is this:   let us suppose that the fans in
their anxiety to be in Pens 3 and 4 had found their own
level but it was at en unsafe density and the pens were
packed to too dense a capacity.    What did you then expect
would be done and by whom?    A.   I would expect that
whoever noticed that, whoever saw that, to inform Ground
Control so that they could take any further action which
they thought might be necessary, obviously that being at
the back of the tunnel where there were both Police Officers
and stewards.

              Cross-examined by MR» GLASGflWi

Mr. Darling, just one matter.   You identified the stewards
at the back of the West Stand as being able possibly to
help with monitoring the situation.   How would they know
what the state of the terrace was like?   A.   Well, they
do have, or the senior steward at the back of the terracing
there, he is inradio contact with the Club so if there
was any problem he could certainly be contacted that way.

Who are you talking about as the senior steward at the back
of the terrace?   A.    I did not work behind West Stand,
I just understand that there is someone there who has got
radio contact.

Afe you talking about somebody in the Stand or somebody
                                  P. D A R L I N G

in the concourse?   A.   No, someone behind the terraces.

At the back of the terraces or the other side of the tunnel?
A.   At the other side of the tunnel.

I see.  What sort of information did you think the Club
were in a position to give him?   A.   Well, if anyone -
if a Police Officer or if Ground Control had noticed any
problems there, then through Ground Control we can inform
certainly the Club, iie*, Mr. Lock or Mr. Mackrell, and I
understand they are in a position then to pass details on
to the stewards there.

I am sorry, are you seriously suggesting the chain of command
might be that a Police Officer would notice that the pens
were full, tell Police Control so that Police Control would
pass it on to the Club officers and the Club officers would
tell the stewards to do something about it?  A.   I said
before that there were both Police Officers and stewards at
the back there.

I am asking you how the stewards at the back are expected
to find out what the state of the pens are and, as I
understand it, Mr. Dairling, your answer is, you would
seriously expect a Police Officer to notice the problem,
to tell Police Control, that Police Control should tell
the Club's Control and that the Club's Control should
tell the stewards.   A.    That would only be if there was
a problem there.   I am not saying that should be monitored
minute by minute.   I am talking about if we saw there was
a problem building up then certainly the stewards would want
to know, as would the Police Officers, and that would go --
that can only go through Ground Control.

This is all very complicated.   I do not follow the
complication.   I thought you had told us that the orders
that you had received in your briefing were that the fans
in that area were to find their own level.  A.   Yes.

And that Police Officers on the perimeter track were
expected specifically in their duties to monitor that
that was happening safely.   A.   Yes.

I do not understand where the stewards come into the picture
at all.  Did you as the Officer responsible for some of
those Police Officers expect the stewards behind the Stand
to be monitoring the position?    A.   They cannot monitor
the situation in that they know exactly how many is in at
one moment in time.    What I am trying to say is that if we
got to a stage where there was potentially a problem
then the stewards and the Police Officers at the back of
the Leppings Lane terrace would need to know of that, so that
some sort of action could be taken, be it by stewards or
by Police Officers, and the only means of them being told is
(a) through Ground Control, which means in respect of Police
Officers messages will be passed from Ground Control to
either the Sergeant or the Inspector in charge of those
Police Officers, or passed to the stewards through the Club.
                       83


                                         P. D A R L I N G

Now, exactly what the Ground Control would do, I don't
know.   They had their own brief there, I presume, and
they would have decided but it would have been our job
on the perimeter track simply to pass that information
to our Ground Control if we thought there was a problem




                              /What you do appreciate.
*    <

o\                                  84



                                                   P. DARLING



         Q. What you do appreciate, Mr. Darling, is that the only
            people who were in a position to assess whether or not a
            problem was developing in respect of packing on those
            stands were the Officers either on the perimeter track or
            those possibly in the stands that overlooked them? - A.
            Also Ground Control - and I am not sure, although I
            mentioned I went into the room at the back of the south
            stand where the counting machinery is, I know there are
            cameras there, or that there are monitors there, exactly
            what part of the ground they show I do not know.    I did
            not particularly look at them.  It may be that staff in
            there can also see the state of the terrace at Leppings
            Lane, but I do not know.

                       Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

         Q. Mr. Darling, may I ask you about the function of the
            Officers in Serial 1? - A. Yes, sir.

         Q. They are identified in documentation and we see the list
            of the Officers that are there and your attention has
            been drawn to a section in capitals which has been
            underlined.   Do you see that? - A. Yes.

         Q. It would seem that there is some emphasis being placed
            upon those Officers to ensure public order.   Is that
            right? - A. The responsibilities of the Officers round
            the track are two-fold.   It is mainly to monitor the
            crowd, in general terms, shall we say.   The two sorts of
            problems we can expect to occur in a football ground are
            those of public order or those concerned with safety and
            they are the two areas they would be looking out for.

         Q. Is it right that in 1988 there had been endeavours by a
            number of Liverpool supporters at the west end terrace to
            get on to the pitch? - A. I do not know, sir.

         Q. You did not know about that.     Not only at     the endof the
            game but at earlier stages? -   A. I was not   aware

         Q. You have been asked about the filling of the pens.    May
            I ask you about that?   The Kop contains thousands of
            people? - A. Yes.

         Q. The Police had, according to the briefing, Officers at
            the entrances to the Kop, Serial 7, but also your
            Officers on the perimeter? - A. Yes, that is right.

         Q. Let's take a hypothetical case.   If a considerable
            number of people in the Kop had chosen to go alldown     to
            the bottom right hand corner?   - A. Yes.
                                         P. DARLING


That they thought that was the best place to watch the
match from.   Were there any Officers in the terrace, in
the Kop, to ensure that that did not happen? - A. I am
not sure exactly where those Officers were situated.   I
was not in charge.

At the entrances to the Kop terraces in pairs to maintain
order and ensure that these entrances remained clear at
all times? - A. Yes.

So there would be, on the basis of that, no Officers on
the Kop? - A. No, they would come up the entrances into
the Kop, that is all.

Of course, if the Officers on the perimeter noticed, and
were aware that such a situation had occurred, never mind
whether the Kop was full, but all those on it had decided
to go down to a particular corner, because even though a
terrace may be only half full you may have a situation of
danger because of where people have gone? - A. Yes.

It would seem that your Officers on the perimeter, if
they noticed that happening, would be expected to do
something about? - A. Yes.

Is it fair to say their attention would have been upon
all matters which would have included that, but primarily
one of public order? - A. It is any problem that needs
Police attention.

Anything at all? - A. Anything at all.

Even if it is not strictly a Police problem the
intelligent Officer will deal with it? - A. Yes.

You went round the perimeter at about 2.40? - A. That is
right, sir.

You went round to check with your men, talk to them, see
whether there were any problems? - A. Yes.

Any matters of concern and also to look yourself? - A.
Yes.

To have a look-see.   Did you have in your mind the sort
of things you would have expected the perimeter Officers
to have in mind - order, any obvious matter of unsafety,
etc? - A. Yes.

Were you looking? - A. Yes, as I walked all the way
around the ground.

Now, of course, as you will expect your own Officers to
act, if you had noticed anything that was unsafe, would
                             86


                                            P. DARLING


     you have acted? - A. Yes, and I did in the fact we found
     Liverpool supporters in one part of the Kop where they
     should not have been.

Q. You dealt with it? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you had a bit of difficulty with communication? -
   A. I did, indeed.

Q. Even though they were only five feet from you? - A. Yes,
   by that time we were fifteen minutes, perhaps ten
   minutes, from kick-off time and obviously the noise had
   increased as we had approached that time.   I was
   speaking to three of four Liverpool fans at a distance of
   only five or six feet and it was difficult to hear what
   they were saying.

Q.   At Four or five feet, you do have difficulty with
     communicating with those who were directly there? - A.
     Yes.

Q. I want to come back to the walk you had round at about
   2.40-ish.   Now over there is a blown-up photograph
   which is a composite made of the photographs that are in
   the composite 2, taken at 2.46 - 1629, 1630 and 1631.
   The first three in the bundle. - A. Yes.

Q. That is the blow-up over there.   It is difficult to see
   from where you are.   Have you had a look at it? - A. I
   have not looked at that one in detail, no, sir.

Q. Perhaps you ought to go and have a look at it because I
   want to ask you a question about it.   The question is:
   does that represent the sort of situation you saw at the
   time you went round?   Perhaps you can do it from those
   photographs there? - A. From these photographs here, yes,
   sir.

Q. They only show little segments. - A. Yes.     Yes, just
   reasonably full showing no concern to me.

Q.   Reasonably full?   No concern to you? - A. In fact the
     second photograph, 1630, if you look towards the front
     there are people facing the wrong way with obviously
     plenty of space round them.

Q. At that time, 2.40, your time may have been before these
   were taken, although perhaps timings to a few minutes on
   your recollection may not be perfect, but the time you
   went round did you have any reservations at all about the
   state of the people in those pens? - A. None at all, sir.

Q. On that occasion it has been put to you plainly, if it
   seems that the pen was in such a state that no more
                             87



                                            P. DARLING


     people could reasonably be admitted to it, you would do
     something about it? - A. Yes, I would.

Q. Was the state anything like that? - A. No.   It was
   nicely filled, but as I said before, not causing any
   problems.

Q. I do not know who has produced this photograph.   I think
   it may be one of the clubs - 1988.   It looks as though
   it is taken some time during the match.   It was produced
   a few days ago and perhaps you were not here.   Were you
   there in 1988? - A. No, sir.  I was at Ecclesfield Police
   Station on duty at the time.

Q. So you cannot help us about that? - A. No, sir.

Q. That sort of situation that you see in that photograph
   there - an experienced Officer - does that cause you any
   degree of concern? - A. No, sir.

Q. Of course, if all the people we see in those three
   photographs - 29, 30 and 31 - had, for whatever reason,
   got themselves into a particular corner, or the bulk of
   them, that would have caused problems? - A. Yes.

Q. What do you have to rely on in the circumstances to
   prevent that happening?   - A. You have got to trust the
   supporters up to a point.    We are not in amongst the
   crowd.   We have got to rely on their commonsense that
   they will find a reasonable level of comfort.

Q. The games you have been at before, had you observed that
   happening or not, the fans living up to your expectation
   of them? - A. In previous games?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I had certainly not come across any
   problem before in that respect.

Q. May I move on a little bit and ask you about your
   appreciation that something had gone wrong on the day in
   question? - A. Yes.

Q. You, upon seeing there was trouble, made    your way to the
   West Terraces? - A. That is right.

Q. Did you get there as quickly as you could? - A. Yes.

Q.    Are you able to say what stage the game had gotto or
     not? - A. As I recall, it had been  played for a few
     minutes, but I am rather vague about that.

Q.   Anyway, when you got there, so far  as you could see were
     the perimeter fence gates open? - A. It was open, as I
     recall.
                           88


                                          P. DARLING


Q. Did you see anybody being thrust back by any Police
   Officers? - A. No.   On the contrary, Officers were
   trying to pull people out.

Q. Did you yourself go up to the perimeter fence? - A. I
   did.

Q. Did you stand up and have a view over? - A. Yes, I stood
   on the advertising boards there.

Q. Did you make any endeavour to relieve the pressure on
   those at the front? - A. Yes.   I tried to shout, or
   signal, to the fans who were farther back, to try and
   move back.   Although I was shouting - I appreciate that
   was rather fruitless because of the noise, but it is
   something one would do naturally, really.   At the same
   time I was indicating with my hands to move back.

Q. Were there people in the crowd who responded to your
   signal and turned round and tried to get those behind
   them to move back? - A. No.

Q. You did not see that.   When you were trying to get those
   to move back, at the back, because that is where the move
   initially had to begin, did those people at the back
   appear to be still looking at the game? - A. Yes.    They
   were looking at the game, obviously shouting back at me,
   shouting abuse back at me.   That was quite clear.

Q. Those who you were trying to get to relieve the pressure
   were either watching the game or some of them responded
   by being abusive to you? - A. Yes.   Obviously I could
   not hear exactly what they were saying, but by the manner
   in which they were shouting and the fact it was directed
   by their gaze towards me, it was quite obvious that it
   was at me and other Officers.

Q. Did they appear to be interested in complying with what
   you were wanting done? - A. No.

Q. Were they apparently being deliberately unco-operative? -
   A. Yes, they just took no notice.

Q. Of course it may be said what could they do, they were at
   the back?   Did they appear to give way to go back? - A.
   No, they did not appear to make any effort whatsoever.

Q. You spoke in relation to events after that, of
   considerable numbers of Liverpool supporters accusing the
   Police and attributing the incident to their being a
   shortage of tickets? - A. That is right, sir.
                                       P. DARLING


This was not just one or two spectators? - A. No, it was
many.   It is very hard to hazard a guess, but double
figures, certainly.

Many, many supporters were attributing the cause of this
disaster to a shortage of tickets? - A. Yes.

Accordingly, it would seem that they would seem to know
something about what had gone on? - A. Quite possibly.

Did you have the impression from those people that they
were saying that far more people had got into the ground
than should have come in, having regard to the ticket
allocation? - A. I am not sure they were saying that that
amount had actually got into the ground, but certainly
more were there, in general, than they had tickets for.




               Q. You are not just talking
                            90


                                                  P. DARLING


Q. You are not just talking about a few.      It was a lot of people
   saying it? - A. Yes.

Q. Coming from different parts of the crowd? - A. Well, these
   were the people who had spilled out on to the pitch, so they
   all came obviously from the Liverpool end, in fact from the
   Leppings Lane terrace.

Q. Because obviously whatever the allocation of tickets, the
   ground has a finite accommodation? - A. Yes.

Q.   These people seemed to be saying that there numbers there who
     would not have been there or should not have been there
     without tickets.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Mr. Woodward, I think I follow
     what the argument i s . What the interpretation is really has
     to be a matter of inference, but I think it is perfectly clear
     what is said and what you say it mea ns.

          MR. WOODWARD:   Thank   you, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     And what the witness says he
     thought it meant.

          MR. WOODWARD:   I d o n ’t mean to cover all the
     possibilities without closing the mind to what might have
     happened:

Q. But that observation, not enough tickets, came from numbers of
   people at different times during the melee that followed? - A.
   Yes.

Q. It was a constant cry that went out? - A. Yes.

                     Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q.    Mr. Darling, in answer to a question from Mr. Hytner which i
     have summarised thus, was your concern with monitoring
     marginal or central, you said "Yes” , and I was really
     wondering what the "Yes" was in answer to. - A. I am sorry, if
     you could repeat the question I will try and qualify that,
     sir.

Q. The question, and I am shortening it because it was longer
   than this, but the effect of the question was, was monitoring
   the build up in the pens on the terraces part of your duty
   that was marginal or was central, and you said "Yes".  I
   wondered whether "Yes" was to "marginal" or to "central"? - A.
   It was one of many duties.  It was an important duty.

Q.   So it was neither marginal nor    central but was just important?
     - A. It was important, yes.

Q.   Just to deal with the question of the state of the pens, I
     want to be sure you are being entirely fair to the Officers
     under you, you see.  It is perfectly plain from the
•Z "




                                 91


                                                       P. DARLING


          operational order that the   emphasis is upon containment rather
          than letting anyone out? -   A. Yes, but we start from the
          premise that the gates are   closed and no-one comes on to the
          track unless there is good   need.

       Q. Indeed, if we look at the sentence before the one in capitals,
          it refers to ensuring that people d o n ’t gain access tothe
          ground? - A. Yes.

       Q. There is nothing directly in the order that deals with
          monitoring the build up in the pens? Correct? - A. That is
          correct, sir.

       Q. Was there anything you heard said in any briefing to any of
          the Officers that specifically dealt with any duties in
          relation to monitoring the building up in the pens? - A. not
          specifically, only the generality that we are always
          monitoring the crowd in general to identify any problems.

       Q. Would you conceive it to be part of the duties of the
          perimeter Officers to keep an eye at all times on the build up
          and to report in if that Officer thought that a position was
          reached where the build up was beginning to look a little
          unsafe? - A. Yes, as soon as it got to the stage where the
          Officer considered that safety was in question then I would
          expect tha t, y e s .

       Q. Even though it was not part of the briefing as such? - A. Yes.
          Our job at a football match, as I said before, is a case of
          public order and safety, and clearly once you get to a stage
          where safety is in question then Officers, I would expect and
          I am sure they do, they act upon it.

       Q. When you went to have a look at the position at some time
          between 20 and quarter-to-3 I think you said the situation was
          that the centre two pens were pretty full? - A. That is right.

       Q. "Comfortably full" I think is the expression you used, whereas
          the side pens were relatively empty? - A. Yes, there was
          certainly plenty of room.

       Q. Plenty of space.  If the build up continued in that way there
          was going to be an obvious imbalance, was not there? - A. If
          fans kept coming in through the centre tunnel, y e s .

       Q. So when you reached 3 o'clock, kick-off time, any Officer on
          the perimeter should have anticipated that all or virtually
          all fans were in? He would not know anything to the contrary?
          - A. I certainly did not receive any messages saying that
          there were still fans outside.

       Q . So you would assume.... - A . Unless there are gaping gaps on
           the terraces from which you conclude there are still people to
           come in.

       Q. If you assume in the absence of any information to the
          contrary that virtually everyone is in by 3 o'clock, and if
5
                                92


                                                      P. DARLING


         bearing that in mind you see that the side pens are relatively
         empty, it must follow, must it not, that the centre pens are
         over-full? - A. If everyone who has a ticket, if they are
         all in there, yes.

    Q. This is what we are assuming if we have reached kick-off, that
       the vast majority, if not all, are in.  So any Officer seeing
       an imbalance must appreciate that the central pens are
       over-full? - A. It would seem obvious, yes.

    Q. Why did not you appreciate it? - A. At 3 o ’clock?

    Q. Yes? - A. Because at 3 o ’clock that is when I actually went to
       the ....

    Q. You were at the tunnel but you could see that end, could not
       you? - A. No, I had walked round the ground from 2.40.  I got
       involved in the incident at the Kop end at something like 10-
       to - 3 . At 3 o'clock I was at the tunnel moving away
       photographers who were crowding around that area.

    Q. So you were not looking at the Leppings Lane end at that
       stage? - A. No, sir, and obviously I would be some distance
       away, and not in the best position.

    Q. The only final matter I want to ask you is this.  You have
       told Mr. Woodward just a moment ago you were trying to get
       them to go back, and you say you were aware of you yourself
       being abused by people at the back? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did it occur to you that it might be that they were reacting
       angrily because there was nowhere for the® to go? - A. It
       could well have been.  I d o n ’t know the reason why.  I am just
       saying that abuse was thrown back.     The reason why they were
       upset or angry with me, it could have been one or two things.

    Q. We know people were still at that stage coming in down the
       tunnel and joining them at the back. - A. I was not aware of
       that, and certainly those I was speaking to, to me did not
       appear to be in any great degree of problem.  In other words,
       they were not being crushed further back, and obviously they
       were the people I was directing my attention to, not those in
       actual fact right at the mouth of the tunnel because I was to
       one side of that.  It was more a general plea to those half,
       three-quarters of the way back .

                           Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

    Q. Just one thing which you have not actually been asked about,
       and may   be you can't help. You assisted, I think, in bringing
       some of the dead out of the terraces? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   Was that out of pen 3? - A.   Out of pen 3, sir.

    Q.   Did you see any brought out of pen 4? - A. No, sir, I did not
         go beyond through pen 3.  I kept to that side.
H   4
                                      93


                                                             P. DARLING


                  MR. COLLINS:     One thing I forgot to ask.     May I just
             quickly do so?

                         Further Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

        Q.   Can I ask you to look at this photograph, which is composite          2
             1/7A. - A. I have it here.

        Q.   I am asked to ask you this.  Do you see the Inspector at the
             bottom in the middle, or rather, not an Inspector necessarily
             but a Police Officer with a flat cap? - A. Yes.

        Q. I don't think it is you, but perhaps you can help me.          Is it?
           - A. I don't think that is me, sir, no.

        Q. No, I think it is Mr. Greenwood, is not it? - A. It could well
           be, yes.

                  MR. COLLINS:   Mr. Kallipetis shakes his head, but
             actually it is Mr. Greenwood, because it is quite clear from
             1/10A.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     I think it was put to him he was
             on one of those.

                  MR. COLLINS:     He was in 1/10A, I think, sir:

        Q. In fact, it looks as if whoever it is has a loud hailer or
           something? - A. Yes, sir.  At some stage I know someone had a
           loud hailer.  I can't recall.

        Q. Anyway, it is not you.      It does not matter whether it is Mr.
           Greenwood or not.

                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much.

                            INSPECTOR DAVID BULLAS Called

                                 Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

        Q.   You are Inspector David Bullas? - A. Yes.

        Q.   And on 15th April you were the Inspector in charge of Serial
             13? Is that so? - A. That is correct.

        Q.   Serial 13 isthe one which   is in the West Stand over the
             Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Do you have there the first volume of the South Yorkshire
             Police documents, at Tab 14, the entry in relation to Serial
             13 in sub-sector 6, perhaps a third of the way through the
             documents in the tab? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q.   It is right, is not it, that that was the only serial with
             which you were concerned? - A. That is correct.

        Q. Your superior would be Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. The information that we have here, did you have a copy of
   that? - A. I did, sir, yes.

Q.    Did you give a copy of this to any members of your serial? -
     A. When I briefed the serial I made reference to this copy,
     and I know the Sergeant of my serial also had a copy of this
     document.

Q. You have two of your Officers at each of the entrances to the
   West Stand.  Would they be at floor level or up in the stand
   itself? - A. All the serial was in the stand, sir.

Q.   So they would be at the top of the entrance stairs tothat
     stand? - A. No, the two Officers you are referring to at the
     emergency exits, they would be at the bottom of the stand
     itself, the lower portion of the stand, in each corner.

Q.   The concourse and bar area, that is inside the stand itself,
     is it? - A. Yes, at the back of the stand, sir.

G.   Then there are 6 Officers at the front of the stand? - A. Yes.

Q. They seemed to have the job of preventing missiles being
   thrown or stand tickets being dropped? - A. That is correct.

Q. And to prevent people from climbing up? - A. Yes.

Q. There is no mention in that set of instructions to keep a
   particular eye on the size of the crowd in the terrace below,
   is there? - A. There is no particular instruction, but it is
   common sense that one does look down, looking down at the
   crowd all the time if you are stood at the front, and
   obviously you will be monitoring the people in the stand with
   regard to exits and emergency exits, etc.  But the Officers
   are the front are obviously constantly looking down because
   one of the problems in that stand is that people do tend to
   climb from the terracing into the stand.

Q. Were you yourself briefed by a more senior Officer? - A. i
   was, sir, yes.

Q. By whom? - A. I was at the briefing on the Friday and also the
   briefing on the match day.  Superintendent Greenwood i think
   it w a s .

Q. Did you receive specific instructions to monitor the crowd in
   the terraces below the West Stand and to pass information on
   to control so it could be transmitted to Officers in the area
   behind the stand? - A. No, I did not actually receive specific
   instructions to monitor the crowd in the terracing.  Our
   duties specifically were to deal with the people inside the
   stand, but obviously part of your duties, because you are
   looking down constantly, is to monitor the crowd both in the
   stand and on the terraces.
                         /Q. Yes.  What I am interested in....
                                 D. BULLAS


Yes, what I am interested in is what instruction you received
in the briefing that you had either from a more Senior
Officer or from Superintendent Greenwood in relation to the
terrace below.  Did you receive any specific instruction
in relation to that terrace? - A. I didn't sir, no.

Did you give any particular instruction to the Officers in
your Serial in relation to the crowds in the terrace below
the West Stand? - A. No I gave the general briefing in
relation to this document and part of our duty is to monitor
the crowd in the vicinity in which we work.  I didn't
specifically direct their attention to the people in the
terracing or anything like that, no, but it is understood
that we do monitor all the crowd.

Yes, of course.  Your prime concern of course was what was
going on in the West Stand itself, wasn't it? - A. Well
it was my prime concern what was happening in the ground.
Obviously our duties eoncern the West Stand in particular,
yes, because we were located there.

You say you did not see fit then to say to your Officers:
"Well if you see the terraces getting a bit full make sure
that you tell me or that you tell Ground Control"? - A. No,
I did not say that.  I should imagine the Officer would use
his initiative.  I would use my own initiative if I saw
any problems and draw it to someone's attention.

You see the reasons I ask you these questions is that
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield gave evidence that your
Serial had the duty of looking out over the terrace from
the Stand and that you were under instructions to look out;
these instructions would have been given to you by Super­
intendent Greenwood.  That was the evidence that we had
from Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.  From what you say
you did not get those instructions at all? - A. We got the
instructions to monitor the crowd underneath but not with
regard to the climbing of people into the Stand if that
is what you mean by instructions regarding the people on
the terracing.

You say you got the instructions to monitor the crowd under­
neath. What was actually said to you about that? - A. Well
as it says on the document that obviously people do climb
up from the terracing; missiles are thrown and there are
one or two problems caused by people in the terracing and
also people in the Stand dropping missiles down on to the
top of them.

That is part of it certainly.   You had your written instructions
about that? - A. That is right.

And they were not amplified in any oral instructions? — A.
I think they might have been, yes, but the general
instruction that we monitor the crowd beneath us for that
purpose.
                                     D. BULLAS


Q. You of course did end up on the West Stand close to the
   front of it, didn't you? - A. I did sir, yes.

Q. You were able then to see over the front wall into the
   terrace below? - A. Yes.

Q. What time would you say that you took up that sort of
   position? - A. I was obviously in the Stand itself from
   being deployed, from about quarter-to-11 we were in the
   Stand.  I remember going to near the front, it would
   be about half-past-2.

Q. Did you stay in that sort of position where you could    see
   the terraces below from about that time onwards? - A.    I
   was in that vicinity the majority of the time.  I was    not
   constantly stood in one position all the time looking    down,
   if that is what you mean, no.

Q. But you did look down from time to time when you were there
   at the front? - A. I did.

Q. It is right, is it, that if you go a little way back from
   the front wall of the West Stand you can't really see much
   of the terrace at all? - A. Probably so, yes.

Q. You have really got to be at the front looking over the
   wall? - A. Yes.
Q. And even then there is an overhang, is there not, of the
   West Stand so that you can't see the back wall of the terrace,
   can you? - A. Yes, I think you can more or less see the
   back wall by leaning over.

Q. You have got to lean over to do that? - A. That is right.

Q. Did you in fact do that? - A. Yes, several times.

Q. Did you at any stage notify either Control or the Serials
   that were in the concourse behind the Stand of any crowding
   in Pens 3 and 4? - A. No, I didn't, the reason being that
   there wasi nothing unusual in that crowd beneath me
   to cause me to do that.   There was nothing that drew my
   attention to any overcrowding at that time.

Q. Were you aware of the fact that Serials 14 and 15 had the
   duty of maintaining order on the terraces? - A. Yes.

0. They of course were not under your command, they were under
   the command of Inspector White.  Is that right? - A. That
   is correct, yes.
 Q. And they would have to receive information from Control
    in order to go on to the terraces from where they were?
    - A. I d o n ’t know exactly where they are positioned but
    presumably so, yes.
                                 D. BULLAS


You certainly never sent any messages or passed any messages
on to Serials 14 or 15 did you? - A. I didn't, the reason
being there was not any need to in my opinion to pass any
messages.

Now what would you say then the situation was like when you
looked over the front wall of the West Stand at let's take
2.30 as the first time or thereabouts when you did look?
- A. There was no problems.  The crowd seemed to be in a
good type of humour.  I remember there was a large beach
ball or something being knocked about.   There was a large
inflatable type of thing just more or less below from where
I was standing.  There were no problems.   There was no
overcrowding by any means.

Did you lean over and look to the back of the terrace? - A.
A couple of times I shouted down to some youths, they were
standing on each other's shoulders.  They were kind of
chant leading, acting the goat.  I told them to get down,
this type of thing.

At that time at 2.30 how would you describe the fullness
of Pens 3 and 4? - A. 3 and 4 were not full by any means.
They were no where near being full.

Could you say how many more people they would take or would
that be impossible? - A. I think that would be impossible
sir.
All right.  When was the next time you looked down, how
long afterwards? - A. I don't know.  I was looking about
me, looking down constantly.

As you were looking down during the next, shall we take the
next quarter-of-an-hour, did you see the pens fillingt^fc
- A. Yes, the central pens were getting more people in
than the two outside pens.  There were people coming through
the central tunnel walking beneath from my right and they
were crossing from the two central pens into the Pen 5 I
think it is.

Could you see the people walking along the back wall through
the gates? - A. Yes, definitely.

Again you would have to lean over to do that? - A. No,
not necessarily.  As you look down you can see people
moving across from my right to my left and they were just
moving across the terrace without any problem.

What was the situation in your assessment at a quarter-to-3
then? - A. At quarter-to-3 there was no problem.

Still room for more people   in Pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

Did there ever come a time before 3 o'clock when you thought
really there is not much room for more people in Pens 3 and 4?
                                  D. BULLAS


- A. No, it never crossed my mind sir.   It never occurred.
If I had seen that situation I would have done something
about it but there was no danger; there was no one looking
up to me crying out for assistance, it was just a normal
type of football crowd, no problems.

You had a good aerial view of what was going on in the
pens below you, didn't you? - A. That is right.

You could see how tightly packed the people were? - A. Well
I am telling you they were not tightly packed at that time.

At quarter-to-3? - A. Yes,   it was Just a normal type of
build-up.

Were you able to see what the crowds were like in the wing
pens in numbers 1 and 6? - A. Yes.

How did you see those crowds there? - A. Well they were
filling up as well.  Obviously they were not as full as the
two central ones but they were filling.   I could see people
walking away from me going into the far wing pen as well
obviously as they come down the tunnel.

Were you concerned with the relative absence of people in
Pens 1 and 6? - A. Not at all.  I was not concerned with
the build-up in 3 and 4 either, I was not concerned at all
at that stage.

Did you not think:  "Isn't it time that these pens became
a bit more full"? - A. I did not have cause to think that
sir, no.  There was no problem at that time.

You appreciated, didn't you, that this match had been a
sell-out? - A. Yes.

So all of the standing areas would be expected to be full?
- A. Yes.

Could you say that the condition of the wing pens was such
that you expected them to fill up to capacity? - A. As
I say the wing pens were filling up. There was nothing
untoward that I could see.   There was no problem in the
central two pens and the wing pens were filling as far
as I could see.

What was the first thing that you saw then that gave you
any cause for concern? — A. The first thing that I noticed
the teams, both Liverpool and N&ttinghara Forest were out
on the ground.   They were kickingfrin at the time.  I don't
think the match had started.   There was a bit of trouble
in the Stand about three rows from where I was standing.
There was some dispute about who was sat in what seats• I
stepped briefly back to deal with this.    I sorted that out
to a degree.   The two seats in particular were occupied by
two people already and there were two more people trying
to get in. They were arguing whose seat it was.     I stepped
                                 D. BULLAS


back and I spoke to these people and then I stepped back to
the front to the railing, if you like to call it.  I remember
looking down at the crowd ....

Before you go any further can you tell us where along the
length of the West Stand you were in relation for example
to the tunnel? - A. Yes, if you look at the tunnel from the
pitch slightly to the right.

So you would be in front of Pen 4? - A. Yes.

Is that right? - A. Yes.

Yes, very well.   I am sorry, please, tell us what you saw?
- A . As I stepped back I glanced down to the crowd. My mind
was still on the person or the two people that had been
having a few problems.   To put it mildly one of them was
drunk.   I was still glancing back at him.  I got back to
the railing.   I glanced down and then I noticed an unusinal
movement in the crowd.

Can you give us any idea what time this was? - A. I can't
honestly say.  I don't know if the teams had kicked off
or they were still kicking out, I can't say.  It would be
somewhere around 3 o'clock.

Either just before or just after kick-off? - A. I can't
honestly r®atomber.

Yes, what was this unusual thing you saw in the crowd? -
A. I think I saw from the direction of the tunnel a kind of
movement down the terracing.   I think I described it in my
statement the type of thing that you see on the nature
programmes, the molten lead flowing down the side of the
mountainside, the molten lava.

You mentioned a "river of people"?- A. That is right.   Yes,
it stuck in my mind as being that type of motion.

Can you tell us please whether that river of people, that
stream of people was going directly down towards the pitch
or whether it was going at some angle from the tunnel? - A.
It seemed to be going directly towards the pitch but there
again spreading.

Spreading out? - A. Yes.

Can you say whether it was in both Pens 3 and 4 or in just
one of them? - A. I can't honestly say.  I just saw this
movement.

Well was this movement that you saw to your right or to your
left or directly in front of you? - A. It was to my right.

To your right? - A. Yes.
                          1 0 0




                                     D. BULLAS


Q. How far down the pen did it go? - A. I can only estimate.
   It was just an unusual movement.  The thing that stuck in
   my mind, all afternoon I had watched the people beneath
   me swaying forward, the normal type of sway. Theyc go forward;
   there is a gap open; then they come back without any problems.
   This one the movement was forward but it did not seem to go
   back and that is what drew my attention to it, I think.

Q. When it got towards the pitch, as it gotc down towards the
   bottom of the terracing can you say whether it was aimed
   at any of the gates in the fencing? - A. I don't know. The
   part of the crowd I saw was in the centre towards the rear.
   I did not really notice towards the front fencing.   The part
   that sticks in my mind is the centre of the movement and
   back towards the tunnel.

Q. What effect did you see this have this stream of people?
   - A. Well obviously the people who were in this stream, the
   people   that were there were getting shoved together, getting
   pushed   together. I must admit I looked at it and my mind
   did not quite understand straightaway what had happened.
   It was   the first time I have ever seen it.    I hope it is
   the last, but asI say it was an unusual type      of sway.
   That is what drew my attention to it.    It just went forward
   and it did not come back.

Q. Did you see any people going down or disappearing from view?
   - A. No, I did not see anyone go down or disappear.  I could
   see there were people in distress obviously having been
   pushed together.

Q. Did you look when you saw it at the centre and towards the
   rear, did you look forward towards the perimeter fence?
   - A. No, I do not think I did initially.  It sticks in
   my mind I saw the centre of the movement more than anything.

Q. What d* d you do when you saw this? - A. As I say the time
   lapse now, it seems to be in slow motion, but I remember
   looking down and thinking that something was wrong.    I
   don't know how long it was until I fully      realised what had
   happened.   I can't say that.  I remember thinking to myself:
   "There is something happened here" so I got the radio and
   tried to contact the Police Control Room.

Q. Were you successful? _ A. No, I tried three times I think
   it was.  In fact I looked across at the Control Box that
   was more or less on a level where I was standing.  I can't
   tell you why I did not get through.  I presume because
   other Officers were using the radio, I don't know.

Q. Had you had a radio with you during the whole of the time?
   - A. I had sir.

Q. Had you heard radio messages? - A. I had heard some radio
   messages.  Obviously when you are in the Stand you are
   dealing constantly with such things as I have mentioned,
   people arguing what seats they are sitting in, this type
   of thing.
                                  D. BULLAS


Had you heard anything about the gates? - A . I remember
hearing something about the gates but it had no significance
to me at the time.

Can you say how long that was before this river of people
appeared from the mouth of the tunnel? - A. I can't remember
sir.

You say you could not get through to the Police Control on
your radio? - A. That is correct.

Did you see anybody else doing anything about this? - A.
Well just to set the picture I was not stood in isolation,
there were obviously the people in the Stand. They were
standing at the time.  I don't know whether the teams had
just kicked off and there was a lot of noise, the build-up
to the match.  I was surrounded by spectators.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Sorry, standing did you say?
Did you say something about   people standing? - A. Oh yes,
they were all stood.  It is   a normal thing before the
kick-off that the people in   the Stand do stand up until
the kick-off takes place.

So this was pre-kick-off you think? - A. Well I don't know.
It was the build-up.  It was somewhere around 3 o'clock I
would say.

Well do they normally sit down when kick-off starts? - A.
Well after a few minutes, it is not instant.  You usually
get a lot of people shouting:  "Sit down", this type of
thing and then eventually they sit down in ones and twos
and eventually they all sit down.

      MR. PHILLIPS:  Did you make any other attempts to
draw this to anyone's attention when you failed to get
through to Control? - A. Yes, I did.  I looked towards the
goal at the Leppings Lane end and there was either one,
I can't honestly remember, either one or two Police Officers
stood at the side of the goal.  I waved and I pointed down
towards the crowd and I remember one of the Officers, and
I can't honestly tell you who it is, looking up ate me and
I think he realised that I was trying to attract his
attention.  As I pointed to the crowd he began to take
notice of what I was pointing at.




                      /Q. What did he do ....
                                   D. BULLAS

What did  b® do by way of taking    notice? A.   I
remember him walking towards the fence and he  was stood
looking into the crowd.   My natural reaction at that
time was to turn and go down below and see what the
problem was, which I did.

Did you Bee any of the perimeta: fence gates open?
A.   Yes, as I got to the exit, I made my way up through
the Stand, up the steps.   I turned, just as I was going
to leave.   It was a difficult job, actually getting up
the steps because the people were still milling about,
people still coming in.   I got to the exit.    I turned and
looked back towards the pitch and I remember seeing that
one of the gates - I cannot remember which one it was -
one of the gates was open and I also remember seeing
either one or two bodies on top of ---   by "bodies", I
mean people climbing over the fencing.

Did you at  any stage see a heap    of bodies byany of the
gates?   A.   I didn't, sir, no.

You went out of the West Stand, I think, then and into the
tunnel, did you not?   A.   That's right.

Were you the first Inspector into the tunnel?
A.   I don't think I was.   There was definitely Officers
in front of me on the terracing by the time I got there.

Did you recognise anyone in particular?   A.   I didn't,
no.  There were a lot of obviously spectators about.
There were people still going forward.  There were people
trying to come up the tunnel, get out of the tunnel, so
there was definitely Police Officers, I think, in front
of me on to the terracing.

What did you observe when you went into the tunnel?
A.   I observed ---  The first thing that struck me as I
entered the tunnel was a strong smell of intoxicants.
That is the first thing that hit me as I wfcnt into the
tunnel.   I was in a confined space.  There was a lot
of noise, a lot of confusion, and I remember going slightly
into the tunnel and at that stage I remember the crowd kind
of parting and the first injured person was passed back.

Were people still going down the tunnel towards the terrace?
A.    There was one youth in particular who was still pushing
his way forward.    I took hold of him by the clothing and
dragged him back and told him to get back.    I remember doing
that.    But it sticks in my mind there were people coming
out of the tunnel as well, so there were people going in
and people coming out.

Did you see Police Officers getting people out through the
back, through the tunnel?   A.   The first person that was
brought out was brought out by -- there was definitely one
Police Officer there, probably two, carried out.

I think then a number of people were brought out who were
                               103


                                              0. BU L L A 5

     plainly affected by injuries and so on;         is that right?
     A.   That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.    How many people did you see brought    out that way? Have
     you any idea?     A.   I can't really  say.   I think it
     was the third or fourth person I attempted to give
     assistance to, a youth, obviously I was seeing to him
     for quite a long time - it seemed quite a long time -
     I can't say.     I would estimate somewhere probably in
     the region of 20.

Q. The injured people in the tunnel that you saw are people
   who had been brought from the terraces back?   A.   Yes.
   As far as I could tell and as far as I am aware there was
   no-one injured actually in the tunnel.   They had been
   brought from the terraces.

Q.    And then you took part, did you, continued to take part in
     getting people out of the terrace?         A.   No, this youth
     in particular, he was only a young lad about 14 - I
     assisted with the mo uth -to -m ou th, myself and another Officer,
     for quite a long time.     Unfortunately an Ambulance Officer
     later told us that he was dead.        I can't really assist.

                      Cross-examined by MR.    HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Bullas, in all the briefings that you had, did          anybody
   tell you that there was a limit on the capacity of          Pens
   3 and 4 imposed for safety reasons?    A.   I don't         think
   anyone had directly told me, sir, but I had worked          the
   ground before and I am aware - the Department that          I am
   in, I am aware of the capacity in those pens.

Q.    You were aware that one was 1,000 and the other 1,200?
     A.Something     like that, yes.

Q.    Were you aware that there was no mechanical means of
     monitoring when those capacities had been reached?    A.         Yes.

Q. You were?     A.     Yes.

Q. If a senior Officer had said to you, "Mr. Bullas, the
   capacities of those pens are 1,000 and 1,200 respectively;
   it is your responsibility by visual monitoring to ensure
   that those pens do not contain more than 1,000 or 1,200
   each','j what would your answer have been? A.   Are you
   saying that if I had been given the job to make sure
   they did not overfill?

Q. Yes.   A.   Obviously I would do my best tp^make sure they
   did not over-fill.

Q. That is a very polite answer.   Would your answer not have
   been something to the effect, though putting it very politely,
   "How on earth am I, with my eyes, to ensure that there is
   exactly 1,000 and exactly 1,200 in each of those pens?    It
   is an impossible task to give me."   A.   I agree.
                            104


                                        D. B U L L A S

Q. That would be the fair    answer, would it not?       A.   Yes.

Q. And accurate answer.    Nobody in their right mind could
   expect a Police Officer, however experienced, to judge
   to within a hundred people or more whether those capacities
   had been reached.    A.  If you are asking me if on the
   day in question ---

Q. No, I am asking you in principle.   I will come to the day
   in question.   A.   I can't really say.   It depends on the
   individual, doesn't it?   If somebody had given me that
   task, I would have endeavoured to carry it out, yes.

Q. But it would have been an impos si bJe ta sk , would it not?
   A.  I don't know.   It depends how you went about it.

Q. You see, it may be - I  am not suggesting for a moment that
   it was your task to do that but it may be suggested that
   it was your task.   Just think carefully.    If somebody
   else were to suggest that it was your task to ensure that
   no more than 1,000 and 1,200 were in each of those pens,
   would you have regarded yourself as capable of carrying
   out that task efficiently?   A.   I am not saying I
   would have been capable of looking at the crowd and
   distinguishing exactly the number but I would have been
   capable of looking at the crowd and distinguishing if it
   had been over-filled to have caused danger.

Q. That is a different matter.   You could not possibly take
   on the task of monitoring the numbers, could you?
   A.   Not from the position I was in, no.

Q. What you1 were in fact doing, whether it was your specific
   task or not, was you were applying your own criteria of
   safety and deciding when the pens would become full to
   dangerous?    A.   No, I was looking at the crowd and I
   couldn't see any problems.    That was my criteria to danger.

Q. Yes, that is what I mean.    You were applying your own
   criteria as to when a pen was full or over-full.
   A.   I was applying my own c r i t e r i a i f anyone is in danger
   of being crushed, receiving injuries or asking for assistance,
   and they wasn't.

Q. You see, that is a very interesting answer because has it
   occurred to you before or since this tragedy that safety
   capacities are imposed to ensure that there never remotely
   becomes a situation where people are being crushed, that
   there is a safety margin?   A.   The time until I saw that
   flow of people, there wasn't anyone getting crushed.

Q. I will just press the question once more and then I
   will leave it.   Has it occurred to you that a safe capacity
   is imposed so that there is a margin between the capacity
   and the time when people are in danger of being crushed?
   A.   I can only reply to that, the capacity at the time,
                                            D. B U L L A S

there was no danger, there was no-one being crushed and
there was no concern to me until I saw the movement in
the crowd.   That is the only way I can reply to that.

I have to just put one matter to you in challenge because
it is unfair if things are said behind your back that
have not been put to you in person.    You see, what I have
to suggest to you is that in the best of faith and doing
the job as best you could, nevertheless your perception
of what was crowded was not necessarily the perception of
those within the crowd and that you made a mistake.
A.   I did not make any mistake.    I am an experienced
Police Officer.   I have worked that match -- that ground
numerous times.

C9n I just read out to you some of the evidence that has
been given?   Of course, may I make it clear, it is for
the Tribunal to decide whether the evidence that has been
given is accurate or not;  do you follow?   A.   I follow,
yes.

And it may well be that the Tribunal will reject that
evidence and accept yours but can I just read out some
of the evidence so that you can comment on it?    A Mr.
Hicks at 2.45 said that people were in distress in Pens
3 and 4.   At 2.50 he said there was such a crush that
people were being pulled over - that is the radial fences.
A Mr. Hennessy at 2.50 said that he was concerned and he
was being tightly squashed.    At 2.30 - going back a bit -
a Mr. Perry was already jammed.    2.30-2.45 a Mr. Lowe
began to worry and the girlfriend of his friend was feeling
sick with the crush.    2.30 a Mr. Postlethwaite said Pen 3
was fairly full.  By 2.40 it was uncomfortable and he
tried to get out.    At 2.45-2.50 a Mr. Matthews said the
crowd was very compact;   he could not move back and he was
being crushed againstithe barrier.    Now, that is some
of the evidence that has been given.    I hope I have fairly
summarised what has been said by thoSe witnesses.    From
your recollection, must they all be wrong?




                           /A.   From my recollection...
                                        D. BULLAS



A. From my recollection there was no crushing in that
crowd.   There was no-one taken out prior to the times I
have mentioned, the flow of people.   There was no-one
carried out.   No-one asked for assistance, medical
assistance, and that includes all the pushing and
crushing you have just mentioned.   No-one asked for
assistance and no-one was taken from the crowd with
injuries, as far as I am aware.

Is that your yardstick, Mr. Bullas? - A. Not at all.
You have just highlighted all this crushing and pushing.
I am saying no-one was injured.   No-one asked for
assistance of the Police.   No-one asked my assistance.
As a matter of 15 feet above the crowd there was no-one
asking for my assistance.   That was not the picture I
saw.

Mr. Bullas, you have actually answered a question I have
not asked you.    I have not suggested to you that anybody
cried out to the Police for assistance or that anyone was
being carried out injured.    I have asked you first of
all, if those witnesses are right, must your perception
have been wrong? - A. I was not wrong.    I have told you
what I saw.    There was no any crushing in the crowd as
far as I could see.

Secondly, from the   last answer you gave, may we takeit
that your yardstick of whether a pen   is crowded is
whether people have cried out to the   Police for help and
whether people have been carried out   injured? - A. No,
that is not my yardstick, sir.   I was just trying to
answer the question you put to me via these people's
statements.   If there was all this crushing and pushing
going on, why wasn't anyone injured prior?

Now the last thing is this:   it is merely to see if we
can refresh your memory as to whether you have the right
recollection as to time.    You say that at the time of
the kick-off, round about three o'clock, there was this
river of people coming down and people were still
standing in West Stand? - A. Yes.

The evidence so far has been pretty firm that this river
of people came down five minutes before kick-off. - A. I
said somewhere around kick-off.   It was somewhere around
three o'clock.   To the exact minute, I do not know.

What may well be right, indeed, it would be accepted, is
that when the river of people flowed through pens 3 and
4, people were indeed standing in West Stand because it
would have been five minutes before kick-off.   Do you
follow? - A. I cannot honestly answer the question
because I do not know exactly what time it was.    It was
«         *


    dm ***’
                                           107



                                                          D. BULLAS


                   somewhere round three o'clock.    I know there were people
                   standing still in the West Stand.

              Q.    Could you look at compact bundle 2 and look at photograph
                   DB 17/14? - A. Yes.

              Q. That photograph we know was taken at three o'clock and as
                 one would expect at kick-off people are sitting down all
                 over, so far as one can see, in the West Stand, do you
                 follow? - A. That is right.

              Q.   So it rather confirms the fact that if people were
                   standing when you saw the river come through it would
                   have been before kick-off, which fits in with everybody
                   else's recollection? - A. Probably so, sir.   As I say, I
                   could not honestly say.  I know it is somewhere around
                   three o'clock.

                               Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

              Q. Mr. Bullas, one matter.   Does your Police experience of
                 the ground go back to the 1985 division of the terraces
                 with the radial fences? - A. I think it may do, sir, yes.

              Q. In that case you may be one of the Officers who can help
                 us on a matter that has not been covered with others.
                 Do you remember when they first went in, the radial
                 fences, attempts were made to divide the terrace up into
                 either three or four sections, with separate numbers? -
                 A. I cannot honestly remember, sir.

              Q. Let me press you just a little harder.   Would you go to
                 the West Midlands bundle 2?   Would you go to photograph
                 17, or any photograph of the tunnel, but I think 17 is
                 convenient.   Do you remember when the big figure ''2'' was
                 put up over the tunnel? - A. I do not, sir.  I am sorry,
                 I cannot help you.

              Q. You cannot remember that at all.   I will just put it to
                 you again, Inspector, just to see whether there is any
                 recollection, that there was a time after the radial
                 fences were first introduced that the terrace tickets
                 were divided into either three or four numbers, but that
                 those who had the responsibility of packing found that
                 very inconvenient and asked the club to stop doing it? -
                 A. I am sorry, sir, I cannot help you at all.   I cannot
                 remember at all.

              Q. Can you remember the alternative, that when you first did
                 become responsible for any work on those terraces,
                 everybody was arriving with the same sort of ticket, is
                 that your recollection? - A. I am sorry to be vague, but
                 I just do not....
                           108



                                          D. BULLAS


Q. No, I am taking you back a long way, I appreciate that.
   Were you ever responsible for the serials which were
   physically involved in the packing work, as distinct from
   that of monitoring from above? - A. No, sir.

Q. You never did that job yourself? - A. No.

Q. You were aware of the fact that others did it, were you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. When I say "others'*, I mean other serials and other
   Inspectors. - A. What, the packing of the terraces?

Q. Yes. - A. I did not know it was the police's duty.   I
   thought it was the stewards' duty to pack the terraces.

Q. Did you work on League games as well as semi-finals? - A.
   I have worked League games, yes.

Q. However, even on League games your understanding was that
   it was the stewards who packed the terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. You are sure about that? - A. As far as I was concerned,
   I cannot remember it being the direct or specific duty of
   the Police to pack the terraces, if that is what you are
   asking?

Q. Yes, I am.   I wondered how clear your briefings had
   been.   Are you saying that as far as you are aware the
   briefings you received, insofar as they dealt with the
   terraces at all, were the same at League games as the
   semi-finals? - A. I am sorry, can you repeat that?

Q. Are you saying that insofar as you recollect the
   briefings that you have received over the years from the
   senior Officers, the briefings relating to the packing of
   the terraces, were the same at semi-finals as *they were
   at League games? - A. As far as I can recall there was
   not any difference between the League and the semi-final.

         MR. GLASGOW:   Thank you.

              Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

Q. Mr. Bullas, may I just ask you a little bit about that?
   Did you ever regard yourself as having any role or
   responsibility for the packing of the fans in the
   terraces?  - A. Not the actual packing, sir. Obviously
   the safety etc., that was our responsibility, but the
   actual packing, no.

Q. Of course, the Police would keep an eye out for whatever
   might happen? - A. Yes.
                                                D. BULLAS


And respond accordingly? - A . Y e s .

Depending on what it was they     observed? - A. Yes.

But so far as the packing, the arranging of where fans went
and whether they went into a particular terrace or not, that
was not something which you regarded as part of your
responsibility or that of the  men under you? - A. No, sir.

You agree? - A. I agree.

Were there stewards on the West Stand in 1989? - A. There
were, sir, yes.

Whereabouts were the stewards in 1989? Were they at different
parts of the gangways on the West Stand? - A. Yes, they were.
I had been round each steward in turn and spoken to them.
There was at least steward on each exit out of the stand.   I
made sure there was always a steward, and I stress this, that
there was a steward at either end of the frontage of the stand
where the emergency exit gates are.  I told them there must
always be someone there, and I also directed a Police Officer
to stand there as w e l l .

If we have a look, for example, at the photographs, the
composite bundle, the one to    which you have already been
referred, DB.17/14.   That is   one taken and timed at 3 o'clock.
You were asked a few moments    ago about people standing up. Do
you follow, by Mr. Hytner, and    he was kind enough to lend you
his bundle.   Is that a steward   in a yellow waistcoat? - A.
That is right, sir.

There would have been a steward at the other end? - A . Y e s ,
that is correct.  I went around each of the stewards, and in
particular I told them that one must always remain at either
end at the emergency exit gat e s .

You have been asked about your view of the crowd in the
terraces, and it would appear you were not doing a head count
but simply looking and observing what the state was? - A. That
is correct, sir.

You have policed this ground on many occasions, have you? - A.
I have, sir, yes.

And have you policed other football grounds? - A. I think I
have policed every ground in South Yorkshire and some other
Forces as well, sir.

Do you have considerable experience accordingly in looking
at and watching crowds? - A. Yes.

Up to the time that something appeared to be wrong, which you
would put at round about the kick-off? - A. I c a n ’t be exact
to the time.  Somewhere around 3 o'clock.  That is all I can
say.
                                            D. BULLAS


What was it that occurred to you that drew your attention to
something being not right? - A. It was the movement in the
crowd.

Up to that time had you observed any problem or distress in
the crowd on the terrace? - A. Not at all.

Had you observed any people trying to get up from the terrace
on to the West Stand? - A. There had been a few but this was
solely with the intent of getting into the stand so they could
have a seat.

Was there any indication from the people on the terrace below
the West Stand that they needed to get out of the terrace for
reasons of safety? - A. Not at all.

For reasons of difficulty? - A. No.

You were at the front watching? - A. That is right.

What were you looking for? - A. I was looking for people
climbing up, I was looking for things being thrown down and I
was also just monitoring the crowd in general.

Of course, it would depend upon what the attention of others
in the front of the West Stand was focused on, but did anybody
along the front row of that West Stand, all those supporters
that were along there, draw your attention to a problem in the
terrace below? - A. No, they did not, sir.

Anyone say, ’’Look, they have got to come up.  There is a
problem.  They are crushing” , anything like that? - A. Before
the movement in the crowd, no, sir.

Your evidence is of movements in the crowd in the terrace
belo w. — A. Yes.

You speak of surging and swaying, the crowd moving about.  Of
course, that may be something which people accept and expect,
perhaps even go to enjoy? - A. Yes.

I suppose it might be said that movement in itself is highly
dangerous? - A. I should imagine it could be, yes.

All it needs is something to miss a footing? - A. I think this
has happened quite regularly, but what I saw on that Saturday
was taken in good humour.  They just swayed back without any
problem.

But this is habitual conduct amongst supporters? - A. Yes.

You saw it happening? - A. Yes.

Did anything about it strike you as being unusual? - A. Not in
the least.

Or against that which might have been expected? - A. There was
*   o


                                     1 1 1




                                                       D. BULLAS


           nothing unusual at all.

        Q. The crowd or the surge that you saw which came, the river as
           it has been described as, was that in pen 3 or pen 4 or are
           you unable to say? - A. I c a n ’t exactly say, sir. I know it
           came from the direction of the tunnel, going forwards, kind of
           spread out.  I c a n ’t really say.

        Q. Of course, there are crush barriers in the terraces? - A. Yes.

        Q. And those crush barriers are intended to prevent people being
           embarrassed by others coming on from behind them? - a. Yes.

        Q. And depending upon their arrangement that may be successful or
           not successful? - A. yes.

        Q. The surge or crowd that came down, its general direction was
           forwards and seemed to be directly in front of the tunnel? -
           A. It did, yes.

        Q. Did you see it extending far to the right-hand corner of pen
           No. 3, or not? - A. I would say no, not to the far corner.
           No.

        Q. The effect of that movement forwards seemed to be more towards
           the centre, did it? - A. It did, sir, yes.

        Q. That is the rail that runs down between pens 4 and 3? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Rather than spreading out and oppressing people who were more
           distant, particularly down towards gate 3, let us say? - A.
           That is correct, sir.

        Q. So your view, watching what was happening, and your attention
           drawn to that, was not that the movement of those people, that
           river, that influx, was having any obvious effect upon people
           distant down towards the corner of pen 3? - A. It didn't
           appear to be affecting the people in the far corner, sir, no.




                                 /Q. Very quickly you made
                                    D. BULLAS



  Very quickly you made your way up the steps of the West
  Stand to go down tb the terrace? - A. As quick as I could,
  yes.

Q. Did you observe any Stewards as you made your way up to
   go out? - A. There was a Steward stood at the exit from
   which I left.

Q. What was he doing? * A. He was still stood at the exit.

Q. And you went down very quickly to the tunnel? - A. Yes,
   I went down the back steps, yes.

Q. Would this be right:  it would be a matter of moments only,
   despite the difficulties you had, before you got down to
   the tunnel? - A. It would net be very long from when I
   had seen the movement in the crowd to going down the back
   steps.

Q. We are not talking of five/ten minutes or anything like
   that? - A. No.

Q. Certainly shorter? - A. Yes.

Q. By the time you got to the tunnel you observed that there
   were already Police Officers in there? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Not only that but those Police Officers were engaged in
   endeavouring to help people to clear them out.  Is that
   right? - A. Well the first person I saw being brought out,
   there was either one or two Officers assisting to bring
   the first person out.

Q. So those Officers must have been very quickly into the
   tunnel to be able to do that before you got there? - A.
   Well they got there before Idid sir, yes.

Q. It must have been in a very short space of time?   - A. Yes.

Q. Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't know whether you can help on this, but did you
   notice amongst some of the fans at the tunnel as the tunnel
   gave on to the terrace, a reluctance on their part to
   come out? - A. I can't really answer that one, sir.
   I did not actually go on to the terracing.  I was in
   the mouth of the tunnel and then I went back with one
   of the injured so I can't really answer that one.

Q. When those who had been hurt were being brought out from
   the tunnel was there some sort of organisation in train
   to help deal with them? - A. No.

Q. What happened to them? - A. They were taken to the mouth
   of the tunnel at the back of the tunnel to the concourse.
   They were placed on the flfcor and they were assisted
   by Police Officers.
                                       D. BULLAS


Q. So those who were brought out were being attended to? -
   A. Yes.

Q. They did not lack attention? - A. Not by any means.  In
   fairness as the numbers mounted there were not only Police
   Officers attending there were also members of the crowd.

Q.   Of course at that stage it was not necessarily apparent
     how small or how large the problem was going to be? - A.
     You could not tell at that stage sir.

Q.   Quite what it was that one was going to have to   cope with?
     - A. No.

Q. But your recollection is that there were Officers very
   quickly on the scene in dealing with it? - A. There were
   Officers already on the terrace when I got into the tunnel,
   yes.

           MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you sir.


                     Re-Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Q. Can I just ask you what is or would be your yardstick for
   deciding when a pen was over full? - A. I think visually
   sir if you are given a figure then you should be able to
   tell within a reasonable amount if it is over full.  If
   you are in earshot of people; people asking for assistance;
   you can see people getting crushed; people asking to be
   moved out. There was none of that prior to the movement.

Q. So you would not act or would not consider it necessary
   to act until you saw people already in distress? - A. Oh
   no, I would not say that.  It is a yardstick by visually
   looking at a crowd you can tell if it is overcrowded, to
   a certain degree.

Q. You were mentioning cries of distress and people in trouble?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Does it have to reach that stage before you act or is there
   something before that? - A. You use your initiative and
   you do something before that.

Q. I see. When you came out down the back of the Stand in
   order to go down to see what you could do to help, can
   you remember whether the turnstiles were still open,
   whether you noticed? - A. I don't know sir.

Q. The only other thing I want to ask is this: you have told
   us there were one or two people you recall trying to climb
   up just in order to get to seats in the Stand.  How do
   you know that was their motive rather than trying to
   escape from problems in the pens? - A. When I mentioned
   that that was prior to the problem that I had seen in the
 0?
A?                              115

                                           D. BULLAS


        crowd.  In fact I took two of the people concerned out
        myself and ejected them down the back steps.  I think
        other Officers did as well.  It is a regular thing to
        climb up on the wall.

      Q. What time are we talking about when this happened? - A
         1 o'clock onwards.

      Q. We know that there were people climbing up and being
         helped up after the trouble had arisen in order to get
         out of it. Did you see any of that? - A. I didn't sir
         no.

               MR. COLLINS:   Yes, thank you.   I have no more
         questions.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Thank you very much.
         We will break off till 10 o'clock tomorrow morning.


                       (The Inquiry was adjourned until
                      10 o'clock the following morning)
