                                                           W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                           City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                    City                                   P.O. Box No. 88
                    of                                     Municipal Buildings
                                                           Dale Street
                    Liverpool                              LIV E R P O O L L69 2D H   2 2 3 -2 3 7 3
                                                           Telephone: 0 5 1 4EBK2WWaXB0S
                                                           Your ref
                 i • FVn. |
                                                           Our ref    WIM/RMSK
                                                           Date
         The Clerk to the Inquiry                                     17th May 1989
         Hillsborough Disaster Public Inquiry

         S’™
         Sheffield                                           P____
                                                                '-k
                                                                                      k-t.
         SI 2HH                                                                                   t-i n
                                                                                                  I ,iO '




       ^     ^      I    y

         Dear Sir,

                                Council Representation at the Public Inquiry

                 Following the application by my Deputy, Mr. Swainson, at the
         opening of the Public Inquiry, for the Council to be permitted to be
         represented during the proceedings, on behalf of the Councils of Liverpool,
         Sefton, Knowsley, St. Helens, Wirral, Lancashire and Cheshire, I duly
         reported to the Council's Hillsborough Working Party that the application
         had been refused.

               The Working Party, and subsequently the Council, remained strongly
       committed to the view that the Council should be allowed representation at
       the Inquiry on the grounds that it represents the City of Liverpool as a
       whole and that it possesses licensing and planning expertise which could
       prove to be of vital importance to the Inquiry Team.   I was, accordingly,
       instructed to make representations for a re-hearing of the Council's
       application.

               In so doing, I, and the Working Party, are of course aware of the
       reasons for the previous application being refused but His Lordship is
       urged to reconsider the previous decision  in the light of the strength
       of feeling expressed by the Members and by the people of Liverpool whom
       they represent, and their anxiety to assist the Inquiry to their fullest
       extent.

                    I await hearing from you regarding this request.




                                                Yours faithfully,

                                                                           A


   JQC
                                                           ‘Lj
                                                   City Solicitor,
                                              Secretary to the Council

When calling or telephoning please ask for
