DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT                       Building Research Establishment
                                                    Garston Watford WD2 7JR
                                                    Telephone 0923 894040   Fax 0923 664010
                                                    Telex 923220

                                                    Direct line 0923 66-| 4206
                                                            GTN 3532-1]
                                                    14 June 1989

  R M Whalley Esq
  Secretary to Hillsborough Enquiry
  Home Office
  Room 662
  Queen Anne's Gate
  LONDON SWIH 9AT




  BRE SUBMISSION TO HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

  Your letter of 23 May invited a written submission to the Enquiry. I am sorry
  that I have not met your preferred timescale of 12 June and I hope that this
  will not have inconvenienced the Enquiry.

  My letter of 18 May indicated the ways in which I thought BRE's expertise
  might be most relevant to the Enquiry's concerns. I would reiterate that I
  think our main contribution could be made when the Enquiry is considering the
  evidence provided by others and seeking to draw general conclusions and
  recommendations for the future design and management of - ■■ r- - grounds.

  My senior structural and fire engineering colleagues have, though, prepared a
  note which develops the themes that were briefly summarised in my previous
  letter. This considers in more detail the application of structural research
  and engineering principles to the Enquiry's work and the ways in which
  experience from fire disasters and related research studies might read across
  into general crowd management issues. The note suggests that the Enquiry may
  find it helpful to separate consideration of the measures needed to reduce the
  risk of emergencies developing from the crowd safety issues that arise once
  there is an 'incident'. It goes on to consider briefly aspects of the
  performance of information and management systems, and crowd behaviour, which
  will affect the risk of death or injury in emergency situations.

   As requested, I enclose six copies of the submission and trust that it will
   assist the Enquiry at this stage of their work.

   As before, I am copying this letter and the enclosure to Mr McDonald
   (CID/SAED) and Mr Kinghan (SARD).




   R G COURTNEY
   DIRECTOR
                                                                    BRE 130/6/2



HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

SUBMISSION BY THE BUILDING RESEARCH ESTABLISHMENT



CONTENTS

Summary

1.   Introduction

2.   Perceived outline of events at Hillsborough

3.   BRE expertise

4.   Sports ground engineering

5.   Passive control

6.   Active control

7.   Conclusions

8.   Bibliography

Annex A     Additional points on managerial issues




Summary

From BRE understanding of the events at Hillsborough it appears that crowd
behaviour and control is a key issue requiring examination.  To assess these
events and determine their implications for sports grounds in general, study of
the interactions within the total system comprising the construction itself
(approach routes, stands, barriers, entrances, exits, etc), the crowd, the
management at all levels and communications with the crowd and within the
management in a range of credible extreme circumstances is required.

BRE's experience with complex structural engineering systems and with fire
safety engineering is relevant and leads it to suggest a comprehensive approach
to the design and assessment of sports grounds. This approach would aim to
provide improved safety by identifying means of reducing the incidence of
extreme situations of crowd movement and of mitigating the dangers arising when
extreme situations occur.  The approach envisaged includes systematic analyses
of control functions (both active and passive) at each sports ground.
1.   Introduction

1.1  The Building Research Establishment (BRE) has knowledge of the events at
Hillsborough only from accounts in the media.  Nevertheless, these seem
sufficient to indicate that crowd control is a key issue on which its research
experience can be focussed to advantage in determining the implications of the
events at Hillsborough for sports grounds in general.  BRE's relevant experience
is described in Section 3.

1.2  It is essential to appreciate the complexities of the total situation at a
sports ground so that suitably comprehensive analyses are made.  Section 4
outlines the wide range of issues.  The specific structural engineering
contribution to crowd control is outlined under Passive Control in Section 5,
making special reference to the 4th draft of the report of the Institution of
Structural Engineers (ISE) "Safety in Sports Grounds".  Section 6 on Active
Control is based on the approach used in fire safety engineering to control fire
emergencies in sports grounds.  It indicates some recent advances in
understanding of human behaviour and gives more general implications which may
be drawn upon.

1.3  The "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (HMSO 1986) provides key
comprehensive guidance.  This submission seeks to suggest ways in which
particular aspects may be strengthened to increase the likelihood that the
required standards of safety are actually achieved in practice.

2.   Perceived outline of events at Hillsborough

2.1 It appears that virtually all the relevant events were centred on the open
terrace at the Leppings Lane end at Hillsborough, and the accesses to it.  It is
therefore necessary to concentrate principally on that area in determining what
happened and why.

2.2  It appears that the control of entry through the turnstiles, together with
the means for diverting those who did not have the means or authority for
access, was insufficient to limit the crowd arriving at the ground to safe
proportions.  To relieve this emergency, gates were opened to by-pass the
turnstiles which initially made available to the crowd the reservoir area behind
the terrace/stand.

2.3  The crowd in the reservoir area then proceeded from there through the
access tunnel under the stand to the terrace.  The result was rapidly increasing
crowd pressure on the rear of the substantial crowd already on the terrace.  The
disposition of the crush barriers on the terrace failed to limit the pressure on
those at the front against the perimeter barrier.  There were no means of escape
at the front.  In consequence, the pressure could not be relieved to a safe
level.

2.4 It is suggested that the circumstances which led to the sudden increase in
pressure on the crowd already on the terrace can be considered separately from
the subsequent events on the terrace itself.

2.5  These events may be seen as an example of an extreme situation in which a
confined crowd is subjected to an accidental occurrence which demands emergency
action in order to preserve safety.  It is considered that the nature of the
'accident' is not significant in determining the behaviour of the crowd nor the
design of emergency measures.  The 'accident' could equally well be a fire, an
explosion, a hoax, a mere change in fortune in the sporting event or, as in this
case, an imposed crowd.

2.6 This view results in a simplification which makes it possible to focus
specifically on the measures necessary to achieve greater success in avoiding
extreme situations following an 'accident' and in coping with a developing
emergency when avoiding action fails.

3.     BRE Expertise

3.1   BRE undertakes, for public and private sector clients, research and
consultancy studies undertaken in the fields of building and civil engineering
and of prevention and control of fire.    It has 5 research and application
Groups, together with supporting technical and administrative services.     Two
Groups, the Geotechnics and Structures (G&S) Group and the Fire Research Station
(FRS) have experience and expertise particularly relevant to this Inquiry.

3.2  An important characteristic of BRE is its ability to take a comprehensive
multi-disciplinary approach to complex problems, such as those posed by sports
grounds following the events at Hillsborough.

3.3 G&S Group has undertaken substantial investigations in recent years of
shortfalls in the performance of buildings, including partial or total
collapses. The purpose has been to establish circumstances and causes, and to
assess implications and remedies for the management of similar types of
construction. Shortcomings in available information generally have required
analyses of postulated failure modes and their effects and physical testing in
order to establish causes with a sufficient degree of certainty.

3.4 The process of assessing the complex interactions between the many
variables in these situations is similar to that required in determining how
crowd behaviour may be influenced for the good by the design and operation of a
sports ground.  BRE experience suggests that analyses and assessment of worst
credible circumstances and the reliability of component parts of the total
system and the links connecting them (organisational as well as physical) are
essential features of the approach required for a sports ground.

3.5  The Fire Research Station of BRE was asked to assist Mr Justice Popplewell
to advise his Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds following
the fire at Bradford City Football Club ground in 1985, in which 56 people died.
FRS carried out experimental studies and assessments into the feasibility of
various sources of ignition, the mechanism of fire development and the
toxicological and radiative effects on humans of the developing fire.

3.6  The Fire Research Station findings were reported in full in the Interim
Report of the Committee of Inquiry and subsequently reflected in Chapter 11 of
the 1986 Guide to Safety at Sports Ground.  Two points of particular importance
in adopting a fire safety engineering approach to safety at sports grounds when
large numbers of people may be involved, and need to be evacuated in the event
of fire, were:

     (i)   the appropriate use of materials, the provision of structural fire
           protection and fire resisting separations to minimise fire risk,
                restrict ignitability and reduce the rate of fire growth and its effects
                should a fire occur;

     (ii)       the planning of escape routes that will keep people well away from the
                smokey gases produced from a fire, which in general means that initial
                movement of people should be downwards.

3.7  Work on human behaviour in emergencies at the Building Research
Establishment, and by its research contractors, has been related to life safety
in fire  and in particular to escape motivation.  It is believed that some
aspects  of this work have relevance beyond the limited context of fire.   In
particular the work provides insight into the difficulty of maintaining the
ability to deal effectively with emergency events of extremely low probability
and the need to manage rapid and orderly behaviour in crowds of people organised
for and interested in something else.

4.        Sports Ground Engineering

4.1 The term "Engineering" is used here to embrace      a comprehensive approach
towards   the design and appraisal of complex systems of many parts - physical
components, users, management and other organisational influences - interlinked
in a variety of ways.   Engineering of a system results in decisions which have
been optimised in accordance with acceptable criteria in order to produce a
finished "product" which provides the performance required of it in a safe and
economical manner.

4.2  This philosophy                      is inherent in the draft report                            of the Institution of
Structural Engineers                      on "Safety in Sports Grounds".                             It is emphasised in the
introductory section                      of the draft:

     "Above a ll, the docum ent is a im e d at ach ievin g stru ctu ral a d eq u a cy u n der a ll the releva n t lo a d in g s a n d
     con dition s, both o f the o v e ra ll construction a n d its in d ivid u a l elem en ts, a n d the elim in ation b y m e th o d ica l
     a p p ra isa l o f p o te n tia l h azards which resu lt fr o m the presen ce o f dense c ro w d s , th eir b e h a v io u r a n d th eir
     m ovem en ts.


     Safety o f cro w d s can n ot re ason ably b e a c h ie v e d w ith o u t ca refu lly co n sid e re d a ction , a n d o rg a n ise d
     m anagem en t techniques a p p lie d both to the da y to d a y running a n d du rin g p u b lic occu pation . This is
     therefore a d d re s se d a s an im portant fa c to r in S ection 2 o f this docu m ent in so m e d e t a i l . "

4.3 The need for a comprehensive approach is further emphasised by the range of
parties addressed:

     "Since the p r o c e s s o f a p p ra isa l f o r safety in such situ ation s is an in teractive p r o c e s s , this docu m ent
     is a d d r e s s e d to a ll the fo llo w in g persons:


     - D ir e c to r s a n d m an agers o f sports c lu b s w ho must run c lu b s to a bu d g et a n d p ro v id e a s e tr ic e to the
       c u sto m e r w h ich can b e afforded a n d which is satisfying, safe a n d co n tro lla b le.


     - E n gin eers, a rch itects a n d o th er pro fessio n a l con su ltan ts e n g a g e d b y the c lu b s ' m an agers to
       ap p ra ise, design the refurbishm ent a n d o rga n ise any n ecessa ry m aintenance.

     - P u b lic officers re sp o n sib le f o r ap p ro v in g m easu res f o r refurbishm ent a n d m aintenance, a n d f o r
       licen cin g sp o rts g ro u n d s f o r th eir variou s u s e s . "


4.4       "This philosophy is also inherent in the 1986 "Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds".             In particular:

      "The p ro b le m o f c r o w d safety a t sp o rts grou n d s is com plex a n d ca n n o t b e s o lv e d sim p ly b y en su rin g that
     each com ponen t o f a grou n d, such a s sta irw a y s, p a ssa g e s o r sectio n s o f terra cin g , is satisfactory in
     itself. The in ter-relation o f these a n d the o th e r com ponents is essen tia l: non e o f them can be
     c o n sid e re d in isolation w ith ou t con sideration o f its effect on the oth ers, a n d they sh o u ld a ll be
     co m p a tib le a n d co m b in e to form a b a la n c e d u n i t . "


4.5 BRE endorses these approaches but it is not clear to what extent the
detailed implementation of the general principles has been achieved reliably at
both new and existing sports grounds.

4.6 For the particular purposes of examination of the events at Hillsborough it
is sufficient to define the system to be engineered as that comprising the
Leppings Lane terrace, its built features (immediate approach route, surfacing,
geometry, internal barriers, perimeter barriers and emergency exits), stewards
and police (their respective instructions, training and communication systems),
and the management hierarchy, including the Referee (who controlled the game).

4.7 The particular design scenario to be examined is that, identified in
Section 2, of a crowd under pressure to move and unable to use the exit (entry)
available for normal movements.  Considerations leading to the identification of
suitable design strategies to cope safely with such extreme situations are
examined in Sections 5 and 6 below.

4.8 Measures to provide control and relief, if required, may be active and/or
passive.  Active measures require human intervention (stewards, police, speech
communication, television monitoring, public address, activation systems for
emergency exits).  The potential for these interventions to fail to operate or
to be ineffective must be considered and may be significant.  The implications
for the provision of active control measures, derived  particularly from fire
emergencies, are discussed in Section 6.  This Section also discusses the
perception of crowds and their reaction to an emergency.

4.9 Passive cpntrol implies, in addition to limiting flow rates and pressure,
the provision of emergency routes which a crowd can use of its own accord.

5.      Passive control

5.1  The flow rates of crowds and the variations in their density under
different situations have not been subject to widespread study.  The available
information is being synthesised by the ISE ad hoc committee but is not yet
available.

5.2        It is clear that,                in order to ensure orderly safe movement,                                       it is necessary
to:

      1.     limit the rate of movement;

      2.     limit the peak body pressure; and

      3.     provide relief if a critical pressure is reached.


Guidance on these issues is contained in the "Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds", 1986.
5.3  "Crush" barriers can control both the rate of crowd movement and peak body
pressures by being disposed in appropriate ways.  The first is achieved by
introducing tortuous access paths, ie effectively introducing friction into the
flow system, and the second, by an overlapping layout of barriers which thus
automatically limit the number of people in a straight line who can push against
others.  An important feature of this form of control is its self-regulating
nature which does not require human or instrumental intervention.

5.4 In the engineering of all systems it is essential to consider the
implications of failure of individual parts.  While it is possible to design and
construct barriers so as to achieve a high degree of reliability in relation to
the performance assumed to be required of them individually (see ISE Report)
their ability to limit crowd pressures is not infallible. Under extreme
circumstances it must be assumed that the "design flow rate" can be exceeded and
that excessive pressures may develop in the crowd.

5.5  Emergency exits to be used naturally must be properly designed and
maintained to ensure their availability when required. This approach might
conceivably involve exit routes permanently open (but of course not amenable to
use as unauthorised entries) or gates "sprung" to open at predetermined
pressures or automatically controlled by crowd pressure sensors.

5.6  In addition, there must be a reservoir or reception area of sufficient
capacity to accommodate the emerging crowd.  One possibility is the pitch or
arena itself but given that internal barriers aim to limit the rate of forward
movement it might appear that lateral emergency movement might be more
effective, particularly at sports grounds where "dead" areas may exist at the
corners.  Even then some means of limiting lateral flow rate would probably be
necessary to inhibit the type of movement seen at Heysel, eg by barriers
L-shaped in plan.

5.7  The above strategies are essentially ones for relief of pressure.  An
alternative or complementary approach is to limit numbers entering a given area.
Whilst it must be assumed that facilities for limiting numbers may fail in
extreme circumstances they have a valuable role in reducing the likelihood of
such circumstances arising.  Should failure of control of numbers occur it would
be preferable that the effects be safely absorbed by diversion of the excess
crowd into an intermediate holding area without impinging on the crowd already
in the ground.

6.        Active control

6.1 Active control is needed to supplement passive control provisions for all
emergencies which are not perceivable by the crowd, eg fire, bomb alert (either
real or hoax) etc.  It is unlikely that active control measures could respond
satisfactorily to emergencies generated by the crowd itself.

6.2       Active control requires a manager who has:

     a)     full responsibility for the control of events in the public place,
            including:

                       i) the game,   performance, etc,
                          ii) the stewards, stewarding police and emergency services,

                         iii) the manual or otherwise activated opening/closing of
                              entrances and exits;

         b)     adequate communication to exercise this control by visual, video, radio
                channels etc, both for the purpose of being properly informed and for the
                purpose of transmitting instructions;

         c)     a team of 'stewards' (police etc) who have been properly trained in
                emergency evacuation procedures for the particular venue.

    6.3 The principal area of BRE research related to active crowd management has
    been concerned with the protection of life in buildings in the event of a fire.
    Major points which emerged from studies of the behaviour of people in fire
    situations, which have potential relevance to Hillsborough, are:

    1)        early clues to the presence of a fire are often ambiguous, and recognition
              of them may well be delayed by competing activities of interest;

    2)    early actions in dealing with a fire are the most effective, but most of the
           fires studied show long delays while people attempt to gain enough
           information to make a decision to escape;

    3)    people tend to use only familiar routes to escape;

    4)    individuals given clear authoritative information concerning an emergency
          will leave quickly.

    6.4  Failure to perceive a future threat from an existing fire has been seen on
    many occasions in the past, but is perhaps best illustrated by the video film of
    the Bradford Football Club fire.  Failure of people in the crowd to perceive a
    future threat may have been a factor contributing to the events at Hillsborough
    and may occur with other forms of 'accident' at sports grounds.

    6.5 There is strong support for the value of training on behaviour in a fire
    emergency.  This is feasible, and practised, for people who habituate a place,

•   eg office workers and hotel staff.  At a sports ground it does not seem
    practicable to train the crowd but only 'officials'.  Even so, the expectation
    of being involved in a fire or other emergency is so small that training people
    for events of such rarity is clearly difficult.  Nevertheless, in inquiries
    following fires, evidence of lax training of those involved has often emerged.

    6.6 When planning for safety in emergencies over the longer term, regard should
    be taken of the low risk and consequent difficulty in maintaining a good
    training programme, even for officials.  Commercial pressures to minimise staff
    costs will militate against rigorous training programmes. It is almost certain
    that any individual called on to handle such an emergency will be doing so for
    the first time.  There is a case for considering whether it is likely to be most
    effective to develop remotely operated systems, subject to effective
    maintenance, to offset a future where training vigilance has slackened.

    6.7  Investigations of major fires have underlined the need for clear definition
    of managerial responsibilities, particularly linking those having local sectoral
    responsibility.

                                                7
6.8 The key issue for the manager's consideration, at any level of
responsibility, is how soon relative to the emergency's commencement can
evacuation be started.  Most traditional research on human behaviour deals with
speeds of movement.  However, in recent years BRE has been much more concerned
with the time required to start that movement.  For the manager, this must
include both the time and the means:

1)   for the collection of information ofsufficient credibility     for him   to
     assess the potential danger as serious,

2)   to stop the event in progress,

3)   to open the egress gates,

4)   to instruct the spectators to evacuate   sothey will   believe their interest
      is served by doing so.

6.9 Given the links in the chain and consequent potential for delays, errors or
failures the virtues of passive control systems become apparent.    However,
although a totally passive system might be conceived which would have coped with
the Hillsborough situation, in general there needs to be efficient and reliable
means of satisfying the requirements in   6.8 above in case passive control fails.
Additional comments on these points are   given in Annex A.

6.10  Fire studies would suggest that one of the weakest links in current
management practice at sports grounds may be the reliable detection of a
developing emergency (extreme situation).  As an alternative to remote sensing
systems, there could be merit in locating officials actually in the crowd where
they could most rapidly and reliably sense events.  Other benefits for order
might follow from this approach.

6.11 The overall theme that emerges is that potential victims will make
rational judgements on how to escape given high quality information on the
location of fire or other emergency.  Early action is essential for safety.

6.12  The need to maintain security in day to day use and to open egress routes
in an emergency are in conflict.   There  is also aneed to consider how effective
emergency procedure can be suborned by disruptive  or dishonest individuals.
Attention needs to be given to avoiding further disruption from those not
involved in the emergency consequent on stopping a sporting event.    To overcome
this sufficiently early, very high credibility information must be available to
the manager.  He then must have effective means to communicate with   staff and
equipment as required by preconsidered plans.
7.   Conclusions

7.1 A comprehensive approach is necessary to the design and assessment of
sports grounds to provide improved safety by reducing the incidence of extreme
situations of crowd movement and by mitigation of the consequences when they do
arise.

7.2 The approach for each sports ground should include systematic analyses of
control functions (both active and passive) in the light of postulated credible
crowd situations.

7.3  For some types of incident, very early recognition, with the capability to
envisage its future development to an emergency situation, is essential to
provide time for relief and escape measures to be effective.  To assist those
responsible for this, a high quality of information is required.

7.4 The location of trained 'officials' in the crowd may provide a much more
immediate and sensitive indicator of some emergencies and help to accelerate the
appropriate action.

7.5 While a high level of training of officials is both desirable and
effective, the frequency of emergencies is so low that it is difficult to
maintain standards.  The virtues of passive control measures should be
emphasised.  A combination of passive and active control measures determined by
systematic analyses of credible crowd situations appears to offer the best
prospect for improving safety.

7.6 The effective and rapid initiation and management of both escape or other
unplanned movement of crowds require responsible local management and well
informed central control authority.  The use of authoritative hierarchies is
unlikely to be effective unless continuous communication can be maintained with
each individual directly when a change of strategy becomes necessary.  Means of
direct communication and information clearing should be adopted generally at
major sports grounds.

7.7  In fire and, by implication, other extreme circumstances there is good
reason to believe that people act sensibly when well informed of the emergency,
its development and the course of action required.  A public address and
communication capability appears to offer the best prospect for crowd
management.

7.8  In a developing emergency it is essential to remove "attractions" which may
distract spectators from listening to and obeying requests to evacuate, eg the
game must be stopped.

8.   Bibliography

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, HMSO 1986.

Safety in Sports Grounds, 4th draft, IStructE 1989.

Canter D:  Studies of Human Behaviour in fire: empirical results and their
implications for education and design.  BRE Report 1985.

Canter D, Powell J, & Booker K:   Psychological aspects of informative warning
systems.   BRE Report BR 127, 1988.

Bellamy L, Geyer T, Harrison P, Modha B, & Ramachandran G:   Experimental
programme to investigate informative fire warning system characteristics for
motivating fast evacuation - an executive summary.  BRE.   In press.
ANNEX A   Additional points on managerial issues



Assessment: The pressures on the manager will be severe.   The penalties of
stopping an event and disrupting the spectators will be obvious.   A very well
handled event might appear as an unnecessary stoppage.   This will lead him to
delay a decision till the evidence is "stronger" that this action is necessary.
  e most rapid assimilation of knowledge is through the eyes.   It is therefore
suggested that video surveillance of the areas open to the public will be
necessary to convey credibility sufficiently early in the event.   If the
emergency is a fire, then colour video is necessary to distinguish between flame
and smoke.  His training must clearly include predictions of likely fire growth
scenarios.  He must also be aware of his staff's ability to deal with small
fires and the time they will take to mobilize and control them.

It will be known to managers of their sports grounds approximately how long it
takes to empty each stand at the end of an event, using the normal egress
routes.   It would be possible to make some reasonable estimates of how this
might be changed, if at all, by selective evacuation.   In the absence of other
information it does not seem likely that this time will be lessened by an
emergency.

Cessation: Research has indicated that it is much more difficult for people to
assimilate an emergency if there is competing activity.  While the sporting
event continues, evacuation will be almost impossible.  The manager must
therefore have the means to communicate with the referee to stop the event.

Opening:  Where manually controlled   gates are used, there must be means to
communicate with those who will man   them.  This will involve a time delay unless
radio links are used, which must be   recognised by the managers and take into
account the human nature involved.    It would be possibly most economic in the
long term to consider the provision   of  remotely controlled gate releases,
capable of automatic self checking.

Instruction: Traditional approaches to fire safety attempt to organise
evacuation through normal communication hierarchies.  Often a link in the chain
is temporarily absent or untrained.  Voice message systems have been shown to be
amongst the most effective means of providing fire warnings and information to
building occupants and the use of public address systems directly to reassure,
advise and guide spectators should therefore be strongly considered in emergency
planning.
