RUNCORN ATTENDANCE CENTRE

Telephone: RUNCORN 713456                                      The Officer in Charge
                                                               Runcorn Attendance Centre
                                                               c/o Cheshire Constabulary
                                                               County Police Office
                                                               Shopping City
                                                               RUNCORN

Ref:                                                           Date: 5th. March 1990.



                     Dear Mrs Sadler,

                    ATTENDANCE CENTRES -INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
                                 STADIUM DISASTER.

                     Firstly I welcome the reference to Attendance Centres made
                     in the report, initially in the hope that some focus on
                    what to my mind is most suitable alternative to custodial
                    penalty might nurture some interest in their increased
                    usage.

                     I think the initial intention when Centres were devised
                    was to find a facility to deal with wayward football fans
                    and Hillsborough and the many incidents of disorderly
                    behaviour arising from sporting events support reinforce the
                    original idea.
                    Insofar as my particular catchment area is concerned, one
                    must appreciate that it is basically a Rugby League orientated
                    sporting pursuit,and this does not seem to habitually
                    initiate disorder although I have had submissions from
                    Rugby matches which are of couse generally played on
                    Sundays.      However there have been submissions arising from
                    games in the Liverpool and Manchester areas and I thing that
                    had Magistrates been more aware of this disposal then many
                    more would have been made sujects of attendance centre orders.
                    I agree that to fullfil the preventive intention, the
                    centres would need to be available on a weekly basis,
                    and perhaps the maximum sentence would need to be adjusted
                    accordingly.     Additionally the rather pathetic attitude
                    to dealing with breaches of orders which I experience should
                    be amended.       I think that the whole matter is one that
                    warrants a meeting of Officers in Charge of Senior centres,
                    where I am sure useful conclusions could be reached.




                    P. Carey   ff
                    Officer in Charge
