Dear

I promised you that I wouldsack a meeting with Mr.Reddlngton and the
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Trustees.     On Wednesday morning I met Mr.
Reddlngton, Derek Morris, and Michael Blankstone and spend 90 minutes In
fairly Intensive discussion and not little disagreement.

The principal points which I raised centered on the issues you brought up
with me during our meeting. I complained about the absence of a contingency
fund* the lack of accountability* the arbitrariness of the dispensations* and
the failure to consider the long term needs of people in Andrew's position.
1 also raised the general management of Disaster Funds and the lessons which
might be learned for the future.

At the end of our meeting there had been little common ground but there was
certainly   no  doubt about your strength of      feeling concerning the
administration of the Trust Fund.

I challenged the basis on which    a Descretlonary Trust was established     andthe
secrecy which has accompanied its administration. They countered this by
claiming that they had consulted widely with all those Involved in previous
disaster funds (e.g. Bradford) and that the most important consideration for
them had been "flexibility".

They cited the example of the Abbervan Disaster Fund* which had been a
Charitable Trust Fund, and they claimed that the Trustees had been so tied by
the terms of reference of the Charitable Trust that they simply "couldn't get
rid of the money".

They admitted that this led to them paying ,tax on the Interest generated by
the £11,6 million In the discretionary fund. However* they also claim that
they came to an unofficial arrangement with the Exchequer and the Interest
was ultimately transferred to the Charitable Trust.     The Charitable Trust
totalled about £2 million (£600*000 from donations* £375*000 from Interest
£340*000 from the unpaid tax* and £626.(100 which was transferred). Of this*
£-100*000 remains which has not been distributed.     I suggested that this
should be used to set up a contingency fund* from which annuities could be
paid and help given where long term needs become clear.
I specifically complained about the use of money for residuary purposes while
there are victims families who are still In need. Mr* Morris commented at
this point i I can understand that point of view and it Is not one we
overlooked." However, It was clearly one with which he disagreed and he and
Mr. Reddlngton made a point of saying that there had been "no objection from
Consultantees." I specifically asked who had been representing the views of
the Injured and he said that there was no group. I asked whether you had
been consulted and, of course, he had to confirm that you had not.

I also made a point, at Robin’s suggestion       (and he was good «"ou*h to
provide me with a superb brief), about the way In which i  "“5      ! !                  Id
the Trust money had been dissipated in legal actions. The trustees confirm*
that they were aware that money had been used for such p u r p o s e d b u t t h e y s a i d




approach ‘^    “^ . ' w M c h l e . ^ V o specifically tie how every single penny la
spent.

Although th.y v.r. full of .11 th. . j y t h l * .                               i d T S
     that th.y a.ti.f.ctorily                                            th. hop. that h.
going to copy thl. corr..pon<l.nc. to th. Frlm. Ml                        h handling of
Bight aak th. appropriat. Cov.rnmMit « " * " “ *• C O M 1 °*
future Trust Funds set up in the wake of disasters.

Y<?urs sincerely,




 DAVID ALTON HP
