                                 W est M idlands P o lice

                                                                REF
TO
          C.I. DIVISION, HOME OFFICE                          STN/DEPT



                                                                REF      LB/VEA
FROM
          CHIEF INSPECTOR L BENNETT, B2                       STN/DEPT   BOURNVILLE LANE




SUBJECT   HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY                                 DATE      14.02.90.




          I refer to your report dated 7 February 1990 concerning the use of Attendance
          Orders as a punishment for football hooligans and the suggestion that they
          could run alongside Exclusion Orders.

          Since taking over the head o f the West Midlands Senior Attendance Centre some
          3 years ago, I have had at the most four Attendance Centre Orders for youths
          found guilty of offences of disorder, drunkenness etc., at football matches
          and this is in a Force which at one time had five 1st Division Football Clubs.

          I have always believed that Attendance Centre Orders are greatly under-used for
          these offences and on a number of occasions I have attempted to persuade the
          Courts to consider this type of punishment as a viable option but with no
          success.

          The suggestion that an Attendance Centre Order should be used to complement an
          Exclusion Order has merit.   However I do see some problems which are not
          insurmountable.   It would need a Centre to be open every Saturday for the
          Order to be effective.   In addition there would have to be a far speedier
          return to Court for non-attenders.   The latter problem would be eased by a
          closer liaison with the Courts whilst the former would be merely an
          administrative problem.

          I strongly believe that since the establishment of Attendance Centres a golden
          opportunity has been missed to ensure that football hooligans are kept away
          from football matches for a period.  The cost would be minimal as the Centres
          are already in existence and whatever increase in staff is necessary would
          outway the cost of the alternatives.




          L Bennett
          Chief Inspector
