                                       cc:   Miss Edwards - LAB
                                             Mr Bolton - G2
                                             Mr Mould - G2
                                             Mr Waghorn - FI
                                             Ms Jago - F8

Mr Brown
G2 Division

TAYLOR;   RECOMMENDATION 4


     My reply to your note to me of 31 August has been delayed by
my absence on leave. Unfortunately the solicitors' letter of
30 August raises a number of difficult issues, not least of
handling.

     2.   Taking your final question first, the chief constable
would, at least in theory, be personally liable under the
agreement. Section 48 of the Police Act 1964 (which concerns
liability for the torts of constables) does not apply to the
chief officer and, in any event, liability here would be
contractual. However, in practice, the chief constable could
reasonably expect the police authority to indemnify him for any
damages (unless he acted in some extraordinary way).

     3.   I have not considered the question whether there is
sufficient "consideration" for the agreement to be enforceable
unless it were made under seal. But, in any event, I think we
must avoid, so far as possible, the possibility of contractual
restraints on the way a chief officer deploys the members of his
police force. I therefore agree with you that it would be better
to have an exchange of correspondence limited to who does what
inside a ground. However, I do not think that that should
subsequently be incorporated in a safety certificate. The need
for consultation means that a safety certificate cannot be
changed quickly. Such a change might be necessary if other
operational requirements means that a chief officer cannot supply
the requisite number of constables on a particular day. But, in
any event, I would see such terms in a safety certificate as a
fetter on the discretion a chief officer has (and should have) as
to the deployment of his force. In this context I would envisage
a condition included in a safety certificate in pursuance of
section 2(2A) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as
inserted by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987) as saying no more than that there should be such number of
members of a police force present at a sports grounds as the
chief officer shall determine.

     4.   The wording of recommendation 4 in the Taylor Report is
distinctly unfortunate. The use of the word "agreement" can be
taken to suggest a more formal arrangement than the one that you
have in mind. Worse still, the reference to "agreed in advance
in writing" at the end of the recommendation carries the
implication that the club could veto any notice from the chief
constable reducing the number of constables to be present on a
particular occasion or all subsequent occasions. Such a veto
would, of course, be unacceptable. However, our reservations
about this recommendation will almost inevitably be seen as an
attempt to water down its contents.

     5.   Nevertheless I think we must adhere to the principle
that chief officers simply state in writing the functions within
grounds that members of their forces will discharge and that they
should be free to revise this as circumstances require. The
danger of written agreements is that the police would be
contracting out their services (rather like Securicor). It is
important that when special police services are supplied, payment
is claimed under section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964 rather than
under some contractual arrangement (cf. Harris v. Sheffield
United [1987] 2 All ER 838). Otherwise the chief officer might
be sued for breach of contract.

     6.   Whilst in general the Home Office would not seek to
interfere in arrangements between clubs and police forces, I
think the issues here are too fundamental to simply sit back and
let them reach a wholly inappropriate agreement. Since the issue
will arise with other forces, you may wish to consider whether
there is a case for issuing guidance.

     7.   The draft agreement submitted is in any event much too
sweeping. Paragraph 6, for example, concerns arrangements
outside the ground. The police have a general duty to keep order
in public places and it is not appropriate to superimpose a
further contractual duty. Paragraph 2 is much too sweeping since
some of the recommendations referred to cover matters that are
not the direct concern of the police. In any event the
recommendations are not drafted in such a way as to be converted
into legal obligations. Paragraph 9 requires the police to be
involved in stewarding if a request to do so is made in a
reasonable manner by the club. This list of criticisms of the
draft agreement is not exhaustive.




                                                     R J CLAYTON
                                          Legal Adviser's Branch
13 September 1989
                     >*■£<*. f*- W t ? ;
                             From   T h e Pb   ECRETARV
s ( e ,n ^
                                                               H o m e O ffice
                CC- rtw •Croj-A
                                                             QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                         (2-ex.
                                                              LO N D O N SW IH9AT
                   Ttib' Vkd^oVsoA
                    ttSr
                    W r - CVvCUot
                                                          18 September 1989
                     CHr' m o r t a H ^
                    tyr -B>e^S S>rvUi-K.      HMClFS
                      KfY\CIC                 HN\C\FS •
                      tftc-'Tuu-t\_e^         (inr-bottc^
                                              ftW^ u d d i u A:~
               /{/I, fccljUA^
    D u k t                                    OV-UOKoJUe^
                                               (ftr* CVx u j K t^
                                                r«r.Wouldi
                                                inr- U\dLCrv<
                                               Mr-   uvcu.»^qHy^-                     \j _
        The Home Secretary has asked me to reply to your^letter               ' ,r'   7C-w
    of 24 August with which you enclosed an extract from "The
    Times" and a copy of an article written by you on safety of
    football grounds.

        In your letter to the Home Secretary and to The Times
    newspaper you suggested that the Home Office has been guilty
    of dereliction of duty by failing to issue regulations or give
    guidance as to the terms and conditions to put into safety
    certificates for sports grounds.

        Since 1975, Home Office guidance to local authorities has
    been that in imposing conditions the£ should follow the
    principles set out in the Guide to Safety in Sports Grounds
    (the Green Guide) by which the safety criteria should be
    determined in the light of the circumstances in particular
    grounds. The main instrument of control however is the
    certificate itself.

        The Home Office has also issued statutory guidance on what
    to look for in safety inspections. But the general principle
    of the legislation is that the precise terms and conditions of
    a safety certificate are for the determination of the local
    authority, who are required to consult the police and, as
    appropriate, either the fire authority or the building
    authority before issuing or amending a certificate. Each
    certificate needs to be drafted so as to relate to the
    situation and conditions in the sports ground to which it
    applies.

        The circular letter also took the opportunity to remind
    local authorities of their powers under section 10 of the 1975
    Act for use if there is judged to be a serious risk to
    spectators in any part of the ground.


                                                          /Recommendation


   Roy Edey, Esq
   Lower Flat, Field House North
   West Street, Harrow
   Middlesex, HA1 3E R
                                                             f, v



                            2.




    Recommendation 14 of the Interim Report urged local
authorities to ensure forthwith that all designated grounds
within their area should be issued with a safety certificate.
We have asked those involved in the certificate process to
take urgent action on this, as with all other recommendations.
The responsibility for ensuring that such grounds have a
safety certificate rests with local authorities under section
2 of the 1975 Act. The Act does not empower any central
authority to supervise the way in which local authorities
carry out these responsibilities. Lord Justice Taylor has
indicated that he will consider whether there should be some
national oversight or inspection of local authority
responsibilities in relation to safety in sports grounds in
stage 2 of his Inquiry. The Government has already amended
its Football.Spectators' Bill so that, if it is considered
appropriate, this supervisory role could be given to the
proposed Football Licensing Authority in respect of grounds to
which that Billapplies. Whether further measures are        -
necessary to secure improvements in public safety at sports
grounds will be a matter for decision when Lord Justice Taylor
has published his final report.
                                                     y.
                               fj by**
                                          ( v5-O^L
h s .9.18/hillsb6.dm
                                                          ~GLJ

From:   D J Mould
                                                                 )
        G2 Division
        Ext 3099                                                 vJ

        18 September 1989


Miss Bannister
Private Office



HILLSBOROUGH:    CORRESPONDENCE FROM MR PATNICK OBE MP

You asked for advice and a draft reply for Mr Patten's signature
to the attached correspondence from Mr Patnick MP who has sent a
letter from a constituent,                as an example of the
feelings in Sheffield expressed to him.


2.   The Government have already welcomed the thoroughness of the
Interim Report and Mr Patnick does concede that it does not gloss
over the causes of the events which took place on that fateful
day.   Whilst the main criticism of the report is levelled at the
police, they are not the only ones who are criticised.       Both
Sheffield City Council and the football club (together with the
club's professional advisers) are the subject of criticism.   Nor
does the report overlook contributory factors such as the
behaviour of fans outside the ground.     It will probably be as
well to comment on these in a general way in reply Mr Patnick.
It seems unnecessary however to comment in detail on the list of
individual points raised by            some of which appear to be
rhetoric.


3.   The Inquiry has already said that it will be addressing
wider, longer term issues such as perimeter fencing and pre-match
drinking by football fans in the Final Report.        As for the
constituent's comments about a disaster fund, the point is that
the scale and nature of the tragedy touched the whole nation
whose sympathy has manifested itself by way of donations for the
families of victims.
4.   A draft   reply   as   requested   for Mr   Patten's   signature is
attached.




                                            D J MOULD


Encs



FEP/89 35/48/106
hs .9.18/hillsb6.dm                            FILE NUMBER ..FEP/89 35/48/106.
DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


  TO                              ENCLOSURES      COPIES TO BE SENT TO
Irvine Patnick OBE MP         (In pouch)
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA




(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                            (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY

               LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ...MR PATTEN.........
                                                  (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

               Thank you for your letter of 29 August to the Home Secretary
               with this one from ________________ as an example of the
               feeling in Sheffield following the findings of the Interim
               Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry.


               As you say, any suggestion that the outcome of the Inquiry
               has glossed over the causes of the terrible events of that
               day is quite wrong.     The Inquiry did not set out to
               apportion blame for what happened but to find out the causes
               and make recommendations to prevent such an accident from
               happening again.    Although the police were criticised the
               Interim Report highlights several other contributory causes
               which led to the accident, for example the absence of an
               authorised maximum capacity for the pens, the layout of the
               crush barriers     and   inadequate  signs  and ticketing.
               Criticism was not therefore confined solely to the police.
               The Report also concluded that a substantial minority of
               fans who had had too much to drink aggravated the problems
               outside the ground but that the evidence did not suggest
               that there was a very significant number of ticketless fans.
               These are issues which will be considered again in the
second stage of the Inquiry which is now addressing the more
general, long term issues "of safety at sports events.

The immediate costs of the Hillsborough Inquiry will be met
in full by the Government.  With regard to the costs of the
investigations undertaken by the West Midlands police,
although their results were made available to Lord Justice
Taylor they were originally started at the initiative of the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire as they concerned the
policing of his area.   In addition to the investigation of
policing and related events on the day, the investigations
by West Midlands police are necessary for the presentation
of evidence to the coroner's inquests, complaints and
discipline matters and, more recently, from allegations of
criminal liability.


The Government by way of police specific grant at 51% plus
block grant already pays a sizeable proportion of the costs
of policing in South Yorkshire.     However, in view of the
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough
tragedy, the Government has offered the South Yorkshire
Police Authority an additional special payment from central
funds to assist them with the additional costs they now face
in respect of the work carried out on their behalf by the
West Midlands police.


Finally,   the disaster fund,     to which the Government
contributed, was set up to receive donations from the public
wishes to express their sympathy for family and friends of
victims of a national disaster.
                  ------            ■.
                                          ^ - 'H v F .S L t .                  , ^ viir
E/R.
       h s .9.14/hillsb3.dm


                                                                  cc   Mr   Moriarty
                                                                       Mr   Goddard
                                                                       Mr   Clayton
                                                                       Mr   Mower

        Miss Bannister
        Private Office




           HILLSBOROUGH:          INTERIM REPORT - CORRESPONDENCE FROM MR EDEY
           As requested by the Home.Secretary at the meeting on 7 September,
           the draft reply (attached) to Mr Edey has been cleared with Legal
           Advisers.   .

         The letter can now go if the Home Secretary is content.       One
         tactic might be to hold back and send a copy of the Home
         Secretary's letter to Mr Carlisle.       But in view of Mr Edey's
         persistence I would be inclined to write as quickly as possible
       •n'befprf^he^Hoiiie Secretary writes to Mr Carlisle.. ;
                                                             .

       The' latest threat by Mr Edey of legal action might just be
       averted by the explanation in the.draft letter about absence of
-   .. central oversight, (which is to be addressed by the Inquiry) .
       Legal Advisers believe that if Mr Edey does make an application
       for a judicial review it is unlikely to be granted; if it were
       granted it is very unlikely it would succeed.


        -- . „         -   '       r-    r;■   - " -- -       '        ,
       „     c,        r   ■ -~                           •            I



              -


        :ifeseptembers 19 89 ;
h s.9.l4/hillsb3.dm


The Home Secretary has asked me to reply to your letter of
24 August   with  which you enclosed     an extract   from
"The Times" and a copy of an article written by you on
safety of football grounds.


In your letter to the Home Secretary and to The Times
newspaper you suggested that the Home Office has been guilty
of dereliction of duty by failing to issue regulations or
give guidance as to the terms and conditions to put into
safety certificates for sports grounds.


You may wish to know that since 1975, Home Office guidance
to local authorities has been that in imposing conditions
they should follow the principles set out in the Guide to
Saf ety„ in , Sports Grounds :V (the- -Green Guide) by which -the -.v
safety criteria should be determined in the light of the
 circumstances in particular grounds. The main instrument of
 control however is the certificate itself.


 The Home Office, has also, issued -statutory guidance on what
 to lock for in safety inspections.                But the general
 principle of the legislation is that the precise terms and
 conditions of a safety -certificate are for the determination           .-.
.of. .'.-the local;, authority,,, who are .-xequired •’t-o consult the
.police and, -as appropriate^' either the fire aartliorit#; o r thevv^W:'::;
JDuilding-authority before issuing' or amending a certificate.
'Each certificate needs'to'"be drafted so as' to relate to the
situation and conditions in the sports ground to which it
applies.                 . ' • • * \.:v.


The Home Office has already indicated in a circular letter
to local authorities, police^ aaad emergency services a-mi to
football   clubs  and other sports organisations, that
consideration is being given to any necessary enforcement of
the Report1s recommendations by means of a statutory
instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975. This remains the position and we shall keep under
     review the progress      being made on                             implementing              the
/    recommendations of the Interim Report.

     The circular letter    also took the opportunity to remind
     local authorities oftheir powers under section    10 of the
     1975 Act for use if there is judged to be a serious risk to
     spectators in any part of the ground.


     You may be aware from Recommendation 14 of the Interim
     Report that local authorities have been urged forthwith to
     ensure ..that all designated grounds within their area should
     be issued with a safety certificate.      We have asked those
     involved in the certification process to take urgent action
     on. this,     as with    allother recommendations.        The
     responsibility for ensuring that such grounds have a safety
     certificate rests with local authorities under section 2 of
     the 1975 Act. ' The Act .does not etiipotfer ' ariyr ceritral
     /authority, to supervise the way in which local authorities
      carry out these responsibilities.         Lord Justice Taylor has
     .indicated^that he will consider whether there should be some
      national     oversight       or inspection of localauthority
    ;,^espgnsi-bildt.i^s     :.relation, to safety in sports grounds in
                a        .   . . . .   .   ...   .....   ...   ..   .         .   .   .   .   .

      stage 2 of his Inquiry.        The Government has already amended
      its Football Spectators1 Bill so that, if .it; is.; considered
      appropriate,, this supervisory role could be given to the
    ' proposed-;.-Football .'.Licensing Authority in respect of grounds
      to ^wfrieiy.that Bill' applies. Whether further measures are
    ',-necessary.-to\secure improvements in public safety at sports
      grounds wil 1 be a ma-tter for decision when Lord Justice
      .Taylor has published his final report.
    ^
     I hopeI that
              hope this
                    that reassures
                          this reassures
                                   you that
                                         you the
                                              thatHome
                                                    the Office
                                                         Home Office
                                                               is notis not
     complacent about the issues identified in the Hillsborough
     tragedy or those which preceded ■>+■




                                                               PO 20058/89
                                                               FEP/89 35/48/109
e : i(   - i
                                 - S f , fffu                                 <SvvX-
                                                                                               'i         ’ 8 SEP 1589
                       E.R.                1
                                   hs.9.15/hillsb5.dm
                                                             h>                   VU,
                                   From:   D J Mould                                          cc    Ms Craig
                                           G2 Division                                              Ms Rex
                                           x3 099                                                   Ms Nicholson
                                                                                                    Mr Yates
                                           15 September 1989                 /W           h         Mr Chilcot
                                                                                                    Mr Moriarty
                                                                                                    Mr Turney
                                                                                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                                                                    HMCIC
                                                                                                    HMCIFS
                                                                                                    Mr Mower
                                                                                                    Mr Clayton .
                                                                                                    Mr Goddard/
                                                                                                    Mr Bolton
                                                                                                    Mr Whalley
                                   Miss Bannister                                                   Mr Lidington
                                   Private Office                                                   Mr Yeo

                                   HILLSBOROUGH:     PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION

-• -      . ■          ..          In Peter Bolton's'absence on leave I attach for consideration a
                                   draft letter for the Home Secretary to send to John Carlisle MP
                                   (paragraph 9 of your note of 12 September refers),

                                    The content overlaps that contained in the draft prepared for
                                    Mr Edey , which I have sent to you -separately. I have consulted
                                  • F8 Division.    Legal Advisers were consulted on the draft for
                                    Mr Edey.                 . .

                                  / PRB s advice is that in the absence   of being ableto specifically
                                  r          implementation of all the "pre-season"   recommendations
                                        letter ought not to be given to the press.
                                                                                    • ^   .
                                                                                                                           -:T.
                                                                                  •v.;-
                                                                                                                                  ;
                                                                                                                         ■ ■ V-
                                                                                                             J
                                                         •        v -v   _
                                                                                              D J MOULD



   - V ' ~ 'v .''" •        ;■     FEP/89 35/48/88
h s.9.15/hillsb4.dm


You asked me whether the Home Office was satisfied with the
response of the football clubs, local authorities and others
to the recommendations in the Interim Report of Lord Justice
Taylor's inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.     I should
perhaps first of all set out what'we expected people to do
or to be doing.


You will know that our immediate action on the day of
publication of the Interim Report on:4 August was to issue a
circular letter with copies of the report to the police,
local authorities, other emergency services, football clubs
and*, to sports organisations urging them all to take the
action .required in order to implement, as necessary, the
Inquiry's recommendations without delay.       .The circular
letter also reminded local authorities of their power under
the Safety of Sports Ground Act .1975 (the .197.5 Act) for use
if there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any
part of a sports ground. _ .. . ..:’

‘The Home Office is keeping under review, primarily through
 the police and Fire Service, the progress on implementation
'of. the recommendations at the football league grounds. The
 indications are that all the parties concerned have
addressed them and have either put them into effect or,
where that was not immediately possible, have the matter in
hand.   There have been some practical difficulties at some
grounds and some difficulties of interpretation.    This was
only to be expected given the variation between grounds. We
have helped to ,resolve them where we can.    Our advice is
that the recommendations should be complied with wherever
practicable but that where an alternative solution is
unavoidable, it must be one which meets the intention of the
recommendation by providing at least an equivalent degree of
safety.    As regards the reductions in ground capacities
I am satisfied that it is a prudent precaution to impose the
15% reduction recommended by the Inquiry as an interim
measure   until   we   can   be   confident   that   the   criteria
                           ; *. i
                       /
                       T
                                    affecting the calculations of terrace capacities at football
                /
                                    grounds have been properly applied.


                                    Lord Justice Taylor has indicated that he will consider
                                    whether there    should be    some national oversight or
                                    inspection of local authority responsibilities in relation
                                    to safety in sports grounds in stage 2 of his Inquiry. You
                                    will know from your involvement with the Football Spectators
                                    Bill that the Government has already amended the Bill so
                                    that, if it is considered right, this supervisory role could
                                    be given to the proposed Football Licensing Authority in
                                    respect of grounds to which the Bill applies.


                                  Even so we shall be taking up with local or other
                                .authorities concerned any case which is reported to us where
                                  it appears that the Report. VsiS^coimeridat ions are not being
   - V v ’ r V s.,-
                                . implemented.  The option'referred t o ;in our circular letter
• -v"   r ~ . ' . '•
                                  of enforcing the Report's recommenda-tions by means of a
                                  statutory instrument requiring safety certificates to
                                  include mandatory terms and conditions remains open and we
                               ^ .have not , ruled, it out.     Whether further measures are
                               -- necessary to secure improvements in public safety at sports
                                  grounds -will be a matter for decision
                                  Taylor has published his final report.
                                   '             •
(g>{
       sep   way
                SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BRANCH                               ^
                      ( S c ie n c e a n d T e c h n o l o g y G r o u p )          f   5<*£p   1989

            Home Office
             Woodcock Hill Sandridge St Albans Hertfordshire AL4 9HQ
             Telex 267604            Fax 0727 50642          Telephone 0727 65051


Mr C J Anderton, QPM,
Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
Chester House
Boyer Street
Manchester M l6 ORE.
                                                                        8th September 1989

Dear Mr Anderton
Thank you for your letter of 1st September in which you asked for SRDB assistance, via
your proposed new Working Party, on the post-Hillsborough issue of CCTV to improve the
safety of the public at sporting events.
I am pleased that you value Andrew Ford’s contribution to the work of the ACPO Sub-
Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting Events on the use of CCTV and still photography; I
have passed your thanks on to him. Mr Ford has now completed his very extensive
involvement in the evaluation of CCTV systems at Football League grounds as our part of
the efforts to spend Football Trust money effectively. This has, of course, not only meant
committee work but also visits to football grounds and Mr Ford had to be released from his
work on a full-time basis for 12 months.
So you will understand that I am concerned that your need for SRDB involvement in the use
of CCTV for public safety will place too great a load on us. In particular, I do not want to
feel that we may become involved in safety surveys of all the football grounds and in the
evaluation of tenders for ensuing CCTV safety systems. The enclosed letter from South
Yorkshire Police is an early indication that this might happen.
Our view is that we would be happy to work with your new Working Party to develop
appropriate standards for safety systems in conjunction with the CCTV Industry (assuming
systems can be found that meet operational requirements). Mr J Aldridge, head of Optics
Group, SRDB, has very extensive CCTV experience and so I propose that both he and
Mr Ford attend the meeting on 20th September. No doubt many issues will be aired and we
can then better plan how we can take matters forward.
                                      Yours sincerely




                                     DR PA YOUNG

       A Holt, SRDB
       J Aldridge, SRDB
       A Ford, SRDB
       Ch Supt R Parker, PRSU.
