                                                                                                <plA


INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                      T h e R t H o n L o rd J u s tic e T aylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                   London SW1H 9AT
                                                   01-273 2577/3602/2370
P G Wall Esq                                          Your Ref:            PGW/WAC
Chief Superintendent
Assistant Secretary
The Police Superintendents' Association
 of England & Wales
67A Reading Road
Pangbourne
Berkshire RG8 7JD                                  Da£ January 1990




3 )-e ^   CXv-          WoJUL/

PO L IC E CONTROL ROOM F A C IL IT IE S


Thank you for your letter of 20 December with the results of your
circular to branches seeking comment upon the adequacy or
otherwise of police control rooms.  I will show this to Lord
Justice Taylor and his Assessors.  I know that they will be very
grateful to you and your colleagues for taking the trouble to
assemble so much detailed information, which will be very
valuable. Many thanks indeed.


                                              'Y.Okj*a    SvwdvJ*,




                                               R M WHALLEY
                                          Secretary to the Inquiry
                       THE POLICE SUPERINTENDENTS' ASSOCIATION
                                 OF ENGLAND AND WALES

                                                                      67A Reading Road
                                                                      Pangbourne
                                                                      Berkshire
                                                                      RQ8 7JD

                                                                      Tel: 0 7 3 4 8 4 4 0 0 5
                                                                      Fax: 0 7 3 4 8 4 5 6 4 2
Our Ref:    PGW/WAC
Your Ref:

   December 20, 1989


   Mr S. Whalley
   The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
   Home Office
   Queen Anne's Gate
   London.   SW1H 9AT


   Dear Mr Whalley,

   POLICE CONTROL ROOM FACILITIES

   As requested, I circulated all our Branches to seek comment upon the
   adequacy or otherwise of Police Control Rooms.          Almost all have now
   responded.   It Is fair to say that some Control Rooms, which had formally
   been regarded as adequate, were not subject of criticism until recently.  It
   is also true that the nature of some grounds makes satisfactory provision
   more difficult.   However, the responses I have received confirm our view
   given in oral evidence that many Control Rooms are primitive, poorly
   equipped and inadequate.    These problems are not confined to the smaller
   clubs, some of which have excellent facilities.    The letters and reports I
   have to hand can be briefly summarised by Branches as follows

   Avon & Somerset - Grounds    at Bristol City and Bristol Rovers haveControl
   Rooms which are small, poorly equipped, have no sound insulation and are
   described as totally inadequate to police high attendance matches.

   Bedfordshire - Luton ground    control meets all requirements.

   Cambridgeshire - No adverse comments have been made with regard toCambridge
   United.   Peterborough United's Control Room is too small and has no sound
   proofing.   Police have requested improvements, but there may be structural
   problems.

   Cheshire - None of the 8 grounds in the force area provides adequate control
   facilities.  None meet the requirements of the Interim Report.   The problem
   is being addressed as a matter of urgency.

                                                                                        ..../



                       Secretary: Chief Superintendent T. Q. Hewitt
                 Assistant Secretary: Chief Superintendent P. Q. Wall
                                   -    2   -




Cleveland - Both Middlesborough and Hartlepool football                grounds   lack
facilities, but both are making progress for improvement.

Derbyshire - Facilities at      Derby       are   described   as   adequate   and   at
Chesterfield Town, excellent.

Devon & Cornwall - Plymouth Argyle has excellent CCTV equipment, but there
are problems with crowd noise.    Exeter City has no Police Control Room.
CCTV equipment is controlled from a small box at the back of the main
(wooden) stand and would need to be promptly evacuated in the event of a
fire. Torquay United have no Control Room.

Dorset - Facilities at Bournemouth are excellent.

Durham - Some problems reported, but these are being dealt with.

Essex - Southend has no sound proofing and no telephone.         Colchester's
facilities are described as just adequate for gates under 2,000.

Hampshire - Southampton and Portsmouth Rooms are adequate, but lack CCTV
facilities outside the ground.   Neither room is large enough to operate as
a major incident control.   Aldershot's facilities are poor, but gates are
very low.

Hertfordshire - The control is described as adequate, but its location gives
no view of the field or terracing.    The Directors of the club agreed the
need for a new Control Room four years ago.

Humberside - The facilities at the three football league grounds are felt to
be adequate, although all have minor problems and should a team gain
promotion, enhancement would be essential. Of the two Rugby League grounds,
one has good facilities, the other has not.   No CCTV, poor visibility, poor
communications.   This club has refused to consider improvements, stating
that the Rugby League do not consider Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
has relevance other than for Association Football grounds.

Kent - Facilities are adequate, but it is noted that the                capacity at
Gillingham has been reduced from 21,000 to 10,000 following             the Interim
Report.

Lancashire - Blackpool's Control Room is too small.       Burnley's facilities do
not meet the recommendations in the Interim Report.

Leicester - The Control Room is totally inadequate.   The box is too small
for the recommended equipment and staffing.   We are informed that the room
has a high fire risk and inadequate escape facility.
                                       -   3   -




Lincolnshire - Lincoln City's room is satisfactory and there are long term
plans for major improvement.        Boston's ground is subject to a safety
certificate, but has no facilities.

M e t r o p o l i t a n - Generally Divisional     Commanders are   satisfied   with
facilities at grounds in the London                area, although   there are   some
inadequacies at the smaller clubs.

Merseyside - A satisfactory position is reported.          The requirements set out
in the Interim Report have been met.

North Wales - Facilities at Wrexham are said to be poor. The box measures
9' x 6' and is so situated that crowd noise makes radio communication
impossible at times.

North Yorkshire - York and Scarborough require sound proofing, telephone,
tannoy and CCTV improvements.    Branch officers report that the clubs are
reluctant to carry out any work recommended by the safety teams until Lord
Justice Taylor's Final Report is to hand.

Norfolk - An agreement has been reached with the Norwich City Club that the
Police Control Room should be doubled in size and needs other major
improvements.  Although the club indicates total support, no start date for
the work has yet been set.

Northamptonshire - Northampton Town,           a Division Three club, has a purpose
built, fully equipped Control Room.

Northumbria - Improvements are planned at both Newcastle and Sunderland.

Nottinghamshire - Nottingham Forest has an excellent, purpose built Control
Room (cost £50,000 approximately).       Notts County has a room totally
inadequate in terms of size, location and technology.     Mansfield Town is
little better.

South Yorkshire - The room at Sheffield Wednesday's ground does not meet the
requirements of the Interim Report.     With the exception of Barnsley and
Doncaster, other grounds have poor facilities.        Sheffield United have
undertaken to provide a new Control Room "as soon as possible".

Staffordshire - Facilities at Port Vale do not meet the requirements of the
Interim Report. A new room is planned and the club appear to appreciate the
need for urgency, but finance is a problem and it is not likely that
improvements will be possible with any speed.

Suffolk - The facilities at Ipswich are satisfactory.

Sussex - A new Control Room was installed at Brighton in July 1989 and
whilst some improvements in communication facilities are necessary, the
position is generally satisfactory.
                                          _   4   -




Thames Valley - Oxford United are seeking relocation of the ground. The
Police Control Room is well equipped, but has no view of the pitch or
terracing.

West Mercia - There are five grounds within the force area. All locations
need control enhancement under a variety of headings including telephone,
radio, tannoy etc.

West Midlands      -   Of   the   six   grounds       in   the   area,    three   are   seeking
improvement.

West Yorkshire - You will recollect Chief Superintendent Clarkson's remarks
concerning Leeds United.      His view that the Control facilities are
inadequate is supported by other officers.

More detailed reports from individual Branches cam be                    obtained if you wish,
but I hope I have set out sufficient comment for your                    purpose.

The recommendations number 30 - 3^ of the Interim Report have been most
helpful in setting some common needs and standards, but it is disturbing to
note that many clubs cannot yet meet those basic requirements.

Clubs are already beginning to complain bitterly about reduced capacities
and increased costs.   We fear that strong resistance will be offered to any
attempt to make them pay the cost of making their grounds safe for the
public.  The clubs seek to compare facilities and costs between forces and
between clubs.  Common national recommendations and standards are therefore
of increased importance.

Yours sincerely,




P. G. Wall
Chief Superintendent
Assistant Secretary
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADU M DISASTER
                                           50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-2^3 25^73602/23^0


B J Capon Esq MA (Oxon)                      Your Ref: RG/SFC/
Chief Executive and Clerk                              FAG/LR/
Norfolk County Council                                 Misc/22
County Hall
Martineau Lane
NORWICH                                    Date
NR1 2DH
                                             2 January 1990




Dear Mr Capon

I am writing to thank you for your letter of 6 December 1989 to
the Home Secretary which has been passed to the Inquiry.  I am
sorry that you have not received an earlier reply.

Lord Justice Taylor's attention has been drawn to the Sub­
committee's comments, and in particular to those relating to
moats.  You may like to be aware that, in their visits to stadia,
including some elsewhere in Europe, Lord Justice Taylor and his
Assessors have been able to assess a number of moat arrangements.
In addition, a technical working group, under the chairmanship of
one of the Assessors, has been examining a range of technical
issues, among them the separation of viewing from playing areas.

In the light of this information, I hope you will feel able to
reassure the Safety Sub-Committee that their concerns are beinq
met.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                       JONATHAN SWEET
                                       Hillsborough Inquiry
                                                                           T


               Norfolk CgmtyJjmncil
                                                Qcpn-.MAA
                                                 ij> D £C »»               County Hall
                                                                           M artineau Lane
B.J. Capon M A ( Oxon)                                                     Norwich NR1 2DH
Chief Executive and Clerk                                                  Telephone (0603) 222946
T.D.W. Molander M A                                                        Fax No. (0603) 222959
County Solicitor and Deputy Clerk                                          DX 5216 NORWICH

My Ref, RG/SFC/FAG/LR/Misc/22                Please ask f o r : -          Mr Godfrey

Y o u r Ref,                                                                               1989

                                                         Cr    a    G'-,
                                    \\\U ^
Dear Sir

The Enquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
                                                           &
                                                                               Si
At its recent meeting on 24th November 1989 the County C o u n c T ^ s S ^ f e t y of
Sports Grounds Sub-Committee received a report outlining proposed*works to
be carried out by Norwich City Football Club at its Carrow Road ground. One of
the proposed works included the construction of a dry moat formed to separate
a new vistors area from the pitch.

The Sub-Committee were concerned with regard to the safety of such moats
and decided to defer a decision on the inclusion of a moat in the general
safety certificate for the Carrow Road ground pending the Right Honourable
Lord Justice Taylor's final report.

The Sub-Committee is aware that the Right Honourable Justice Taylor
intends to deal with perimeter fencing in his final report. I have been asked
by the Sub-Committee to write to request that the question of safety as it
relates to moats should also be dealt with.

One further problem on which the Sub-Committee would like advice concerns
the provision for visiting team supporters with particular reference to the
problems likely to arise if the numbers of visiting team supporters exceed
the number J
           of tickets or seats/standing space available.

Can you please draw the Sub-Committee's comments to the attention of the Right
Honourable Lord Justice Taylor.

Yours faithfully «



 For Chief Executiv

 The Secretary of State for the
 Home Department
 Home Office
 Queen Anne's Gate
 London
 SW1H 9AT
                                                                                    1889

                                                                                 Norfolk County Council
                                                                                      CENTENARY
                                                                                             W - 320
