     •*                                                            ►>   i.
*

.t
          Fronts Ms P Hansford                            cc   Mr Storr
                 FI Division                                   Mr Yates
                 Extn 3241                                     Mr Chilcot
                 11 July 1989                                  HMCIC
                                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Malone-Lee
                                                               Miss Edwards
                                                               Mr Addison
                                                  /            Mr Nagler
                                                               Mr Sandiford
                                                               Mr Whalley
                                                               Mr Archer
                                                               Mr Durbin


          Miss Nicholson


          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - POLICING COSTS

          You asked for advice and a draft reply to a letter dated 4 July
          from Mr Bainbridge, Chairman of the Police Consultative Committee
          for the J2 Sub Division of the West Midlands Police Authority
          about the costs of the inquiries by the West Midlands police into
          the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.
          I attach a draft reply for Lord Ferrers' consideration. This
          follows the draft submitted in several recent replies to MPs.




                                             P RANSFORD
4
                                                          POL/89 850/4/30




    B C L Bainbridge Esq MA                     HCC: Mr Storr
    Head Teacher of the                              Mr Yates
     Pensnett School                                 Mr Chilcot
    Tiled House Lane                                 HMCIC
    Brierley Hill                                    Mr Boys Smith
    West Midlands DY5 4LN                            Mr Malone-Lee
                                                     Miss Edwards
                                                     Mr Addison
                                                     Mr Nagler
                                                     Mr Sandiford
                                                     Mr Whalley
                                                     Mr Archer
                                                     Ms Ransford
                                                     Mr Durbin

                                                LORD FERRERS




                  Thank you for your letter of 4 July in your capacity as
                  Chairman of the Police Consultative Committee for the J2
                  Sub Division about the costs of the inquiries by the West
                  Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

                  The Home Secretary has accepted, in his reply of 28 April
                  to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in
                  his letters to other West Midland MPs, that the
                  additional costs of the police inquiries which are being
                  undertaken in relation to the disaster by West Midlands
                  police officers should not fall on the West Midlands
                  Police Authority.


                  "Additional costs” include the cost of overtime worked by
                  the West Midlands police offices in their own force area
                  to cover duties which would otherwise have been
                  undertaken by officers seconded to the Hillsborough
                  inquiry.
He also mentioned that it will take a while to sort out
the precise mechanics of how the West Midlands police
should be reimbursed.


I recently met members of the South Yorkshire Police
Authority to discuss their concerns and to put a proposal
to them about how the costs should be met. I have also
written to them about the proposal, which they are
considering.


As you know, I have also previously met a deputation
from the West Midlands Police Authority to discuss this
matter. I am anxious to reach agreement on the
reimbursement of West Midlands police costs. I hope the
proposal that we have put to South Yorkshire Police
Authority will help to achieve this.


With regard to the efficiency of the West Midlands police
and the service it can offer, I have been assured by Mr
Dear, the Chief Constable of the West Midlands police
that the duties of the officers absent from the force
conducting the inquiries have been covered by other
personnel working overtime. The Chief Constable said
that there has been no diminution of service to the
people of the West Midlands and no lowering of police
efficiency.


You will be interested to know that when the Enquiry
began, something in excess of 350 staff were involved.
This was reduced on 5 June to 125 and will be reduced
again on 17 July to 65.
