            18 APR 1989*            <
                                    ^ )
R.
                                      cc.   Ms   Craig
                                            Ms   Adams
                                            Ms   Rex
                                            Mr   Chilcot
                                            Mr   Moriarty
                                            Mr   Boys Smith
                                            Mr   Turney
                                            Mr   Wat£-s
                                            M-^GsfceTaard
                                            Mr Mower
                                            Mr Lidington




 Mr Yates


                 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



 Sir Clive Whitmore discussed with the Home Secretary, Mr Patten,
 Lord Ferrers and Mr Hogg this morning the follow up to the Home
 Secretary's statement in the Commons yesterday. Mr Moriarty,
 Mr Watts, Mr Mower and Mr Gilbert were present in addition to
 Mr Yeo and Mr Brandon Bravo and the Special Advisers.

 2. Sir Clive Whitmore said that immediate enquiries had
 suggested that no recent work had been undertaken on the
 proposition that major football grounds should convert to all­
 seated accommodation. He planned to have an early talk with the
 Permanent Secretary at the DOE, Sir Terence Heiser, about how an
 urgent approach to the football authorities could be mounted.
 Difficult issues would need to be addressed in relation to cost
 and criteria, as well as the legislative implications of any
 conversion scheme. The question of Departmental lead would also
 need to be established. His initial thought was that
 consultations with the football authorities might be begun under
 the auspices of the Minister for Sport's Working Party which had
 provided the forum for consultations on the Football Spectators
 Bill. But this would need to be brokered with the DOE. As
 regards the legislative implications, it might prove to be the
 case that there would be sufficient powers under existing Safety
 of Sports Grounds legislation to introduce a requirement of all­
 seat accommodation at major clubs. This would obviously affect
 the implications for the Football Spectators Bill.

 3. The Home Secretary agreed that the first priority was to get
 under way the practical work which Sir Clive Whitmore had
 described. Until that work was done it was impossible to say
 what the legislative requirements or implications would be.   If
 new legislation was required, one possibility would be to augment
 the licensing provisions in part 1 of the Football Spectators



                                            /Bill.
Bill. It might also be possible to turn the proposed Football
Membership Authority into a body also responsible for safety
standards at sports grounds. This would enable the Chairman of
the Authority to take the lead in implementing whatever
arrangements for all-seat accommodation were deemed sensible.
The proposal for a membership scheme could be embraced within
such a concept, perhaps allowing for its introduction on a
voluntary basis with a clear safety link.  If the work could be
done speedily, it might be possible for the Prime Minister to
gather the various strands together through a meeting at No 10
embracing the football interests, to set the seal of approval on
the new approach.

4. It was agreed that Sir Clive Whitmore would discuss the way
ahead with Sir Terence Heiser and then prepare a draft minute
from the Home Secretary to the Prime Minister, to be sent
tomorrow, which would set out how it was proposed to proceed and
prepare the way for any discussion in Cabinet on Thursday. On
the Football Spectators Bill, it was too early to say what the
precise implications would be for the Bill's timetable and future
development.  Lord Ferrers should discuss with the Lord Privy
Seal what would be the best way forward in terms of the handling
of the Bill in the Lords, and the Home Secretary himself would
aim to have a word with the Lord Privy Seal about the matter
tomorrow.  I should be grateful if Ms Adams could let me know the
outcome of Lord Ferrers* discussion with the Lord Privy Seal.




Private Office                               P J C MAWER
18 April 1989                        Principal Private Secretary
