NOTES ON VISIT TO NIMES 27 SEPTEMBER

Visit to Stadium


1.      I was met by Monsieur Langlais, Deputy Director of the
stadium, and a former Olympic fencing champion.      I then met
Colette Dumas, one of the secretaries, who acted as translator
throughout.     I was then introduced to Monsieur Filliau, who is
the Director of Sport for the City of Nimes, and Monsieur
Gaillant, who is the Director of the Football Club Nimes
Olympique.


2.      After these various introductions I was taken on a tour of
the stadium.     This began with a demonstration of the gates, which
were released manually from one end, allowing some six or seven
gates to swing open in cascade before the process seemed to come
to a stop.     I was then shown how the pivot and angle of the gates
makes each one open under its own weight.     I was shown the box
where the electronic release can be made, and also the manual
release at the end of each line of gates.     The decision to
release the gates is made by the representative of the
Municipality (in this case Monsieur Filliau) whose decision
overrides that of the police or the Club (as it does on the time
a match can start).     I was then shown the terraces and the
seating areas.    The seating areas occupy the entire length of the
pitch on both sides, the terraces being the areas behind the
goal.    The gates go all the way round the field.   They are on the
level of the pitch, about 9 inches above the ground level at the
front of each viewing area.     Each terraced area can accommodate
3,000 people seated or 6,000 standing (the seating in the
terraced areas consists of fixed benches, upon which spectators
can either stand or sit).     There is an area of about 5 yards
between the first row of seating and the fence.      I was told that
fans quite frequently come right up to the fence if the crowd is
large.    Now that Nimes are playing in the second division, crowds
are quite small (average about 11,000 or 12,000, whereas the
stadium as a whole can hold 30,000).     But there are large crowds
for rugby matches.    On the whole, football fans behave worse than
rugby fans.    There is some throwing of objects over the fence
onto the pitch, and I was shown the players' entrance, which has
a tunnel capable of extension right onto the pitch to protect
them from missiles.    I was also shown the changing areas for both
teams.


3.   The public can buy tickets at four booking offices at
corners of the stadium.    Matches are all ticket.   The times when
the booking offices are open are advertised in the local press.
The entry for spectators to the stadium is separate from the
purchase of tickets.    There are 12 entrances which are situated
at intervals along the sides of the stadium.     Fans go through a
series of sloping passageways, with some steps, taking them
through the inside of the stadium onto the terraces or the
seating areas.    At the back of the terraced sections there are
steps in the open down to assist with the evacuation in case of
emergency.   The atmosphere in the public entrances is quite
clinical (large expanses of newly whitewashed concrete).      But the
entrances go past the various sports halls situated at the four
corners of the stadium, so that there is some distraction for the
fans.


4.   These four sports halls are most impressive.    The first is
said to be the largest gymnasium in France, and I was shown the
French National Gymnastics team in practice for championships in
Stuttgart.   A visiting American team was to join them at the
weekend for a match.   The next sports hall is laid out for
exhibitions (one was planned soon for a car company).     Then there
is an indoor sports hall for volleyball, basketball and
badminton, a 14 place fencing area, billiards room (club
membership 200Frs per year, sessions 12Frs per hour), and finally
a huge sports hall laid out for martial arts.    The aim is to
develop these sports halls for all kinds of competitions,
including junior sports for the City of Nimes.


5.   There is car parking for 2000 and a separate pitch adjacent
for use by reserve teams, juniors etc.   A junior match was in
progress (6pm).


6.   The link with the City is strong.    They largely paid for the
stadium (160 of the 170 million Frs which it cost).     Only a tiny
fraction of the remainder came from the Government.
Representatives of the Municipality have the best seats.       The aim
is to develop the stadium also for national championships in
France, attracting interest and attention to the City.     Monsieur
Filliau knew of no other city which was trying to do the same
thing.   The project was obviously conceived on a grand scale.
Since it was opened only in February this year, its development
is still in the early stages.     But I was impressed by the
keenness, confidence and openness of all those whom I met.


Arrangements for the Visit on 20 October


7.   Monsieur Gaillant would arrange for transport at Marseille
(Marignane).   Since the flight (1200 from Heathrow) was due to
arrive at 13.50, a visit to the stadium would be timed to start
at 15.30.   We would be given a tour of the stadium, and a
demonstration of the gates by Monsieur Cloez.     This would last an
hour, followed by discussion if we wished for a further hour, and
then on to the hotel.     We would then be welcome to return to the
match (v Red Star, Paris) as guests at 20.30.    After the match,
we were invited to "lunch" with the Club Olympique (apparently
consisting of drinks and light refreshments).


8.   Transport would also be available the next day, leaving at
11.45, to take us to Marseille in time for the flight at 14.35
(16.30 at Heathrow).    Colette Dumas said she would be available
throughout (and offered to meet us at the airport) to provide
translation facilities.    Monsieur Filliau   would handle the
arrangements from the Municipal side.     I said that we would like
to meet Monsieur Bousquet, and he said that this would be
arranged (he would normally attend the match).     It was agreed
that I would send a fax about 10 days before the visit,
confirming all the details.


9.   I was then invited to a cocktail party with some visiting
journalists and officials of the City.    This was brief but
friendly.   Afterwards Monsieur Filliau arranged for one of his
staff to take me to the hotel.     (This was one of a complex of new
hotels near the stadium, a little way out of the town centre),
subsequently arranged for us to stay at the hotel Le Cheval
Blanc.   This is opposite the Arenes (in the middle of the City).




                                         R M WHALLEY

29 September 1989
