                         states:

1.   I was born on the
2.   Occupation - Qualified Ambulanceman - SYMAS.

3.   I have   16 years     experience with the service.      I have

     attended training courses and have attained the Miller

     standard.    I mainly work accident and emergency and this on

     occasion covers transfer and out patient work.      I am based

     at Parkway Station.    I work a set 23 week rota which covers

     the 24 hour, 7 day per week, emergency service.

4.   On Saturday 15th,     I arrived for duty shortly before 1400

     hours and signed in my shift is 1400 hours 2200 hours.        I

     was on duty that shift with ambulanceman ________        Having

     booked in we checked the vehicle and equipment.     We had been

     allocated vehicle Sierra 208 which is an emergency vehicle.

     We were on domestic Channel 2 which is the usual Channel for

     accident emergency.

     We then waited for any calls.         Shortly after 1400 hours

     Control issued us with an admission to Northern General Ward

     8B.          was driving.     We arrived at Northern General at

     about 1502 hours.     We off loaded the patient and radioed

     Control to say that we were clear.

6.   At about 1512 hours we heard a message to another vehicle,

     Sierra 209                         sending them to Hillsborough

     Football Stadium. The message specified gymnasium entrance-

     Penistone Road.     Having called clear at 1516.23 (Track 19

     page 6) we were given the same instructions to go to the

     gymnasium entrance of the Football Ground at Penistone Road.
We proceeded on red at speed with lights and horn.    On route

to the ground I heard Control asking for vehicles to come

green as soon as possible and also heard reference to this

being a major incident and for them to turn to Emergency

Reserve Control Channel, Channel 1.     We therefore switched

to Channel 1.
We approached the Junction of Herries Road South and Herries

Road and were directed by a police officer to the right down

Herries Road.     We proceeded to the roundabout junction with

Penistone Road.    There were police on duty at the roundabout

and we were directed by an officer towards Leppings Lane.

The general     indication seemed to be that there was      an

incident down Leppings Lane.     As far as I can recall as we

passed Penistone Road was congested with vehicles.

We proceeded down Leppings Lane.      There were supporters on

foot, police cars and police officers.      There was nothing

out of the ordinary for a Saturday football crowd at that

time.
As we approached the gates there were a lot more supporters.

I saw a couple of fire appliances and I could see two SYMAS

ambulances    inside the Leppings Lane entrance.      We were

ushered in by police.
We formed in line with the vehicle. I radioed Control to

book on scene but experienced interference.       As far as I

can recall the time was 1520, if not earlier because we had

a straight run from Northern General and maximum journey

time is 4 minutes.
12.   My assistant         1 was in the drivers seat.   I got out and

      went up to the other crews already on scene to ascertain

      what had happened.     I spoke to ambulanceman              and

      ambulancewoman            They were working on casualties and

      I noticed two male bodies on the ground.    I went to them and

      checked for signs of life.      I could not find any signs of

      life and I informed the police officer who was next to me of

      this fact.

13.   At this stage more people began to appear from the West

      Stand direction (point AG on the plan).      I noticed three

      more bodies near gate C.     I checked them for signs of life

      and found none.    I then collected the handset radio from the

      vehicle.

14.   At this point.I was concerned that the incident was here at

      Leppings Lane and not at the gymnasium entrance as had been

      radioed.     I tried to contact Control to inform them of this

      and requested a senior officer.     I was unable to contact

      Control via the handset so I used Domestic Channel 2 and gdc_

      through at 1525 (Track 19 page 12).      I then went towards

      Gate C and saw another 3 bodies.      I checked them also for

      signs of life and found none.



15.   I then moved forward towards the West Stand Tunnel entrance

      which was congested,    I was grabbed by a Policewoman who

      said,   "I've got one here who is not breathing".    I saw two

      bodies near the entrance to the West Stand, but went with

      the Police to a further body to the right of the entrance to
      the West Stand.     I found this body also had no signs of

      life, but the Police Officer could not be informed as she

      had disappeared.    So at this stage I called Control about 3

      times, but got no response, with a view to requesting the

      attendance of a Senior Officer, whilst I was on the radio I

      was heading towards the two bodies originally seen near the

      tunnel but not checked.

16.   I moved over to the two bodies at the other side of the

      tunnel to check for signs of life.     I checked one and found

      no signs of life.      The other one a male about 20 years,

      cyanosed,    dilated pupils but with a carotid pulse.         I

      instructed two Police Officers and a civilian to carry this

      patient down towards the Ambulances.    I was being jostled by

      anxious people.whom I tried to collate, into one area.   --

17.   People were wandering from the West Stand tunnel to 'C' gate

      in a dazed and shocked condition.         I went towards and

      entered the West Stand tunnel, I honestly feared for my own

      safety and although I saw some bodies on the floor of the

      tunnel   I retreated because of the volume of people coming

      towards m e .

18.   I then returned towards the Ambulances.         This area was

      congested with many agitated people.      I saw at least two

      people getting very aggressive towards the uniformed staff

      there.      One person had to be physically removed by two

      Police Officers.    As I approached my Ambulance, I could see

      at least two bodies lying on the side of the road by my

      ambulance towards the fence alongside the river.         There
      were also many shocked people sitting near the Ambulances.

      I then went over to my colleague who was attending to the

      patient I had sent down from the tunnel area.       We removed a

      cot from our vehicle and loaded him on.         The condition of

      our p atient    was   critical   and we decided     to move off

      immediately to hospital.

19.. I radioed Control but could not get through.          I therefore

      turned to Domestic Channel 2 and asked if there was            a

      designated     hospital   at   1532   (Track   19 page 14).     I

      mentioned that two vehicles had just left and because of the

      seriousness of our casualty I asked if Hallamshire was okay

      as a result of traffic congestion.       Control confirmed that

      we should proceed tothe Hallamshire (Track 19 page 15).

20.   At 1537 we arrived      at the Hallamshire.      We were met   at-

      casualty by staff and off loaded the patient.        We then set

      off back to the ground and radioed clear to Control at 1541

      (Track 16 page 10).     We had gone back to Channel 1.

21. Control did not specify an end of the ground as far as I can

      recall so we returned to the gymnasium entrance.      We arrived

      at the entrance and were met by Superintendent Dale. He told

      us to wait until ambulances loading had departed.              An

      ambulance left and we reversed off Penistone Road into the

      entrance to the ground.    Another ambulance next to us loaded

      up and left.      A casualty was brought to us on a SYMAS

      stretcher.     We took off one of our cots and loaded the

      patient on to the vehicle.       The patient appeared to be in a

      serious condition and in addition to this we loaded two
          walking wounded.      From there we left for the Northern

          General casualty.

    2 2 . At Northern General we off loaded and their medical teams

          were assessing casualties.    We radioed clear to control. We

          returned to the ground via Herries Road and Leppings Lane.

    23.   There were a large number of supporters and we made our way

          near the entrance.    We were met by Mr David Jones, who told

          us to go to Penistone Road gymnasium entrance. There were a

          large number of people coming out of the ground.             We
#
          proceeded down Leppings Lane, left onto Catch Bar Road and

          left at Penistone Road.

    24.   On arrival   by the     gymnasium entrance    there were two

          ambulances parked in front of us.    We were parked further up

          this time by the main police access entrance to the ground._

    25.   The   two other vehicles departed and we were brought a

          casualty.    The doctor with him was satisfied that his

          condition was stable so we waited for further casualties.

          After about 4 or 5 minutes the doctor became concerned and

          asked us to leave for hospital.

    26.   I set off for Hallamshire as I then understood that Northern

          General was too busy.     I drove to the roundabout at the end

          of Penistone Road and then turned left into Leppings Lane.

          We had a police bike escort and Leppings Lane was heavily

          congested with supporters on foot. I would estimate it was

          about 1615 or 1630 hours.    The crowd was especially dense by

          the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground.     I continued down

          Leppings Lane and on to the Hallamshire Hospital and off
      loaded the casualty and the doctor.

27.   We headed back towards the ground and on the radio we heard

      vehicles being stood by.    I drove to Infirmary Road and

      stood by and informed Control. We were stood by for about 30

      minutes and then Control stood us down and told us to return

      to Parkway station.   We returned to station I would guess

      sometime after 1700 hours and carried on with our normal

      duties.



Dated this       daY of                      1989


                                                             J.
                                                                                                                          iain Police Access

Sheffield Wednesday F n                                                                                           Police
                                                                                                                  Room\>'
             Hillsborough Ground                                                                        R o o m 'A l .         Av

                                                                                                                                               U
                                                                                           GymnftfAmt




                                                                                    NORTH STAND




                                    1-1 6                                                                                                          4 9 -5 4




                                                                                   P la y e r's
/ay Fans Entrance                                                                  Tunnel


and Enclosures



               1Police Control              1 9 -2 2                             S O U TH S T A N D
 #** ' “ 1


 CO                                                               Bt~ m W                                        ca.gi
                                                       Oftlclal                                               29-32      33-

             KEY

             TU R N S T IL E S   BJ//t                            D ire c to r * E n tra n c e
