 I                       9                               c.c.
R.                            ( 0 Ut>~   fK.>V >                 Mr
                                                                 Mr
                                                                       Chilcocv
                                                                       Moriarty n
                                                                 Mr    Turney
                                                                 Mr    Boys Smith
                                                                 Mr    Mower
                                                                Jiir   Whnlley— ^
                                                                 Mr    Lidington




Mr Bolton


      The Home Secretary has asked me to arrange a meeting shortly after his
return to the office to take stock of the extent to which the urgent
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor have been implemented, particularly
those falling to the football clubs.     He has in mind the stories which
appeared in several newspapers recently suggesting that progress in
implementing these proposals was slow.    The meeting has been arranged for
10.45 a.m. on 7 September. I should be very grateful if you could before the
meeting gather some information (perhaps on a sample basis) from the police
about the extent to which the recommendations have been put into effect and
let me have a note on this and any other points which need to be considered
at this stage.




Private Office                                   C J WALTERS
24 August 1989                            Principal Private Secretary




PS.   I see that you have already issued a circular to Chief Fire Officers
      requesting information. I am a little concerned that this might fuel
      the controversy if it leaks to the press. I understand that you have
      agreed to supply a suggested line to be taken by PRB in this
      eventuality.
h s .8.2 3/hillsb9.peb


                                        cc   Mr   Mower
                                             Mr   Payne
                                             Mr   Goddard
                                             Mr   Whalley*/
                                             Ms   Jago
                                             Mr   Brown
                                             Mr   Kinghan (DoE)
Mr Haslam


HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

Last Saturday the Daily Mirror in a leader (P6) suggested that
the Home Office had given clubs extra time to comply with the
recommendations in the Taylor interim report and that a recent
circular had said that they must be completed "before the start
of the season or immediately thereafter".
This is inaccurate.

The circular of 4 August urged recipients (in paragraph 2) "to
take required action without delay in order to implement, as
necessary, the Inquiry's recommendations to improve safety at
sportsgrounds."

In paragraph 5, the circular draws attention to the 2 categories
of recommendations:   the 28 requiring implementation before the
start of the new football season and those which would take
longer to put into effect.     It went on "The Home Secretary
nevertheless urges recipients to take urgent action on both
categories   so as to put       into effect    as many of the
recommendations as possible before the start of the season."

In other words - to put into not only         those whichTaylor
recommended should be complied with before the start    of the
season, but as many of the others as possible too.

The Press Notice was consistent with the circular.

I shall be glad if the Press Office will ensure that the correct
position is presented in response to enquiries, and consider
whether any remedial action is necessary.




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        G2 Division

23 August 1989
    CT5
    OO
    CO



r   CNI
 rom:    Jonathan Haslam                           23 August 1989
         Deputy Director of Information
         Public Relations Branch             c.c. *Mr Mower o/r
         Room 144, QAG.                           *Mr Payne
         Ext. 3735                                *Mr Goddard
                           I                      *Mr Whalley
To:      Mr Bolton G2                             *Ms Jago
                                                  *Mr Brown
                                                  *Mr Kingham (DoE)
                                                   *w/o attachments


                          HTT,T.fiBOROUGH REPORT

Thank you for your note of 23 August.
First, let me assure you that press office at all times seeks to
ensure that the correct position is given to the media. In this
instance all that was asked of us was a copy of the press notice,
including the circular, issued by the Home Secretary on
4 August. Press office took the opportunity to draw the
reporter's attention to paragraph four of the release dealing
with the circular.
Second, I must confess to a degree of confusion about the case
you present.                                 V;jt
Paragraph 316 of the Taylor report states:
        "Those (the recommendations) which are asterisked should be
        carried out before the 1989/90 season stajtrts. The, rest
        should be started forthwith and completed as soon as
        possible".
As you know there are 28 such recommendations asterisked.

Paragraph 5 of the Home Office circular states:
        "The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
5       two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
        implementation before the start of the new football season
        n-r inrmediatelv thereafter (my emphasis) ; the remaining 15
        are those which etc etc".                  v
                     'T
Even. accepting the Home Secretary's urging clubs to take urgent
action in both categories, there is divergence.
Having read both the report and the circular Carefully, I
concluded that there were no grounds for complaint to the Mirror.

The question at issue, therefore, can only be whether PRB was
given the correct circular to issue with the press release? ^9^-'
information I attach both the release and the circular we are
working from.
 I should be grateful for youir advice on this point.
     <CO
       T»
V)   cs»
     =5
£
 r
h s .8.24/hillsblO.peb


                                             Mr   Walters
                                             Mr   Mower
                                             Mr   Chilcot
                                             Mr   Turney
                                             Mr   Goddard
                                             Mr   Whalley*/
                                             Ms   Jago
                                             Mr   Brown

Mr Haslam



HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

You drew my attention to paragraph 5 of the Home Office circular
on the Taylor interim report and its description of the 28
asterisked recommendations requiring implementation before the
start of the new football season or immediately thereafter and
the fact that this was at variance with paragraph 316 of the
Taylor report which indicated that those recommendations which
were asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/1990 season
started.

2.   The sentence concerned was descriptive:           Taylor,  in
paragraph 304 of his report refers to his proposal "of instant
measures capable of being implemented forthwith and where
possible before the commencement of the 1989/1990 season". I did
not draft the circular but in my view paragraph 5 is consistent
with paragraph 304 of the report which accepted that it might not
be possible to implement particular asterisked recommendations
before the start of the season.     As to the Home Office view of
what should be done, my note of 2 3 August is I think accurate.
3.   I agree that there is no point in seeking a correction from
the Daily Mirror.

4.   You and Mr Walters were worried that the requests which
I initiated to the Fire Service and to the police through the
ACPO network mentioned that the Home Secretary was concerned
about suggestions in the press that there may be some dragging of
feet on compliance with recommendations in the interim report.
You thought that this might lay the Home Office open to the
criticism that we were motivated only by the press suggestions to
ensure that the Taylor recommendations were being complied with.
5.   I think the line to take if this particular point is picked
upon is that all the indication which we had had (through contact
on the telephone with individual clubs,          individual fire
authorities, local authorities and the police) was that the
recommendations were being taken extremely seriously and that
every endeavour was being made to comply with them.    I think we
should make a virtue of the fact that nevertheless, in view of
the Home Secretary's concern, we have taken special steps to get
reports from the police and the fire brigades (which are services
for which the Home Secretary has special responsibilities in law)
on the extent to which the Taylor recommendations which
particularly affect those services have been complied with.

6.   You asked me why we had not directed a similar request to
the local authorities who have responsibility for the safety
certificates.   There are two reasons:   one of principal and one
of logistics.      The local authorities are not subject to
supervision by the Home Office in the way that they carry out
their safety responsibilities.   (The question whether they should
be subject to central supervision is to be addressed by Taylor in
Part 2 of his inquiry.)    The other reason, which would not bear
press examination, is simply the number of local authorities
involved.   I would prefer to take the line that we are getting
reports from the police and the Fire Service in the first
instance.   If they indicate to us that there are areas where the
recommendations are not being complied with, we shall be prepared
to take that up with the local authorities concerned.

7.   DoE agree that this is an appropriate line to take.




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        G2 Division

24 August 1989
          iI
3    CO



    CM
