    MAIDSTONE UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB Ltd
       BOWERDENE HOUSE. NUMBER ONE BOWER TERRACE. MAIDSTONE. KENT ME16 8RY.
                        TEL: 0622 54403/56700 • FAX: 0622 57054
                        GROUND - WATUNG STREET. DARTFORD, KENT.
  Chairman &Managing Director J.C. Thompson: Secretary/General Manager, W.T. Williams: Team Manager, K Peacock



                                                                                            S -       P<I»

28th September 1989
Mr. R.M. Whalley,
Secretary to the Inquiry,
The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London. SW1H 9AT
Dear Mr. Whalley,
I am in receipt of Lord Justice Taylor's request for
comments on an article in the Sunday Times dated 3rd
September under the byline of Chris Dighton and Chris
Lightbown entitled 'League's newest   club in   safety
dispute'.
Before commenting on the article I think there are a
number of things that Lord Justice Taylor should be made
aware of.
Firstly, neither Mr. Dighton or Mr.      Lightbown, whose
names appear on the article, have ever visited Watling
Street in relation to the article and to the best of our
knowledge have never visited Watling Street at all.
 Secondly, we would draw his attention to the questionable
 credentials of Mr., James Tve. the self styled Director
 General of the so-called British SafetyX .Q U tlc i l , which far
“TJronP being an official body or Council is, in fact, a /
 registered charity whose main activities appear to be the
 operation of a company called British Safety Council Sales
 TjtjH i magazine publishers and      sellers       of     various
*p o r > i i ndustrial equipment and a i d s f f photocSpy of
 two    typical  pages draWfT' “from fctTSir own          magazine «
 illustrating the nature of their activities is attached.
 I leave you to draw your own conclusions.            However, I
 would particularly draw your attention to the fact that in
 the advertisements they claim that the Directors receive
 no fees or emoluments, a statement which is perfectly true                                                                       g
 in relation to British Safety Council Sales Ltd., what*
 they fail to point out is that 98% of British Safety
 Council Sales Ltd. shares are held ^by th^_BrJjLi£Lb__Sa£ety
 Council who <35 employ      and obviously remunerate the
 apparently altruistic i)irectors concerned.
Equally important, we have it on good authority that Mr.
Tye's instructions from the Sunday Times were "to visit



  Company Registered in England No 1633510. Registered Office: Bowerdene House, Number One Bower Terraoe, Maidstone, Kent ME16 8RY.
        Directors: J.C. Thompson. Chairmen: J. Dawkins. Vice Chairmen; D. Berry; S. Pearson. Company Secretary D.J. Twiddy
Maidstone and find some things wrong on which an article
could be based". Unfortunately, the journalistic source
concerned will not publically substantiate this statement
but we nevertheless believe it to be true. Indeed, we can
fairly claim that the methods employed by Mr.     Tye to
assess Watling Street only serve to substantiate this
belief.
Had Mr. Tve wished, a simple telephone call to our Club
would" have resulted in him being put in touch with the
appointed safety officers from the Police, Fire Brigade
and County Council, who would have been happy to have
shown him over Watling Street and answered any questions.
Instead, he decided to enter the ground clandestinely and
without proper guidance," and then make a series of
statements many of which are untrue. However, even had he
applied normally to visit the ground one would have to
seriously question what basis he has to proclaim himself
an expert on stadium safety and what his qualifications
are apart from the grand title conferred upon him by his
own commercial organisation.
I turn now to the allegations contained in the   article.
We would reply as follows.
1.   The Main Stand.
     The Main Stand is not substantially built of wood
     and in corroboration of this we attach the relevant
     extract  from the    Structural Surveyors    Report
     required for the Safety Certificate issued each
     year.
      In so far as his comments with regards to safety
      exits at the rear of the stand and the inadequacy of
      the exits at the front, it is the opinion of the
      Fire Officer that given the size of the stand there
      is no requirement for rear exits and far from being
      inadequate,   the 4 double     width   brick   built
      staircases at the front of the stand are clearly
      capable of allowing the stand to be cleared within
      the required safety time.      In so far as fire
      extinguishers are concerned, not only are there fire
      extinguishers placed in the stand at all points
      nominated by the Fire Officer, there are also two
      inertial hose reels in the centre of the stand
      permanently connected to the water supply which can
      be brought into action immediately should there be a
      problem.    Since Mr.    Tye   could not,    without
      identifying himself, enter the areas of the stand in
      which these are sited he simply missed them and
      produced this inaccurate report.
      The rooms beneath the stand are built in the usual
      way with plasterboard and are of no different
      construction to that of a normal house.   Each room
                          -   3
                              -




     has its own smoke detector, fire alarm and fire
     extinguisher system and in any case the rooms are
     constantly occupied as offices etc. during football
     matches.
2.   Turnstiles.
     This allegation is completely refuted and, in fact,
     for a ground of 5,200 capacity we have 16 turnstiles
     which is far above the required number. All of the
     turnstile blocks are newly constructed and have
     passed building regulation inspections.
3.   Escape routes.
     I am not quite sure what people are supposed to be
     escaping from, but between the rear of the Watling
     Street terraces and the main road is a large car
     park capable of holding many hundreds of people.
     The pitch itself has 14 turnstile exit gates on to
     it so that any requirement to remove the crowd
     because of danger on to       the pitch could     be
     accommodated in seconds. Mr. Tye also fails to
     inform the reader that the pavement is approximately
     6 metres wide.
4.   In so far as safety instructions given to Stewards,
     Mr.    Tye chose to visit the ground on the second
     night of our entrance to the Football League.      We
     employ 42 Stewards of whom the vast majority are
     voluntary and it is not surprising that so early in
      the season training still needed to be carried out.
     Training is, however, carried out regularly under
     the supervision of the Police and Fire Officers and
     we are confident that we have, and are, producing a
     first class stewarding team.
     However, of the people interviewed by Mr. Tye we
     have ascertained that two of them were not Stewards
     at all but Usherettes who show people to their seats
     in the main stand and are not included in the
     stewarding team. One was a girl on a passgate who
     has to do nothing but check tickets admitting people
     from   the private car     park into the     members
     enclosure, an area in which there is no possible
     problem of crowd disorder. Further, if Mr. Tye was
     under the impression that the colours of the tickets
     indicated different parts of the stadium he is sadly
     mistaken, as the colour scheme only refers to the
     difference in status of those holding the tickets
     i.e.   Players/Directors/Vice Presidents etc.    and
     knowledge or otherwise of the colour codes is
     totally irrelevant in the context of safety.
        This only leaves the senior Steward who quite
        clearly informed Mr. Tye that he had been trained
        but made a mistake in assuming that the source of
        the authority was the Football League.      I am,
        however, at a loss to see how this error could
        affect his efficiency.
This latter point, together with those preceeding, we
believe reinforces our contention that Mr. Tye set out to
find whatever flimsy evidence he could to fulfill the
demands of his paymaster the Sunday Times, without any
attempt to provide a fair and unbiased report.
Finally, we would point out that the Police, Fire Brigade
and County Council Officers involved in the Watling Street
project are all completely happy with the work carried
out.   Indeed, the Football League inspection produced no
queries whatever, and was followed by a report which
complimented the Club on the work it had completed. With
regards to our current Safety Certificate, all work
requested by the Safety Authorities has been completed to
their satisfaction and the Certificate is at present being
engrossed.   Should you wish to confirm this the local
Officers are as follows:-
Mr. G. Winfield,
Chief Structural Engineer,
Kent County Council.
Superintendant D. Lambert,
Kent County Constabulary.
Mr. B .H . Twyman,
Senior Divisional Fire Officer,
Kent County Fire Department.
Finally, may I apologise if this letter appears somewhat
bellicose but I am sure you will understand that having
spent over £500,000 in order to comply with every minute
request of the authorities, I and my colleagues are less
than happy with this article which is, in essence, 'gutter
journalism' supported by evidence provided by a source of
a very questionable nature.
I hope that the foregoing serves to allay any fears that
Lord Justice Taylor may have had on the article.      Any
further information you may require, we would be happy to
provide.
Yours sincerely,




J.C. THOMPSON
Chairman and Managing Director
Encs.
