 From: Timothy Middleton                                cc      Juliet Wheldon
       Legal Adviser’s Branch                                   Rick Evans
       Room 807 QAG                                             Peter Edmundson
                                                                Matthew Pyne
         ® 273 3098                                             Sarah Clifford

         6 February 1998


 Paul Pugh

 HILLSBOROUGH

This minute comments on the draft submission and draft letter enclosed with your
minute of 3 February, and on the draft oral statement circulated yesterday.

Draft Submission

2.      You are right to draw the Home Secretary’s attention to the two issues of
police statements and evidence about the state of the ground, and I agree with the gist
of your conclusions in paragraphs 16 & 18 (although I suggest below a different
approach on these issues in the letter to the Attorney General). However, I think the
wording of paragraph 16 should be reviewed.

3.      I am not clear that it is correct to say that statements taken for one purpose
were tinkered with to fit them for another purpose. You state in paragraph 13 that
officers were originally asked to prepare statements for the purposes of the force
collecting and presenting its case to the inquiry. You state that subsequently it was
decided that the statements would be used by the West Midlands police as part of their
fact finding on behalf of the inquiry. Is there really a substantial difference of purpose
between those two functions? I think the criticism is that the statements were vetted
at all. It would be argued that the statements would have been more valuable if they
were truly the statements of the individual police officers concerned without any input
from senior officers or solicitors. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers the criticism at
length, and he reaches the firm conclusion that Lord Taylor’s inquiry was not in any
way inhibited or impeded by what happened. He is satisfied that the process did not
affect the outcome of the inquests or the decision of the DPP not to bring criminal
charges. He is clear that there was no question of misconduct either by the solicitors
or by the senior police officers. He emphasises (paragraph 98 of chapter 4 and
paragraph 21 of chapter 7) that the process was not materially different from that
adopted by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Ambulance Service.

4.      In the light of those points I suggest that you should leave out the last sentence
of paragraph 13. If you wish to retain the view in paragraph 16 that the vetting of the
statements was an error of judgement, I think it should be differently expressed, but it
is, of course, as the judge recognises, common practice for statements of individuals
to be commented upon by senior colleagues and solicitors before they are submitted.
It is ultimately for the individual to decide whether to accept the amendments and
whether to sign the statement.

5.      If you wish to retain the criticism in paragraph 16,1 suggest that the final
sentence should be amended to read as follows: “But I think you might want to
express a view that it was an error of judgement at the time for the police force to
attempt to tinker with statements, and that it would have been better to have allowed
the statements to go forward in their original form so that the inquiry could form its
own views about all the points contained in the statements, whether or not they were a
matter of opinion or fact.”

6.     You state in paragraph 27 that we should be more open than the judge
recommends in connection with the assistance provided to him by the people listed in
paragraph 6 of appendix 1. There may be a difficulty with that approach, in that the
judge states (paragraph 8 of his letter to the Home Secretary) that there are no
transcripts of his discussions with most of these people. To publish what is available
could accordingly appear partial (in both senses of the word). It rather depends on the
amount of written material available.

Draft letter to the Attorney General

7.     In the first paragraph on page 2 the letter refers to publication of the report and
other material. I wonder if the letter should be a bit fuller here, explaining more
precisely what the Home Secretary proposes to publish. The Attorney General and
the other recipients of the letter may wish to have the opportunity to express their own
views on the Home Secretary’s publication proposals.

8.      I suggest that the paragraph on police statements should be slightly less
presumptuous as to the Attorney General’s views. It might be better to replace the
final sentence by: “I would be grateful for your views.”

 9.     There is no suggestion at all in the scrutiny report that the two matters of
technical evidence that were not before the Taylor Inquiry could support allegations of
negligence of a criminal nature. The judge states in paragraph 20 of chapter 6:
“These matters do not give grounds for reopening the judicial inquiry or any other
proceedings.” He goes on to say that he does not consider that there would have been
any question of Lord Taylor changing his central conclusion that the primary cause of
the disaster was a failure of police control. The only bearing that the judge considers
the issues might have on criminal responsibility is in relation to police officers. In
other words, it is conceivable that the issues weigh against criminal proceedings
against police officers. He does not suggest that they support criminal proceedings
against the football club or anyone else.

10.     It may be that the families, with nothing else to grasp, will clutch at this part of
the report. However, it would be a departure from the lines that they have followed
up to now, and I really do not see any value in asking the Law Officers to spend time
on this point at present. If it becomes a genuine issue, we can raise it with them later.
I suggest that you replace the final sentence of your paragraph on this point by
something along the following lines: “However, it is clear that Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the balance of
conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry, and he considers that the structural engineer’s
advice on the point will have been taken into account the apportionment of
compensation payments that have been made.”

Draft Statement

11.      I have no comments on the draft statement, except to observe that paragraph
15 may carry unintended implications. As worded, it might be taken as being critical
of the conduct of the inquests, and the final sentence suggests that the inquests may
have challenged the conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry. I am not sure that that is
correct.




T J MIDDLETON
