KH.5.14/FLA4.DM

FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

Section 8 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 creates the
Football Licensing Authority and enables the Secretary of State
to appoint its chairman and members.       The FLA will be an
independent non-departmental public body which will employ a
small administrative staff and an inspectorate.    Supplementary
provisions relating to the status, constitution and organisation
of the FLA are contained in Schedule 2 to the 1989 Act (see
Annex A to this note).

Composition

2.   The Act provides that the FLA shall comprise a chairman and
not less than 4 nor more than 8 other members. Membership of the
FLA is likely to comprise some people with relevant technical
experience, in particular in policing of major football grounds,
engineering or construction and fire safety, together with others
who have knowledge of professional association football or who
have other skills judged to be of value for the purpose of
carrying out the FLA's functions and duties.

3.   Membership of the Authority will be. part-time and it is not
expected that for ordinary members the commitment will involve
more than one or two days per month on average. Members will be
remunerated on a daily basis proportionate to the salary of Clxacxl
Sood-e<>-Cradc--2 (for the Chairman) and C ' \ _ y \ 1 'ji.i,m i.ijr. C!ir?i.li. 4 (for
other members) .                                          <$©— a

Staffing

4.   It is intended that the FLA will have a Chief Executive
(salary level Civil Service Grade 5) and a small headquarters
staff. The Act also provides for the appointment of inspectors
who, it is proposed, would be drawn at least initially from
people who have relevant qualifications or experience in
policing, fire safety, engineering or construction in relation
to sports grounds.

Location

5.   The Government proposes to locate the headquarters of the
FLA in North of England. No final decision has been made but the
Home Office would favour Merseyside because that would facilitate
the provision of office services and related support from within
existing Home Office establishments.

Functions

6.   The FLA will have two basic responsibilities: the operation
of the football licensing scheme and the function of keeping
under review the discharge, by local authorities, of their
functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation
to sports grounds at which designated football matches are
played. These functions are described in greater detail in the
following paragraphs.
Licensing

7.   The FLA will licence football grounds to which the
spectators are admitted to watch designated football matches.
A designated football match is one designated by order of the
Secretary of State under section 1 of the 1989 Act. An order has
been made (see Annex B) which covers matches played by football
league clubs and international matches at football league grounds
or other sports grounds designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 including Wembley Stadium.    Relevant parts of
Part I of the Football Spectators Act to permit the setting up
of the Football Licensing Authority come into effect on 1 June
1990 but section 9 (which creates the offence of admitting
spectators   to unlicensed    premises)   and  section   13  (the
Authority's powers in relation to safety at football grounds)
will be brought into force only when the Authority is ready to
exercise those responsibilities. Once the relevant parts of the
1989 Act are brought into force, it will be an offence to admit
spectators to a      designated match without a licence or to
contravene the terms and conditions of a licence. The FLA will
be responsible for devising the licensing scheme and for the
enforcement of the terms and conditions contained in a licence.

8.   The long title of the 1989 Act indicates that, the purpose
of. the licensing scheme is to provide for        the safety of
spectators.   The   Government will expect, the FLA to use the
licensing scheme     to ensure thatthe standards of safety,
including the level of amenity for spectators (to the extent that
that is relevant to crowd behaviour and safety) and the
arrangements for preventing or mitigating the effect of crowd
disorder and offences is satisfactory in relation to the nature
of the match being played (but see also paragraphs 12 and 13
below).

9.   The Act requires that in granting, amending,    refusing or
revoking a licence the FLA shall have regard to:

     (a) whether equipment provided, procedures used arid other
     arrangements enforced at the   premises are such as are
     reasonably required to prevent the commission or minimise
     the effects of offences as designated football matches
     (section 10(12)(c) of the Act); and

     (b)   such other considerations as the Secretary of State
     determines from time to time and notifies the licensing
     authority (section 10(12)(d)).

10. The FLA has powers under the Act to refuse to grant a
licence, to vary the conditions of a licence or to revoke or
suspend a licence.    The Act provides opportunities for the
licence holder to make representation against decisions by the
licensing authority, but there is no specific avenue of appeal.

Use of the licensing scheme in relation to the introduction of
seated accommodation at football grounds

11 . The Government has indicated that one of the reasons for
giving effect to the football licensing scheme and to the setting
up of the Football Licensing Authority is to bring about the
move towards all seated accommodation at major football matches
recommended in the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
into the Hillsborough tragedy. The 1989 Act does not permit the
FLA to include terms and conditions in a licence relating to the
seating of spectators except when, in relation to any specified
premises, the Authority is so directed by order made by the
Secretary of State.    The Government expects football clubs to
respond to the Taylor report's recommendations in the first
instance.    The national football authorities (the Football
Association and the Football League) endorse the move towards all
seated accommodation which is to some extent stimulated by
decisions of the national governing bodies (FIFA and UEFA) that
particular matches played under their jurisdiction should
normally be played at all seated stadia from 1993.            The
Government will expect the Football Licensing Authority to
monitor the progress made by clubs towards providing all seated
accommodation (though there is no necessity for them to provide
more seats than the numbers of spectators that they expect to
accommodate).    The Government has indicated to the football
authorities that it hopes that clubs will not make inappropriate
or piecemeal changes to their accommodation which are likely to
add to the problems of safety and public order. For this reason
it favours the provision of well planned seated accommodation
providing an increased level of amenity and comfort for
spectators and for this purpose has provided money, though the
Football Trust, by reducing the: pools betting tax.           The
Government considers that strict adherence to the staged
 timetable towards all seated accommodation recommended by Lord
Justice Taylor is less important than the overall objectives and
 the Government would propose to use section 11 of the Football
 Spectators Act only in those circumstances where it was advised
by the Football Licensing Authority that in Its view the progress
 towards all seated accommodation was unsatisfactory.

Powers in relation to safety at football grounds

12. Section 13 of. the 1989 Act. enables the FLA to keep under
review the discharge by local authorities of their functions
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in relation to sports
grounds and which designated football matches are played.     The
FLA will need to work closely with the relevant local authorities
in order to secure consistency of approach to setting terms and
conditions in safety certificates.     Section 13(2) of the Act
enables the licensing authority to require, by notice, a local
authority to include in any safety certificates such terms and
conditions as are specified in the notice.      Before exercising
these powers the licensing authority is required to consult the
local authority, the Chief Officer of Police and either the fire
authority or the building authority as appropriate.

13. Because of the specific powers provided in section 13, the
Authority will be expected to use that section, rather than terms
and conditions of a licence, to address problems of safety which
should be dealt with in the safety certificate.




 Home Office
 Fire and Emergency Planning Department

 April 1990
