  From: Peter Edmundson                                      cc Mr O’Brien
        Operational Policing                                    Permanent Secretary
        Policy Unit                                             Mr Boys Smith
        Room 527, QAG                                           Mr Pugh
        » 273 2621                                              Mr Granatt
                                                                Mr Warner
                                                                Mr Owen

             16 June 1997


  1.        M r Michael

  2.        Home Secretary

 HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM THE MAYOR OF KNOWSLEY

 Issue

 Councillor George Howard, the Mayor o f Knowsley, has written in support of the
 campaign for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

 Timing

 2.   We suggest that you send an early reply to Mr Howard, in advance of the
 announcement of the independent examination of the alleged new evidence.

 Recommendation

 3.       That you reply as set out in the attached draft.

 Consideration

4.    The Mayor of Knowsley writes in support of the bereaved families campaign
and the Lord Mayor of Liverpool’s recent request for a new inquiry into the
Hillsborough tragedy.

5.    The attached draft reply follows the line that you have taken in previous
correspondence about the re-opening of the inquiry.

Handling/Presentation

6.        There are no additional handling considerations.




                                         Peter Edmundson



f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mjw-0096.doc
  DRAFT LETTER TO THE MAYOR OF KNOWSLEY FOR HOME
  SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

 Thank you for your letter of 3 June in support of recent calls for a new public inquiry
 into the Hillsborough disaster.


 I am currently considering what action to take in response to the representations which
 have been made for a fresh inquiry. I have been following the families’ campaign for a
 new inquiry closely, and since the broadcast of the television drama about the disaster
 in December I have had the opportunity to meet some of the members of the
 Hillsborough Families Support Group.


 I am very conscious of the strength of feeling on this issue and will make an
 announcement as soon as I can.




f:\oppu\complnts\shortsub\mjw-0096.doc
                c ~<     M"




                                       KNOWSLEY
                                       M E T R O P O L I T A N   B O R O U G H



                                       THE MAYOR’S OFFICE




                                                                                   3rd June 1997
                                                                                                     v»
                                                                                                      «->
                                                                                                             ms
                   The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                                                                       0ic
                   Home Secretary                                                                                  12.(4
                   Queen Anne’s Gate
                   London SW1H 9AT




                   Dear Mr Straw

                   I write in support of recent calls for a new public inquiry into the Hillsborough
                   disaster.                ,
                                                                       v_


                  I was Chairman of Social Services at the time of the tragedy and attended a l T s f ^ -
                  funerals which took place in the Knowsley area. As you can imagine it was a very sad
                  time for everyone on Merseyside and it certainly left a marked impression on me.

                  Since my election as Mayor o f the Borough o f Knowsley I have been approached by
                  bereaved families in the area to add my support to the Mayor of Liverpool’s request
                  for a fresh enquiry.

                  I ask that you give urgent attention to this matter and I am hopeful that you will reach
                  a favourable decision in the very near future.


                  Yours sincerely




                  Cllr George Howard
                  M ayor of Knowsley




Municipal Buildings    Archway Road   Huylon   Knowsley   Merseyside   L36 9YU   Tel 0151 443 3478   Fax   0151 443 3507
