APPENDIX 10


Ten ‘unresolved’ questions?


1.     At the time of the ‘Hillsborough’ television programme in 1996 the
       programme makers, Granada Television, identified in a letter to Mr David
       Maclean MP, then a Minister at the Home Office, what they said were ten
       unresolved questions about the disaster. Eight of these questions were
       addressed quite plainly by Lord Taylor. He answered them in as far as
       answers are possible, and I think the answers he gave were right.

2.     Lord Taylor did not specifically cover the other two questions. But the
       answers to them are again in my view quite evident.

3.     I set all ten questions out below, together with some discussion of them which
        I have mainly taken from Lord Taylor’s interim report. Collectively they
        point to the ‘failure o f police control’ which Lord Taylor concluded, and I
        agree, was the main cause of the disaster (paragraph 278 of his interim report).


Whv was Chief Superintendent David Due ken fie Id put in charge o f a major semi-final
nnlv 21 davs before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced at policing
matches? .

4.     Lord Taylor gives a clear account of this aspect of the disaster. He said in his
       interim report

               ‘At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control o f Chief
               Superintendent Mole, then Commander o f F Division within whose
               area Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 March 1989 when
               the FA broached the 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over
               command o f F Division on 27 March to Superintendent Duckenfield on
               the latter’s promotion to Chief Superintendent. Both were present at
               an initial meeting on 22 March, but on 27 March Mr Mole bowed out
               and Mr Duckenfield took o ver.... It might have been wiser to have left
               Mr Mole in charge o f this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
               understandable that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take
               command o f events in his Division from the date o f his promotion’
                (paragraphs 47 and 275).
Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build-up
outside the Leppings Lane end o f the ground i f as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

5.      There is a conflict between the evidence of the police and that of supporters.
        The fans say that in 1988 the police operated barriers and cordons along
        Leppings Lane to filter out those without tickets and control the flow of
        people towards the ground. The police say they did not. Both fans and
        police however agree that there were no such barriers or cordons in 1989.
        Lord Taylor examined this question. He concluded

                "As to 1988, there was a very large and consistent body o f evidence
                that, on the day, the police in Leppings Lane conducted an efficient
               filtering exercise      I do not believe that so many witnesses without
                either opportunity or reason to put their heads together could be
                mistaken about what they experienced on that occasion. Yet the police
                maintain that no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was
                carried out in 1988 and that their policy and practice then were no
                different from those o f 1989. The answer .... m ust.... be that whilst
                the policy was no different, in practice the policing in 1988 was more
                efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a year later
                (interim report, paragraphs 214 and 215).


 Why was the game not delaved, as a number o f police officers thought it should have
 heen. when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool
fans safely into the ground before the 3 p.m. kick-off?

6.      Lord Taylor examined this issue also. He gives his answer at paragraphs 226
        and 227 of his interim report.

               ‘At various stages in his evidence (at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry) Mr
               Duckenfield gave three accounts o f why he thought it too late to
               postpone kick-off. Once it was that one o f the teams had already come
               onto the pitch. Then it was that a group o f photographers at the
               tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out.
               Finally, he did not know why he thought the teams were coming out.
               They did not in fa ct come onto the pitch until 2.54 p.m., two minutes
               after Gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked fo r a
               postponement o f the kick-off before Gate C was opened. It should not,
               however, have needed a Police Constable in the thick o f the crowd
                (and there were others o f like mind) to think ofpostponing the kick-off.
                The need should have been clear in the control room.

                The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had
                discussed with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be delayed unless there
                were some major cause fo r delayed arrivals, eg a jam on the motorway
                or fo g .... Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous,
              crowd safety should have been the first consideration. Kick-off should
              have been delayed’.


Whv didn ’t the police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson. were aware o f the problems
fifteen minutes before kick-off?

7.     This again is a question which Lord Taylor discusses in his interim report.
       He has a chapter about it (Chapter 13). He concludes

              ‘As the stream from Gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in
              the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3
              and 4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position
              through their window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was
              the zoom facility on the TV camera ... pens 3 and 4 became more and
              more crowded, surges took place, fans were showing and signalling
              distress. None o f this was seen or recognised in the control room ....

              ... the combination o f no instructions (to police) as to overcrowding
              and a strong prohibition on opening the gates (from the pens onto the
              perimeter track) was likely to make police recognition o f crushing slow
              and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
              between 2.50p.m. and 2.59p.m. went unheeded or certainly
              unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the
              rule required the consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be
              opened....

              Naturally, one would hope that common sense and humanity would
              make some officers cut through the rules and open a gate i f fans were
              clearly in distress...

                This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress
               and even then not immediately... there was a period during which the
              failure to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it
               caused vital time to be lost ’ (interim report paragraphs 244 to 248).

8.     Elsewhere in his interim report Lord Taylor says (paragraph 78)

               7« the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything
               amiss in pens 3 and 4 until the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter
               track just before kick-off. Then, the officers in command assumed that
               there was an attempted pitch invasion
Why wasn ’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s semi- final?

9.     Lord Taylor’s interim report says (paragraph 230)

                ‘Since pens 3 and 4 were fu ll by 2.50 p.m.. the tunnel should have been
                closed o ff whether Gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was
                a simple one and had been carried out in 1988. All that was
                necessary was fo r a few officers to act as a cordon to the tunnel and
                divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately the 1988 closure seems to have
                been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not
               figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
               planning fo r 1989\


Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary o f the FA bv telling
him that fans had forced open Gate C. when the officer knew he had given the order
for it to be opened?

10.    Lord Taylor says of this (paragraphs 283 and 284 of his interim report) that

               ‘Most surprisingly (Mr Duckenfield) gave Mr Kelly and others to think
               that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing open a
               gate. This was not only untruthful. It set o ff a widely reported
               allegation against the supporters which caused grave offence and
               distress .... I can only assume Mr Duckenfield’s lack o f candour on
               this occasion was out o f character. He said his reason fo r not telling
               the truth was that i f the crowd became aware o f it there might be a
               very hostile reaction and this might impede rescue work He did not
               wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
               officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the truth did not require
               that he be told a falsehood. Moreover, although Assistant Chief
                Constable Jackson was at hand, Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the
               truth to him until much later.

                The likeliest explanation o f Mr Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply
                could not face the enormity o f the decision to open the gates and all
                that flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to Mr Kelly,
                what he did not say to Mr Jackson, his aversion to addressing the
                crowd, and his failure to take effective control o f the disaster situation.
                He froze ’.
 Why did it take ha lf an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10 foot
spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch
too small to he effective in an emergency evacuation?

11.    The sequence of events is clear from Lord Taylor’s interim report. He says
       that

               ‘At about 3.10 p.m. a request came from the perimeter fence fo r bolt
               croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police
               garage close by without success. At 3.13 p.m., PC Bichard requested
               Headquarters to call the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
               equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance .... fire appliances arrived
               at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road at 3.22 p. m. At both
               entrances their arrival surprised police who were uninformed as to
               why they had been called or where they should go ....

               At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency
                tender and station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a
                crew. The emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
               stand but owing to its height was unable to proceed fu rth er.... Mr
                Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying
                cutting equipment and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the
               fence, the cutting equipment was not required as by then the last o f the
                dead and injured were being removed from the p e n s ’ (interim
                report, paragraphs 101-104).

               ‘ The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
               intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder
               or an emergency. The kind o f emergency contemplated was not
               massive crushing but, fo r example, the collapse or illness o f an
               individual.... The need to provide fo r speedy and large scale
               evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was not anticipated’
               (interim report, paragraphs 258-9).


 Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
 w as happening asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the sm m d Ja
 help, until 3.30?

 12.    Lord Taylor’s interim report says

                ‘Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for
                medical assistance about 3.30p.m., no information or advice was
                broadcast on the public address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that
                the crowd might turn hostile or might all attempt to leave together
                thereby hampering the emergency services i f they were given
                information about what had happened. The result was that apart from
                those close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth fo r
              themselves, the majority o f the crowd were left in ignorance' (interim
              report, paragraph 97).

13.   Lord Taylor had more to say about Mr Duckenfield’s reluctance to address the
       crowd at paragraph 284 of his interim report. I have quoted that above.


Whv. when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not pet on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained medical help?

14.   As I mentioned when discussing the rescue operation in Chapter 3 of this
      report, Lord Taylor made it quite clear that ‘no valid criticism can be made o f
      the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS (the South
      Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service) or the fire brigade ... I fin d that
      all three ... services.... responded promptly when alerted, that they brought
      appropriate equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently'' (interim
      report, paragraphs 296/7).

15.   The video evidence is that three ambulances went onto the pitch, one St John
      Ambulance and two SYMAS. They drove very slowly because of the large
      crowds of people moving about. It would have been impracticable for
       substantially larger numbers of ambulances to have come onto the playing
       area. There was only one route for them on and off, which was also being
      used by fans and police carrying the dead and injured off the pitch towards the
       gymnasium and would have formed a bottleneck.

16.   It would have been extremely difficult for triaging to take place on the pitch
       given the chaotic conditions there. The gymnasium, which was used instead,
       was the only practicable alternative for those victims who had been brought
       out from the front of the Leppings Lane pens. In the circumstances it was
       quicker for victims to be taken there in the way that they were, on stretchers
       and improvised stretchers, that it would have been to use fleets of ambulances.
       As it was the ambulances were mainly used to take injured people from the
       gymnasium to hospital. I think that this was in the circumstances the most
       effective way of using them.


Why did only 14 o f those who died go to hospital?

17.   Part of the gymnasium at the ground was used as a temporary mortuary and
       the bodies remained there for some hours until they were removed to the
       Medico-Legal Centre at Watery Lane, Sheffield, where the post-mortems were
       carried out. I have dealt in Chapter 5 of this report with suggestions that
       people were confirmed as being dead on the basis of insufficient examination.
       It is clear that this was not the case. The bleak but simple truth - one of many
       bleak truths about that terrible day - is that the ambulances were better used to
       take the injured to hospital rather than the dead.
