     l>              \       CITY             OF                 LIVERPOOL
     y/K F L ocalAuthority
     BUILDING
                             Hi|D               L N. BUSH, F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M.I.Struct.E., F.I.A.S.,

     CONTROL                 w Mm.              CITY BUILDING SURVEYOR,
                                                5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                Liverpool L3 2AJ.   Direct Line 225 3395
                                                                  227 3911
                    APSU/LNB/LS                 Telephone: 051XX3&2281              Ext:  j 395
     Our ref:                                   Facsimile: 051                     225 3886
     Your ref:                                  Date:     26th May> 1989


     The Secretary to the Hillsborough Inquiry,
     Room 662,
     50 Queen Anne's Gate,
     London,
     SW1H 9AT


     Dear S i r ,                                            J     K . J       '     v    -   .    c      .

         Hillsborough Disaster

         I understand that Lord Justice Taylor wishes to receive submissions, in                          Jj
         connection with the above, from experts in safety at football grounds,                           I
         which might assist him in making recommendations to avoid a repeat of the
         above tragedy. Accordingly, I am concerned to provide him with any
         assistance, advice, or information I can, as a result of my own experience,
         in the control-of such safety. The City Go :,cil, by which I am employed;
         has instructed me to assist the Inquiry and any of those legal experts
         concerned with it, in any way possible.

         I have discussed the Hillsborough tragedy with a local group of
         solicitors acting in the matter, which they call the Hillsborough
         Steering Committee. The Chairperson of that Committee, Miss E.M. Steel
         of Messrs. Cuff Roberts North Kirk, Solicitors, of Liverpool, thought it
         imperative to produce a statement from me, some few days ago, to be
         placed before the Inquiry, before a certain deadline for witness
         statements expired. You will therefore have had such a statement
         covering the matter generally, which I hope you will find helpful. In
         making this further submission, I want to concentrate more on the kind
         and standards of safety precautions which I consider ought to be taken,
         that appear to me to be relevant to the causes of the many deaths at
         Hillsborough.

           urs faithfully,




                Building Surveyor.




NBAABJ
                                           Mr. L.N. Bush
 SUBMISSION OF LESLIE NORMAN BUSH




 1.    My qualifications as a Chartered Surveyor and Chartered Structural

       Engineer will be seen from the letter enclosing this submission.- I have

       been employed by Liverpool City Council for over 38 years, in the City

         Building Surveyor's Department, which is responsible for enforcing

         statutory standards of design and construction for buildings and other

         premises, both for general use and for those specific purposes which

         require a formal approval, certification or licence.    During the last 21

         years of that employment, I have been concerned personally with the

         suitability of such special buildings and premises.     That work has

         included advising the City Justices on suitability for licensing premises

         under the Licensing Act 1964 and the Gaming Acts.     I also advise the

         Licensing Sub-Committee of the City Council, which licenses places of

         entertainment.



  2.     Through that last-mentioned Committee, I presently have delegated to me

         the City Council's duties set out in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act

         1975, including maintaining up-to-date Safety Certificates and all the

         necessary monitoring of compliance and any enforcement necessary in

         respect of the two large and well-used First Division football grounds of

         Liverpool and Everton.   Prior to the City Council acquiring full respons­

         ibility for this matter, on the abolition of the Merseyside County Council

         in March 1986, I had been concerned wth both of those grounds since 1971,

         when at that time the clubs themselves were responsible for providing a

         form of Safety Certificate to the Football League, and had been encouraged

          to involve Local Authorities in that responsibility.    Thus when the Act of

          1975 was passed, and preparations were being made to certify those two

          grounds, arrangements were made with the County Solicitor, who was




NBAABE
delegated the responsibility by the County Council, for my Department to

continue to take care of the design, construction and maintenance of

facilities in the interest of the safety of spectators.



I was not at the Hillsborough Ground on Saturday 15th April last, but

followed the events by radio and television from about 3.00 p.m. through

the remainder of that day, and ever since.      My Principal Assistant - 1

               I- who has submitted evidence to the Inquiry through West

Midlands Police, was present, and on the following day, Sunday morning, we

discussed the disaster on the telephone, and he made arrangements with the

Police at Sheffield for us to visit the ground late that afternoon.         We

were shown to the ground by Superintendent Murray, who told me that he had

been in the Boliicer. Control- Room,- situated overlooking the Leppings; tafte ^ ■

end of the ground.    I spent several hours looking round the relevant areas

to familiarise myself with the layout and facilities. I have returned to
      e
Hillsborough on two further occasions, on Wednesday 19th April and again

on Friday 19th May, with a party of City Councillors who were members of a

working party dealing wth the effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the

local community.



Immediately before my second visit to the ground, on the 19th April, I

joined in a meeting with Sheffield City Councillors and Officers, which

had been arranged to establish contact and to clarify some of the

questions which had arisen about the circumstances of the disaster, as far

as that was possible in the prevailing atmosphere at that date.         As a

result of those visits and the contact with Officers of Sheffield Council,

I have had prepared a diagrammatic drawing of the whole of the

Hillsborough Ground and a larger scale drawing of the relevant West End,

between the pitch and Leppings Lane.      A copy of both those drawings is
attached to this submission, and it is upon the information contained on

those that I base some of my observations which follow.



In addition to the above, I have discussed the disaster with a number of

eye witnesses, including two others of my staff, apart from my

A s s i s t a n t I .      One of those,                    was seated with

            in the North Stand when the disaster occurred, and the other,

                 "~|7~was in one of the fateful enclosures at the West End,

but fortunately escaped serious injury by being helped and hauled up from

the back of the terrace, into the seated area of the West Stand.



From the above knowledge and experience, together with my understanding of

the pattern of events leading to die loss of life at Hillsborough; I feel’

it may be useful to explain how the relevant safety factors have been

dealt with by me at the Anfield and Goodison Park football grounds.        At

the same time, I would comment on any significant differences between

those practices and the ones apparent at Hillsborough.



It seems absolutely clear that the prime cause of the deaths and injuries

on the two centre sections of terraces at the West End at Hillsborough was

the gross overcrowding of those areas.     I believe that the General Safety

Certificate for the ground permits a capacity of 1,100 spectators in each

of the two spaces concerned, and that that is based on the area available,

approximately in accordance with the recommendation of the Guide to Safety

at Sports Grounds, which is the Code of Practice produced by the Home

Office to assist in the administration of the 1975 Act.      That "Green

Guide" recommends a density of no more .than 54 persons per 10 sq. metres

 in standing areas.     It is possible to pack a crowd to a higher density

 than that quite safely.    That has been done on terraces at Anfield and
                                        - 4 -




     Goodison Park to some advantage, favoured by the Police, because it

     reduces movement within those areas, and thereby assists in preventing

     misbehaviour in or by the crowd.   A density of up to 60 per 10 sq. metres

     has been found reasonable and acceptable.   A greater density, up to 70,

     tends to lock the crowd together approaching a solid state, but does not

     in itself, subject to the existence of adequate and well-positioned crush

     barriers, cause injuries, even during the excitement and tendency towards

     swaying, caused by the events of the football match.   Any further

     increases in crowd density, especially where the crowd is subject to

     further pressure, due to lineable gaps in crush barriers, or the sudden

     arrival of more spectators on the terrace could cause injury.   If that

     figure is considerably exceeded, as Hillsborough has proved, pressures on

     spectators could become so high as to cause death.                         •



8.   No doubt it will be possible to count the approximate number of spectators

     on the two central West End enclosures concerned, using pictures produced

     from still photographs and video recordings of the disaster.    I expect

     that such a count will show that the crowd was packed at a density of well

     over 70 at the material time.   I understand that a considerable number of

     deaths were caused by crushing within the tunnel/gangway which led on to

     the two terraces concerned, through the West Stand.    Meanwhile, the

     density of spectators in the other three areas of standing terrace at the

     West End and the North-west corner, appeared to me, from television and

     press photographs, to have been very much below the maximum recommended

     density of 54 per 10 sq. metres.   Here again, I expect that an approximate

     count of persons present on those other terraces at the relevant time will

     be made from photographs and video pictures, for the benefit of the

     Inquiry.
It is fundamental to safety that the numbers permitted into each separate

enclosure at a football ground, are best controlled by being positively

counted by passing through a turnstile, which gives access only to one

enclosure.     The counting at each turnstile should be recorded at one or

more central control points, and all turnstiles connecting with any

particular enclosure should be aggregated at the central counter or

computer, so that an accurate record is kept of numbers entering the

enclosure during the filling of the ground.     That arrangement should

prevent any spectator from entering a different enclosure to that

allocated to him by his payment or ticket and from changing enclosures

during his stay at the ground.     This positively prevents overcrowding of

any area, and such arrangements exist in Liverpool at the Anfield Ground

and also for over 92% of Goodison Park.



Any departure from these entry arrangements should be permitted only on a

small scale, and in very carefully controlled circumstances.     It needs to

be accompanied by a completely adequate and experienced club stewarding

and Policing operation.     That operation needs to include the constant

monitoring of the packing of those terraces not subject to positive

control through turnstile counting.     Such an arrangement exists, in a

small way, at Goodison Park for the Visitors' terrace, which has a total

capacity of 3,700 standing.     That terrace is divided into two pens, one

being about one third of the total area and the other being the remaining

 two thirds.    For most matches during a season, only one or other of these

pens are open, and then a count of spectators passing through turnstiles

 is possible to control positively the numbers entering that area.    When

 both parts of the terrace are in use, some balance of packing is ensured

 because there are five turnstiles opposite the largest portion, and three

 opposite the other part. It is however possible for persons passing
through either of these two batches of turnstiles to make their way to the

part not immediately opposite to them.            To guard against that causing

uneven packing, it is necessary to have Crowd Stewards with a full

understanding of their duties, which includes monitoring the packing of

each part and communicating to Stewards and the Police, on duty in the

Concourse between the turnstiles and the Terrace, when the entrance to

either of the two parts needs to be closed, either temporarily whilst

uneven packing is remedied, or permanently when one of the parts is

considered to be full.



It is clear to me that the preferred arrangement, of linking turnstiles

exclusively to each separate enclosure, was not practised at the West End

of Hillsborough.            There are clearly insufficient turnstiles for the

staniirig:"terraced"dfc' that:«ftd4*©§5thte ground, which ! willicomment upotr      •

    further later.        Therefore there is a positive need at this ground, because

    of the large number of 10,100 standing spectators, permitted to choose any

    one of the five separate pens at the West End, after gaining common access

    to the open concourse at the rear of the West Stand, to monitor, direct

    and control the numbers entering each of those separate enclosures.           That

    calls for a thoroughly organised and adequate number of Club Stewards,

    assisted by a similar force of in ground uniformed Police.         It appears

    that no such provision was made by the Club in liaison with the Police, or

    s p e c ifie d   to be necessary in the General Safety Certificate, for which the

    Sheffield City Council are responsible.



\ Stewarding at football grounds is throughout, a most important factor in
!
    ensuring the safety of spectators.         It is a matter of detailed need, which

    was once generally neglected by the majority of designated grounds'

Lmanagements.            The work of stewarding was often carried out by volunteers,
                                                      - 7 -




             insufficiently instructed and briefed about their duties, and frequently

             neglectful of them.      It was commonly considered to be a convenient way of

             obtaining a free view of the football.           It was clear to me following the

             Bradford disaster and the Popplewell Reports, that stewarding^ought to be
                                                               ^                   ..
             covered very thoroughly and written into Safety Certificates in total

             detail.   Every steward should be physically capable and adequately

             trained, with regular updating, to perform his prescribed duties.




     13.     At the Anfield ground of Liverpool F.C., which has a total capacity for

^            45,685 spectators, Pages 13-21 inclusive of the General Safety Certificate

             are devoted to this subject.        A total of 116 Stewards are required, apart

             from the Head Steward, solely for safety purposes (more are employed by

             the Club for other reasons).        There are Exit Stewards, Relief Exit

             3 tfewards V •Crowd •Sfe^arjds^ ands Saf e ty ■S tewards, <?ach -given 3t,§obce^ ict'ffi'

             specification and regularly addressed by the Head Steward about their

             duties.    In addition, two meetings a year are held, when they are

             addressed by, and their work is fruitfully discussed with, an officer of

             my own Department and representatives of the Police, the Fire Authority

             and the St. John Ambulance Brigade.          The General Safety Certificate for

             Goodison Park - Everton F.C.         -   which has a capacity for 50,059

              spectators, similarly devotes Pages 15-24 inclusive to the matter of

              stewarding, and there is a total of 115 Stewards employed, apart from the

              Head Steward and Exits Controller.         Again, the Stewards are divided into

              four categories and each Steward has a job specification and is assigned

              to a particular location or part of the ground.            Twice yearly meetings

              are also held at Everton.       I think it would be useful for Lord Justice

              Taylor to examine the Safety Certificates for these two grounds, to see

              these details, in order that he may compare them with the provision for

              stewarding which was specified in the General Safety Certificate for the




    NBAABE
Hillsborough Ground.



Where there is a large standing terrace which is sub-divided into separate

enclosures or pens, and entry into each pen is left to the choice of

spectators, I earlier explained the great risk of unequal packing, which

demands careful attention by the club and the certifying authority.      That

need is not confined to sub-divided terraces.     It is possible to get some

degree of unequal packing on any large terrace, and the problem is always

in need of attention.    At Goodison Park there is a home supporters'

undivided terrace with a capacity of 14,200, and at Anfield there is a

similar terrace (Spion Kop) with a capacity of 21,500 standing.      Uneven

packing in these terraces has occurred from time to time, and has been

traced back to such causes as the preference of spectators for certain

parts of ..the terxace, .and also ,to the popular choice of turps£ile|s serving

the various points of entry on to the terrace.     Although, on such a large

undivided terrace, there is no physical restriction to the redistribution

of the crowd, there is a reluctance by spectators to move if they have

 located themselves in what they consider to be a choice viewing position.

That can have an accumulative effect, so that the mere reluctance to move

 can cause overpacking some little distance away, which can become

 uncomfortable and aggravating, but is not very likely to be the cause

 of any injury.
   \_______

 What those experiences have pointed to, is the need for diligent attention

 to all possible influences on the choice of position by those spectators,

 from their point of entry into the ground at a turnstile, to their final

 viewing position.     I have looked at these infuences in the case of the

 West End of the Hillsborough Ground, and consider many of them to be

 obvious with little experience and therefore worthy of attention, which it
                                                  - 9 -




              is now apparent they did not receive.




     16.      Persons entering the Hillsborough ground^ to stand on any of the West End

              terracing, have to pass through one of the group of seven turnstiles

              allocated for that purpose, nearest to the River Don boundary wall at the

              Leppings Lane Entrance.   They are unlikely to be familiar with the ground,

              because the West End terracing is habitually used by visiting supporters

              That was the case at the F.A. Cup semi-final tie on the 15th April last.

              Therefore, they find themselves in a large concourse at the back of the


*             West Stand, and the only route on to the terraces which can be seen from

              that position, and is clearly signposted to lead to the terracing, is the

              passageway through the centre of the West Stand, which is marked as

              Gangway 2.   In fact the pitch can be seen through that tunnel, although

              because the floor firs,t rises slightly and the,n» ialjs..;rapidly, at-a    -

              similar slope to the terrace beyond, they are not able to see the state of

              occupation of the terracing.    There is no other readily visible way on to

              the West End terrace from that point.




•     1 7 •
              Gangway 1 at the south east corner of that yard has a small high-level

               sign fixed to a column,which reads "STANDING", in approximately 6" high

               letters, which might be noticed by anyone    entering through the turnstiles,

               if they paused to survey the area.     It is not likely to be seen by persons

               in a hurry, or in competiton with the clear indication of an entrance to

               the ground through the central tunnel previously mentioned.      On the left

               of persons entering through the relevant turnstiles is a comparatively new

               brick wall, which although it is provided with a gated opening, the gates

               in which were fully open on the day of the disaster, has no sign inviting

               spectators to move through that opening.     On the whole that wall tends to

               discourage spectators from moving into the Northern part of the concourse




    NBAABE
                                            -   10-




         at the rear of the West Stand.    However, one needs to move well into that

         Northern part, before you could begin to realise that there is a gap

         between the West Stand and the refreshment bars in the far corner of the           ■

         concourse, which might well lead to a viewing area.     There would still be

         no visible indication of that by signposting, until you had moved further

         North to explore the possibility and had reached the North end of the West

         Stand building.

 18.     To expect spectators, hurriedly entering the ground through one of the

         seven turnstiles allocated for the West End terraces, to find and use

         gangways 1, 3 or 4, rather than gangway 2, without signposting or positive

         guidance from Stewards, especially shortly before the start of the match,

         is not reasonable.   Considering that that was readily appreciable with

         little expertise, it is surprising that no remedial provisions were made

         before a fuM-'Ca^aeifcy matchv ® Such provisions,-oughtvtoJiave«iiiclji#e4«    ^ -

         clear signposting, accompanied by a number of Club Stewards monitoring the

         packing of the terraces from the pitch perimeter, in radio contact with a

         generous number of Stewards at the rear of the West Stand, to guide and

          direct spectators accordingly.   The Stewards at the rear of the stand

          would need support from in ground uniformed Police, in case spectators

          were not prepared to take direction from Club Stewards.     This arrangement

          would have ensured that the two central enclosures, which is an area which

          is always most popular because it is immediately behind the goal and

          generally first to be filled, were closed to entry when they were safely

          filled.



  19.     I suggested earlier, that one of the contributory causes of the fatal

          over-packing of the two central enclosures of the West End terrace, was

          the speed with which this occurred, around the time of the kick-off.         It

          has been established by video recording, that this was caused by the




NBAABE
opening of the shutter gate alongside the seven turnstiles admitting

spectators to those terraces.   That brought a mass of spectators into the

concourse at the rear, who were faced with the situation described above,

which led them, logically, to the central tunnel known as Gangway 2.      It

goes without saying, that the opening of exit gates to permit an

uncontrolled and uncounted surge of spectators into any ground should

never occur.   Entry through turnstiles only, and keeping exit gates

closed, to prevent surging entry, is absolutely fundamental to safety.

The opening of that same gate earlier, to eject ticketless intending

spectators who had climbed over the wall, which I understand has been

shown on the video recording, must be condemned for the same reason.

However, at least the final opening of the gate may have been justified,

in the opinion of a Police Officer who was attempting to control the crowd

outside the ground, because ,p.f. a combination pf ^ yisk .of injury from. ,

crushing, due to the density of that crowd, and also because the

high boundary wall to the ground, adjacent to the gate was thought to be

unstable and possibly in danger of collapse.



 I noted on my last visit to the Hillsborough ground, on 19th May, that a

 very extensive length of that boundary wall, reaching from the gate in

 question, down almost to the South Stand, had been thoroughly propped and

 held by raking shores, bolted to the wall and bolted to the ground inside.

 That would suggest that this wall had been confirmed to be in a seriously

 and extensively dangerous structural condition.     Having regard to the

 construction of the wall along that full length, and to the fact that

 probably there have been no unusual forces applied to that wall

 accidentally in the recent past, one is bound to enquire when the wall was

 last previously examined at a routine safety check.     The General Safety

 Certificate for the ground will no doubt specify the maximum interval
between such periodic examinations.      I think it is relevant to ask why the

wall was not found to be dangerous t9 some extent before 15th April last,

if it is accepted that its condition was indeed a contributory cause of

the disaster.



Another contributory cause of the disaster was the crowd conditions

which developed in the Leppings Lane recessed area outside the ground.

The disorganised massing of Liverpool supporters at this point has been

blamed on a number of factors, none of which were exceptional or

unpredictable, in all the circumstances before and immediately preceding

the disaster.     The delays involved in getting the large number of

approximately 24,600 spectators into the ground through a total of only 23

turnstiles, in that funnel-shaped dead-end condition, ought to have been

the4 starting point for- th e .design of .recommended approach E O & f c e s »   .>*.tKm-

indeed for deciding whether the ground was suitable for a full capacity

gate at all.     It is relevant to note that this situation was worsened, by

a deliberate decision to restrict entry to this area and to 23 turnstiles

and not to use 10 other turnstiles in Penistone Road North, which were

normally allocated to North Stand spectators.



 The matter of access to football grounds is very relevant to safety, and

 Paragraph 5 of the "Green Guide" is devoted to the subject, albeit fairly

 shortly.     The rate of entry through turnstiles does differ widely, and

 depends on what has to be done by, and the speed of individual turnstile

 operators.     Entry by payment which involves giving change, can slow the

 rate down to as low as 4 or 5 persons per minute.        There are other

 influences; for turnstiles which admit only O.A.P's., or parent and child,

 which tend to slow the rate down, or conversely at normal matches, season

 ticket holders may be moved through at a very brisk rate.
                                                       -   13-




 23.     In my experience, the maximum rate quoted at the end of Paragraph 47 of

         the "Green Guide" of 750 persons per hour (12.5 per minute) is not often

         achievable.              Most clubs, including the two in Liverpool, have

         experienced staff responsible for ticket sales and admission fees

         accounting, who are very knowledgeable in this aspect of ingress to

         grounds.           They are generally members of the permanent staff, and

         therefore, although Hillsborough is not a ground which regularly

         experiences full, or even high capacity attendances, I would have expected

         advice on this subject from the club to have been sought by the Police

         responsible for any arrangements made outside the ground.



  24.    Spectators will not arrive two hours before a match, unless pre-match

         s a fc & r ta iiu n e n £ - is ,            ap. a l l ~ t i c k e t m a tc h -,   th e r e   is , a n a p p a r e n t -

         guarantee of a space, and it can be expected that they will arrive mostly

         in the last hour to half an hour before the kick-off, unless attracted in

        ""some way to come earlier.             I have noted that the tickets for the relevant

         Hillsborough match advised spectators to be in their seats only 15 minutes

         before kick-off, but gave no indication of what time they needed to arrive

         at the ground in order to do that.                 The maximum rates of flow through

         turnstiles, which varies, according to circumstances, from say 4 to 10

         persons per minute is only achievable when there is a steady queue

          outside.            It is not sensible to expect that 2 hours, or even li hours,

         before the kick-off.               Thus in assessing the total number of spectators

          each turnstile can deal with at a full capacity match, you should not work

          on full possible flow for the whole of the period they are open.                                         For an

          all-ticket match, a reasonable compromise expectation for the number of

          turnstiles needed would be 1 for about every 600/750                                spectators.




NBAABE
                                                      -   14-




     25-      The 23 turnstiles provided at the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough were

              divided and signposted for use into groups, 8 for the North Stand, 8 for

              the seated West Stand, and 7 only for the West End terraces (including the

              North West corner high level terrace).            That requires passage by a total

              of 1,250 persons, 563 persons and 1,443 persons per turnstile in each of

              those groups, respectively.         The first and last of these figures are

              clearly very much in      excess of those desirable and could be expected to

              produce a serious need for extensive crowd control, including orderly and

              carefully kept queues, outside the ground.            Alternatively, the above might

              have brought a decision to provide pre-match entertainment, or the choice

              of a better venue at another football ground.



      26.     My understanding is that queueing was not part of the organisation outside

      «■-<    the Hillsborough- ground* on-■th<is>*£>cca s ion .   Therefore,

               gates to ease congestion and allow ticket holders into the ground for both

               the North Stand and the West End terraces, was to be expected.           No mention

               has been made of any opening of the shutter gate adjacent to the North

               Stand 8 turnstiles, but I should think that this gate must have been

4)    •'       opened also, to admit the numbers required before kick-off.            There has

               been no report that large numbers of North Stand spectators were not in

               their place by 3.00      p.m.   Such an opening of that gate, whilst most

               undesirable as part      of any thorough organisation, would not attract      the

               same risks of overcrowding and/or injury within the ground.



        27.    The pitch perimeter fencing, in front of the West End terraces have been

               blamed for the magnitude of the disaster.            They were not, however, the

                readily avoidable prime cause, or one of the contributory causes leading

                to it discussed in the foregoing.          At Hillsborough these fences were

                difficult to climb.      Persons pressed against them, and the concrete




     NBAABE
                                             - 15-




         retaining wall below, for their full height, by the crowd behind, found it

         impossible, generally, to pull themselves up the fence and escape that

         way.    Gates in that fence are small and minimal in size and number and

         never intended to afford rapid evacuation of numbers from the terraces.



 28.     Such fences went up at most grounds in the 1970's,when bad behaviour at

         football matches saw many incursions onto the pitch.    There was

         understandable fear for the safety of players and match officials, and

         some cases of rival fans clashing.    It is not practicable for stewards and

         Police to prevent a pitch invasion once more than a few spectators leave

         an enclosure.    The F.A. and U.E.F.A. reacted by pressing clubs for pitch

         perimeter fencing and disciplining clubs where pitch invasions occurred.

         Some clubs did not erect such fences, but massively increased their in

         ground uniformed Police presence.



  29.    This problem was identified in both Lord Wheatley's and Mr. Popplewell's

         reports of 1972 and 1985.    They accepted their need, as the lesser of two

          evils, but said they should have gates or access points for use in an

          emergency.   The last report urged a standard design and specification be

          prepared for them by the F.A., but that Association declined the

          responsibility.    Sadly, it would appear that the need for such fences, to

          contain fans in standing terraces, remains as strong today as it ever was.

          Events at football matches since Hillsborough, point to that fact.    My

          only further comment on this matter is that gaps of good width__are_to be

          preferred to closeable gates. They can be used to allow Police, or medical

          assistance7~onfo^terraces quickly, and to remove sick or injured persons

          out.    In case of moderate local overpacking (mentioned earlier), they can

          be used to redistribute numbers at a reasonable pace. A reasonable number

          of in ground Police can stem a mass exodus through such openings.




NBAABE
I should just say that pitch invasions do not only come from terraces, but

they are generally the most numerous and dangerous.    Many pitch invasions

from seated areas are attributable to the entry of irresponsible persons

from outside the ground, when exit gates are opened    at i time, or at some

other period before full time.



There was a failure of parts of the crush barriers,installed in the

southernmost of the two central sections at the West End,where deaths

occurred at Hillsborough.   It is not possible to say whether that caused

   contributed to any of the deaths, but such a failure is potentially

dangerous, and ought not to occur.    However, the barrier may have been

subjected to loads in excess of those prescribed in    the "Green Guide", and

I understand that the Club's Structural    Engineerhas a regular programme

o£ testlug of crush barrier strengths at Hillsborough.    Visual examination

of the barriers in the two fateful enclosures,indicates that the majority

of them were of considerable age and showed corrosion and repair at the

base of the legs in many places.     However, it is not possible to judge

strength from that, and I have found that barriers have withstood the

 strenuous test specified in the "Green Guide", even when visual examinaton

 suggested excessive corrosion in the legs near the ground.    The layout of

 these barriers at Hillsborough was not totally in accordance with the

 recommendations of the "Green Guide".    The spaces behind some of them,to

 the back of the terrace and to the tunnel/gangway entrance point is

 excessive.   In addition, the heights of the barriers vary, and some of



 them are slightly above or below the figures recommended in the "Green

 Guide".
The safety of football grounds is a \joint operation between the club, the
   -x       ,                          ^   ------------ ^        ..
Local Authority responsible for the issue of the Safety Certificate and

the Police, with the Fire Authority contributing to problems involving

fire risks.     The T.ocal^ Authority probably has ^the^greatestjp^^      its

certification role, to influence the staftd*rd-s and leve-l~af^attentioir-pa-id'
                         ------------------------ y
to the matter. In my experience, a responsible Club and the Police,

welcome a detailed and constant control by the Local Authority.

Therefore, nothing encourages good practice all round,better than a

carefully prepared and detailed Safety Certificate, accompanied by firm

enforcement of its terms and conditions.        I have not had the opportunity

to examine the General Safety Certificate held by the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club, but I understand from my contact with Sheffield Council

Officers on my second visit to Hillsborough, that it remains very much as

it was inherited from the South Yorkshire County Council in 1986, except

for any alterations resulting from i.he extension of the South (Spion Kop)

 terrace.



Finally, I trust that it will not be considered presumptious of me to make

 a number of suggestions for recommendations to emerge from the Inquiry

 into this disaster.     I set these out below



 (a)    Certifying Local Authorities ought to be cautious about the General

        Safety Certificates which permit full capacities, where practice

        shows that those capacities are rarely achieved, because there is

        danger that the club's safety organisation will not remain at the

        high level needed to safely manage full attendances.



 (b)    Safety Certificates should include a condition that they do not hold

        good, without review, if the ground is to be used for a match
                                             - 18-




                involving two visiting teams and an expected full capacity gate.



         (c)    Any review undertaken under the last recommended condition should,

                include the three principal parties to safety, and must co-ordinate

                the planning and control for overall safety, inside the ground with

                that outside the ground.



         (d)    The review recommended by the last two paragraphs should result m        a

                refusal toaccept the unusual match concerned if all parties are not

                able to be satisfied about the total safety of spectators, both

                inside and outside the ground.



         (e) Stewarding, in all its aspects, should be very fully      specified and

                conditioned in the Safety Certificate (This follows the principle

                established in   Recommendation No. A12 of Chapter 6 of the Final

                Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell in January 1986).    These provisions

                 in the Safety Certificate should have regard to grounds which are

                habitually used for comparatively low attendances, and the number of

                 Stewards required is reduced on those many occasions.



          (f)    In order to refresh the sense of responsibility for safety at

                 football grounds by those parties concerned with the Safety

                 Certificates, there should be an annual review of such Certificates

                 in the same way as licences for other places of public entertainment,

                 drinking etc.   That should involve a clear duty   on the Local

                 Authority to inspect the premises annually, and    amend anythingthat

         y       is necessary on re—issuing the Certificate.



          (g)    There should also be a power for the certifying LocalAuthority      to




NBAABE
                                                                                             i
                                                 -   19-
  *» '•
i •-%<■ .* ►*


                    revoke a Safety Certificate at any time when the management and

                    appeal provisions set out in Sections 4 and 5 of the 1975 Act are not

                    appropriate to the needs of immediate safety for any event proposed.



                    (This and the previous recommendation is a repeat of the one

                    contained at item C9 of the Final Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell in

                    January 1986).




                       L. N. Busu




                26th May, 1989




^^B A A B E
