                               From: T h e P   r iv a t e   S ecretary


                                                                             H om e O ffic e
                                                                            QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                            LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                               JjI/-
                                               ^ m c                         0           1998

                                               fJU3

                                            f^w
                                           f-u-
                                           f a ^ Q u / 'L s
Margaret Aspinall,
                                          jtv (Ua^ uJA




                              )
Thank you for your letter of 1 December reminding the Home Secretary of your
question in Blackpool. The Home Secretary wrote to your colleague, Rose Robinson
on Monday to let her know the position on the issue of the funding by South
Yorkshire Police Authority of the defence costs of former Chief Superintendent David
Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard Murray in the private prosecution

brought against them.


There is discretion for a police authority to provide financial assistance to police
officers and former officers who face legal proceedings, which may include criminal
proceedings, arising out o f their service with the force. The decision whether to agree
to individual requests for funding is entirely one for the police authority concerned,
and the Home Secretary regrets that this is not a matter on which it would be
appropriate for him to comment, or intervene.




                                  CLARE SUMNER
                                                                        r e c e iv e d   - 8 D E C IS 38




                                                        QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT



                                      ^7- M r        H o w a n -h

The Rt Hon Frank Field MP                      Mr    O M and
House of Commons                               H M C iC
LONDON
                                               (Mr B ugler
SW1A OAA
                                               m s    U D C i^ ie r .
                                               M r    P u g h .

                                               Pei-er ^cbiunoson
                                               m r    (g c u le y
                                               (v^r cswen
                                               Mr bussed                     0 1 DEC 1938




I am writing by way of reply to your letter of 12 October on behalf of your constituent,
Mr Burkett and to clarify the arrangements for the publication of the documentary
material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the course of his scrutiny.

In my original statement to the House of Commons, I undertook to publish as much
of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible. This has now
been done and the material, which includes more than one thousand police officer
statements, has been placed in the House of Commons’ Library.

As you know, copies of the police statements have also been sent to the Family
Support Group. However, I was incorrect when I indicated recently that the material
had been or was being sent to the Liverpool Central Library (Official Report, 26
October 1998, Vol 318, Col 3). I misinformed myself and I am sorry for the
misunderstanding. Of course, it remains open to you to arrange for your constituent
to view the material in the House of Commons Library.

I am writing to Maria Eagle in similar terms and I am placing a copy of this letter in
the Library of the House.



                                  f    rr ^ , JLS as'
                                                        /
                                       s r .




                                      JACK STRAW
