                                                                                      DI B B L U P T O N
                                                                                      BROOMHEAD
                                                                                     ------------------S O L I C I T O R S-----------------

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6 Butts C ourt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Leeds LSI 5JX
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Telephone 0532 439301
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fax 0532 452632/428891
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Telex 557181
                                                                                                                                                                                                                M D X 12.017 Leeds




                                                                                                                                                                                                   6 July 1989

                         R. M. Whalley, Esq.,
                         Secretary to the Inquiry into
                        llhe Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                         50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                         LONDON,
                         SW1H 9AT.

                         Dear Sir,
                         Hillsborough Inquiry
                         Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
                         We refer to our telephone conversation with Kate Humphries
                         this afternoon when we indicated that there may be one or two
                         amendments to Section III of our client's closing statement.
                         However, in order to comply with the time limit for
                         submission of closing statements, we enclose ten copies of
                         our client's closing statement in its present form. If there
                         are any subsequent amendments to be made we will notify you
                         immediately.
                         V o in




 C .S . B a rk e r R . A . Sm ith S. N . L. C h a k o n B . B . F i r t h D . P. R ead G . D . C . S h a w T . H . R e e d L . N . R o b e r t s J. A . V. W ad e(N o taryP u blic) M .P .W .L e e C .D .T r ip p e tt C .D .Ib b e r s o n M. Jenkins
M. J. W inkw orth-Sm ith B. Bentley J. A. B. Buchan Miss J. C . Boler R. M . Sutton                                   J. R. S. Lazenby*J. D . Simon T. B. Knight W . M . W rigley J. R. H a rrap                          M . E. Cow ell P.              M . A nson
 R. C . W hitlam D . A. T h o rp e P. A . R hodes A. G . Chappell P. D . B arton T. H . Ratcliffe N . P. D ickson N . G . Knowles, Miss A. S. D uchart K. A. Royle J. M. Row lands A. D . D arw in T. J. Pope
                                                        W . K. P. Ballmann A. J, Callaghan M . G rab in er P. E. C ranston T. J. W hiteside G . J. Smallman C . Staton
     Associates: N . D . Slater R. W. Boreham M rs J. S. Street S. D . R obertson M. S. Jackson Miss J. L. A tkinson A. D. H o lt A. M. K err D. A. Jam eson K. D ocherty J. R. H . Sykes P. N . Firth
        Miss A. G oraj N . L. T hom pson M rs E. W . W ilkinson M rs J. Jackson D . A. Smyllie J. S. C rookes C . T. Tulley M rs S. J. Gaskill A. D . B ennett Miss J. E. H am pson J. Yorke D . J. G ray
                                                                                           D . P. M osley S. P. H o u g h to n (Scotland) H . C. Evans
                                                                                       C onsultants: E. C . Bousfield S. L. Batiste M P C . T. Peach

                                                                     Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (
w
                                                                                                                                                                               JW. S)M>
                                                                                     DI B B L U P T O N
                                                                                     BROOMHEAD
                                                                                                        -SOLICITORS-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6 Butts C o u rt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Leeds LSI 5JX
       Your Ref-                                                                                                                         Telephone 0532 439301
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fax 0532 452632/428891
       O u r Ref.                                                                                                                       Telex 557181
                         A JC/SO 'C                                                                                                                                                                              M D X 12.017 Leeds


                                                                                                                                                                                                    10 July 1989

                         R. M. Whalley Esq.,
                         Secretary to the Inquiry into
                         The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                         50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                         LONDON,
                         SW1H 9AT
               $
                         Dear Sir,
                         Hillsborough Inquiry
                         Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
                         We refer to our letter of 6th July and to Counsel's closing
                         statement.
                         Counsel has asked that the following alterations be made to each
                         copy of the closing statement:-
                         Page 19                                                                                             The words "P.C. Waugh to SYMAS"
                                                                                                                             should be at the top of page 20.

                         Page 22 - Paragraph 1 (b)                                                                           The word "not"                                          should be inserted
                                                                                                                             between "is" and                                         "consistent". The
                                                                                                                             words "outside                                          Gate C" should be
                                                                                                                             added to the end                                        of the sentence.

                         Page aj - Paragraph 6 (c)                                                                            r"15 .0 8 ” should be " 15.C3"                                                                            and
                                                                                                                              "respect" should be "request".

                         Page 36 - Paragraph 5.2 (b)                                                                          The second sentence should be
                                                                                                                              "Please see Doctor Eastwood's plan
                                                                                                                              No: 11424-8 which shows that some
                                                                                                                              of the gaps were in existence
                                                                                                                              before he obtained his retainer
                                                                                                                              from the S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y
                                                                                                                              Football Club i.e. pre-1978 and the
                                                                                                                              rest were made by the removal of
                                                                                                                              existing sections with no new

 C . S .B a r k e r R . A . Sm ith S. N . L. G h a lto n B . B . F i r t h D . P. R ead G . D . C . S h a w T . H . Reed L . N . R o b e r t s J . A . V. W ad e(N o tary Public) M .P .W .L e e C .D .T r ip p e tt C .D .Ib b e r s o n M .Jen k in s
M. J. W inkw orth-Sm ith B. Bentley J. A. B. Buchan Miss J. C. Boler R. M . Sutton J. R. S. Lazenby*J. D . Simon T. B. K night W. M. W rigley J. R. H arrap M. E. Cow ell P. M. A nson K. M cLoughlin
 R. C . W hitlam D . A. T h o rp e P. A.             Rhodes              A. G . Chappell P. D . B arton T. H . Ratcliffe N . P. Dickson N . G . Knowles, Miss A. S. D uchart K. A. Royle                                   J. M. Row lands                A. D . D a
                                                         W. K. P. Ballmann A. J, Callaghan M. G rab in er P. E. C ranston T. J. W hiteside G. J. Smallman C . Staton
      Associates: N . D . Slater R. W. Boreham M rs J. S. Street S. D . R obertson M . S. Jackson Miss J. L. A tkinson A. D . H o lt A. M . Kerr D. A. Jam eson K. D ocherty J. R. H . Sykes P. N . Firth
        Miss A. Goraj N . L. Th o m p so n M rs E. W . W ilkinson M rs J. Jackson D . A. Smyllie J. S. Crookes C . T. Tulley M rs S. J. Gaskill A. D. Bennett. Miss J. E. H am pson J. Yorke D . J. G ray
                                                                                            D.          P. M osley S. P. H ou g h to n (Scotland) H . C . Evans
                                                                                        C onsultants: E. C . Bousfield S. L. Batiste M P C . T. Peach

                                                                     Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investm ent business
         t
1 %.     «




                                       DIBB L U P T O N
                                       BROOMHEAD
                                       ------------------S O I. I C 1 T O R S-----------------



       Continuation


       Date           10 J u lY 1989




                                                                        uprights being constructed".

                 We apologise for any inconvenience this causes.
                 We have sent a copy of this letter to each of the solicitors for
                 the other parties.
                 Yours faithfuly,
                                                                                                                                                                                         'g?
3EN7 BY:DIBB LUPTON BROOMHEfiD J10- 7-89                                              12:14PM J                                0532426656^                                 01 273 2190;tt 2




                                                                  DIBB L U P T ON
                                                                  BROOMHEAD
                                                                  —          —     SO L I C 1 T O R S
                                                                                                                                                                             6 Bur* Court
                                                                                                                                                                            Lwdi LSI 5JX
                                                                                                                                                                     Telephone 0532 4J9W
   Your Rrf.                                                                                                                 F a 0S32 452632/428891
                                                                                                                                                                                   Teles 557181
   O ut Ref.                                                                                                                MDX 12.017 Leeds
                  AJC/SO'C
                                                                                                                                                                10 July 1989

                  r. M. Whalley Esq.,
                  Secretary to tha inquiry 1*1x0
                  The Hillsborough stadium Disaster,
                  50, Queen Anne’s Gate,
                  LONDON,
                  StflH 9AT


                   Dear Sir,
                   Hillsborough Inquiry
                   Our Clients: Trent RHU/SYMAS
                   Wa refer to our letter of 6th July and to Counsel's closing
                   statement.
                    Counsel has asked that the following alterations be made to each
                    copy of the closing statement:-
                    Paae 19                                                                          The words "P.C. Waugh to SYMAS"
                    5282-                                                                           should be at the top of page 20.

                    Paae 22 - Faraoraph 1 (b)                                                          The word *not" should be inserted
                    — a           *                                                                     between "is" end "consistent". The
                                                                                                        words "outside Gate C" should be
                                                                                                        added to the end of the sentence.

                    Paoe 30 - ParaarsDh 6 (o)                                                          "IS. 08" should be "15.09"                                                             end
                    — *---                                                                              "respect" should be "request".

                     Paae 36 - paragraph 5.2 (b)                                                         The second sentence should be
                     — ---                                                                               "Please see Doctor Eastwood's plan
                                                                                                         Not 11424-8 which shows that sows
                                                                                                         of the geps were in existence
                                                                                                         before he obteined his reteiner
                                                                                                         from the Sheffield Wednesday
                                                                                                         Football Club i.e. pre-1978 and the
                                                                                                         rest were »ede by the removal of
                                                                                                         existing sections with no new

  C .S .B ir k tr R. A. sm ith S .N , L, C h ilto n 1 . 1 . F in k O. P. R « d G . D . C. Sfc.w T H R « d I.. N . Rabcna ] . A. V, W.d.(NM»fyPi>WtC> M_P W . U C n .T H p p m C 0 , tb b w iM R J w M w
 M. J. Winkworth-Smiih ft Bentley J. A. B. Btt«h*n M i* J. C. Boler R, M.            J. 1 1 L a o b p 'j .   Sfanea T. B. Knight W, M. W*W«y )■*• H *r«p M 1- C a m ?. M. An«M K.
   R. C. W hiilun D. A T b on * P A. R Jw da A. G. C h iptxll P. D. B u ton T. H . Rttsliffe N . P. Die b o n N . <3. K now k* M in A. 5. D M tn n *   A. Rojrk J. M. R O »l»d« A. D . D a m n T. J. P o ft
                                                w . K p. Bdlmmn A. J. C ilkgkU M. C n b M v » . E. C n m n n T. J. WkliMide G. ]. f a n ifa in C, S«MMi
                    D. S b u r R. W, S o fd u n M riJ. 5. 5trw* S. t>. Robernon M. 9. J a d u m   l~ Adrijuon A. B . H olt A. M. K « r D. A.          K. Dochrrty J, R. M. Syk«« P. N. Fmn
        Miw A. G craj N. L. H>um~nn Mrs E. V. Wilkinson M n J. JickKm D. A. SmvIU* J. 5. C rookn C. T TmIU, M h S. J. G ukill A. t>. »WIK«i M m |. E.                    ] Ywh« D. J G r.y
                                                                           D. P. M «ln *. P. M oufim . (So<h1hi« H. C, Evmu
                                                                         C oan ttnn : E. C. la a M j S. L. M n r   C. T. Pw h

                                                         Regulated by the Ltw Society in the conduct of investment butine**
SEN'S BY.-DIBB LUPTON BROOMHEAD J 1 0 - 7 - 8 9   1 2 : 15PM ;            0 5 3 2 4 2 6 6 5 6 -*   01 27 3 2 1 9 0 ; U 3




                                       DIBB L U P T O N
                                       BROOMHEAD
                                              ■-« 0 1 I    I T It K S -     ..


  Continuation

                     10 July x»8«




                                                                 uprights baing oon»truct»4'.

               We apologise for any inconvenience this causes.
               Ue have sent a copy of this lottsr to sach of the solicitors for
               the other parties.
               Yours faithfuly,
    '              I




                                                                               DI B B L U P T O N
•                                                                              BROOMHEAD
                                                                                ---------------- S O L I C I T O R S------------------

                                                                                                                                                                                          6 Butts C ourt
                                                                                                                                                                                         Leeds LSI 5JX
              Your Ref.
                                                                                                                                                                                 Telephone 0532 439301
                                                                                                                                                                                Fax 0532 452632/428891
^             O u r Ref.
                                                                                                                                                                                           Telex 557181
                                    AJC/SO'C                                                                                                                                         M D X 12.017 Leeds


                                                                                                                                                                                      6 July 1989

                                   R. M. Whalley Esq.,
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry Into
                                   The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
                                   50, Queen Anne's Gate,
                                   LONDON,
                                   SW1H 9AT


                                   Dear Sir,
                                   Hillsborough Inquiry
•                                  Our Clients: Trent RHA/SYMAS
                                   We refer to your note of 29th June and enclose ten copies of
                                   Counsel's closing statement.  We have sent two copies to the
                                   Treasury Solicitor and to each of the solicitors for the other
                                   parties.
                                   The statement is divided in five sections dealing with the
                                   following matters:~
                                   I:            Criticisms of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                                                 Ambulance Service.

                                   II:            Interim Recommendations.

                                   III: The Police's failure to recognise the disaster. You will
                                        recall that when cross examining P.C. Waugh (on the final
                                        day of evidence} our Counsel undertook to provide a
                                        chronology and ar g um en t r e l a t i n g to P.C. Waugh's
                                        conversation with the police control at Hillsborough at
                                        14.59 in which he asked whether they required ambulances.

                                   IV:           Outline Comments on Various Factors Relevant to the Matters
                                                 Within the Inquiry's Term of Reference.
                                   V:            SYMAS Equipment.


         C .S .B ark er R. A. Sm ith S. N . L. G halton B. B. F irth D . P. Read G .D .C .S h a w T .H .R e e d L .N . R oberts J. A. V. Wade (N otary Public) M .P .W .L ee C .D .T rip p ett C .D .Ib berso n M. Jenkins
        M. J. W inkworth-Smith B. Bentley J. A. B. Buchan Miss J. C . Boler R. M. Sutton J. R. S. L azen b y J. D. Simon T. B. Knight W. M. Wrigjey J. R. Harrap                 M. E. Cowell P. M. Anson K.McLoughlin
         R. C . Whitlam D. A. Thorpe P. A. Rhodes A. G. Chappell P. D. Barton T. H . Ratciiffe N . P. Dickson N . G. Knowle* Miss A. S. Duchart K. A. Royle J. M. Rowlands A. D. Darwin T. J. Pope
                                                        W. K. P. Ballmann A. J, Callaghan M. Grabmer P. E. Cranston T. J. Whiteside G. J. Smailman C . Staton
             Associates: N . D . Slater R. W. Bore ham Mrs J. S. Street S. D. Robertson M. S. Jackson Miss J. L. A tkinson A. D. H o lt A. M. Kerr D. A. Jameson K. Docherty J. R. H . Sykes P. N . Firth
               Miss A. Goraj N . L. Thompson Mrs E. W. Wilkinson Mrs J. Jackson D. A. Smyllie J. S. Crookes C. T. Tulley Mrs S. J. Gaskill A. D. Bennett Miss J. E. Hampson J. Yorke D. J. Gray
                                                                                    D.       P. Mosley S. P. H oughton (Scotland) H . C. Evans
                                                                                 Consultants: E. C. Bousfieid S. L. Batiste MP C. T. Peach

                                                                 Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment business
                          DIBB L U P T O N
                          BROOMHEAD
                               *> O l I (   ! T (.) K s-


Continuation


Date           6 July 1989




          The Interim recommendations have been specifically drafted with a
          view to them being Implemented, If the Inquiry agreed with them,
          In time for the commencement of the 1989/90 season.
   «      Inevitably there Is some overlap with Phase Two, but we will
          Include these matters again when we come to deal with Phase Two
          of the Inquiry.
          Yours faithfully,
>   (




                                    INDEX

        SECTION                                         PAGE

        I         Criticisms of SYMAS                           1- 6

        II        SYMAS' Interim Recommendations               7 - 11

        III       South Yorkshire Police Failure
                   to Recognise the Disaster
                  A.   Summary                                 12 - 14
                  B.   Key                                     15 - 16
                  C.   Chronology                              17   -   21

                  D.   Argument                                22 - 32

        IV        Outline Comments on Various Factors
                   Relevant to the Matters within the
                   Inquiry's Terms of Reference                33 - 37
        V         SYMAS's Equipment
                  1.   Front Line Emergency Equipment          38 - 39
                  2.   Contents of Rescue Box on Front
                        Line Ambulance                         40
                  3.   Ambulance Aid Satchel                   41
                  4.   Extended Trained Ambulanceman's
                        Equipment                              42 - 43
                   CRITICISMS OF SYMAS

Implicit criticisms of SYMAS appeared in quotations
contained in an article which appeared in The Times and The
Independent of 17 April 1989.    They also appeared in other
newspapers.    The remarks were made by two doctors who
attended Hillsborough as Liverpool supporters on 15 April
1989.   During the course of the evidence it became clear
that the first five criticisms by Doctor A related to events
in the area behind the Leppings Lane stand and terrace (day
25 pl2lD).




DOCTOR A


1. "At 3.30 pm there were no medical personnel apart from
   one or two St John's ambulancemen. There was no medical
   equipment and there was only one ambulance."
   FACTS:
   a.   Ambulances arriving at Leppings Lane (see video RJH2)
        1513     S407 arrives (leaves 1523)
        1516    S203 arrives (leaves 1528)
                (by 1530 Mr         |from this ambulance is on
                the pitch - video MAPI)
        1521     S208 arrives (leaves 1532)
        1535    R608 arrives
        This doctor cannot have arrived in the concourse
        until about 1535.
  b.    About 40 casualties are taken from the Leppings Lane
        end by SYMAS, of which 5 were removed by 1532.   All
     casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (SYMAS recording track 19 page 19).
     Therefore about 35 casualties, all of whom survived
     were conveyed by SYMAS vehicles between 1532 and
     1606.



"Lack of triage"
FACTS:
a.   SYMAS personnel operated triage:
     -   see   Miss           statement, paragraph 7
     -   see   Mr Yoxall's evidence - day 23 page 126F
     -   see   Mr          J statement - paragraphs 15 to 18
     -   see   Mr          [statement - paragraphs 16 and 21
b.   Other personnel - police - also:
     - see Miss Pearson's evidence - day 17 page 159E-H



"A full casualty team with resuscitation equipment did
not arrive from the hospital until about 4.15 pm."
FACTS:
a.   A full casualty team arrived at the designated
     casualty clearing station (the gymnasium) at the
     Penistone Road end of the ground.      Miss
     statement paragraph 12 shows that the medical team
     left Northern General Hospital at 1544; it would
     therefore have been at the ground by 1550 at the very
     latest.
b.   A casualty team did not attend at Leppings Lane and
     all casualties had been removed from that end of the
     ground by 1606 (see above).
c.   A further casualty team arrived from Barnsley
     District General Hospital at the designated casualty
     clearing station but was not required.
d.   The implication that only the casualty teams would
     have resuscitation equipment is wrong.   All SYMAS
     frontline ambulances carry portable and fixed
     resuscitation equipment which was used at Leppings
     Lane.   Fire service also carried resuscitation
     equipment.



"There was no oxygen, airway tubes and drips.
FACTS:
a.   No oxygen     -   Wrong -     All SYMAS frontline
                       ambulances carry pneupac minuteman
                       oxygen resuscitators and have a
                       static supply of oxygen on board.
b.   No airways - Wrong:
                    i. All SYMAS frontline vehicles carry
                       a selection of airways, and a large
                       number were inserted.
                   ii. If the doctor means to refer to the
                       lack of intubation equipment, such
                       equipment is carried by paramedics
                       for use by them as they are trained
                       to use it.     Although there were
                       some doctors present in the crowd
                       who were competent to use such
                       equipment had it been available for
                       general use (apart from that
                       brought by paramedics and the
                       medical team) it is impractical to
                       expect a supply of such equipment,
                       which can only safely be used by
                       those trained to use it, to be
                       available on the offchance that
                       suitably qualified persons may be
                       among spectators. (This doctor
                       admitted that it was some time
                       s i n c e he had c a r r i e d out an
                       intubation himself - see day 25
                       page 124D).
                  iii. A consultant anaesthetist (day 25
                       p27D) agreed that if the tube were
                       wrongly inserted it could kill the
                       patient. The treatment that was
                       being a d m i n i s t e r e d by police
                       officers, fans, St John's and SYMAS
                       ambulancemen, namely CPR, was the
                       correct treatment               in t h e
                       circumstances and undoubtedly did
                            save lives,
     c.    No drips     -   Wrong:
                         i. Infusion equipment is carried by
                            paramedics, and requires special
                            training, however, there is no
                            evidence that any casualty was
                            prejudiced by the lack of infusion
                            equipment.
                        ii. Medical Team (gymnasium) obviously
                            had I .V. drips because spectator
                            nurse F J Eccleston gave evidence
                            that he set up 10 drips ready for
                            doctors (Transcript day 5 pl5D).



5.   "More lives could have been saved if staff and equipment
     had arrived earlier."
     FACTS:
     a.   Before he was reminded that he had made such a
          statement to the press, Dr in chief (day 25 page 115G
          to 116G) accepted that it was pure speculation
          whether or not further lives could have been saved
          (day 25 page 115G to 116D), and on cross examination
          (day 25 page 127C to D) agreed that it was
          "unfortunate" that he had sought out the press to
          make public pronouncements which it was not possible
          for him to make.
     b.   If as SYMAS submit, the crushing started at the very
          latest at 1459, by the time that any medical
          a s s i s t a n c e got to the most severely crushed
          spectators they had been deprived of oxygen for over
          4 minutes and therefore it is unlikely that the
          presence or otherwise of such equipment made any
          practical difference.



DOCTOR P

6.   "Complains about the lack of defibrillators"
     FACTS:
We believe that the Inquiry accepts that the use of
defibrillators on the pitch in the circumstances of
this t r a g e d y would have been professionally
irresponsible, (day 19 page 31C) (day 24 page 103F)
(day 25 page 24A and 29A).
In case anybody has any doubts about it we list the
difficulties:
  i.   If wrongly used it can kill:
       - the patient
       - the operator
       - any third party coming into contact with the
         patient.
 ii.   Before being used national guidelines for
       ambulancemen lay down that an ECG reading for
       diagnosis should be obtained from the machine.
       In order for the reading and diagnosis to be
       accurate the patient and the defibrillator must
       be completely isolated from any movement and
       the s u r r o u n d i n g e n v i r o n m e n t m u s t be
       sufficiently stable to permit an accurate
       assessment of the ECG recorded. Spurious
       readings can occur in a crowd.
iii.   In the circumstances of this tragedy when
       otherwise relatively fit individuals were
       rendered hypoxic (lack of oxygen), the likely
       heart pattern is asystole (continuous line of
       electrical activity with no effective heart
       contractions) and not ventricular fibrillation.
       The purpose of a defibrillator is to jolt a
       fibrillating heart rhythm back into a normal
       pattern.   The standard treatment for asystole
       is CPR. Successful CPR would normally produce
       a regular heart pattern rather than ventricular
       fibrillation.
 iv.   However, given the length of time during which
       most of the patients had been deprived of
       oxygen, even the use of a defibrillator would
       not have made any practical difference (see Dr
       P's statement to the police, page 7 "my
       thoughts that in view of the length of time he
       was pulseless it would probably be kinder if he
       died.   I am sure he must have been severely
       brain damaged by that time" and at the bottom
       of the page "I looked desperately for somebody
       not dead but seriously ill who needed help. I
       could not find anybody in that category in the
)   I




                            goal area.   They were either all dead or okay
                            with nothing In between.")
        B.   Ambulance Equipment
             1.   A list of equipment carried by all SYMAS frontline
                  ambulances, the contents of a rescue box carried on a
                  frontline ambulance, the contents of an ambulanceman's
                  satchel and the equipment carried by an extended trained
                  ambulanceman are contained in Section V.
             2.   This equipment is Intended for use by SYMAS personnel and
                  not by third parties.
             3.   Much of the equipment has to be kept with the ambulance
                  for use on the journey to hospital.
             4.   The primary purpose of the ambulance is to give immediate
                  treatment to casualties and convey them to hospital.
             5.   On 15 April 1989 many SYMAS ambulancemen treated
                  casualties with CPR and resuscitation, as well as
                  conveying 172 injured to hospital. Any criticism of lack
                  of equipment on SYMAS vehicles is ill-informed.
            SYMAS' INTERIM   RECOMMENDATIONS


Ambulance Service Attendance

At any Specified Activity where the attendance is expected
to exceed 25,000 and/or the past history and/or other
circumstances indicate that ambulance service presence is
desirable (a "critical match"), the holder of the safety
certificate should invite the statutory ambulance authority
to attend with such personnel, vehicles and equipment as
shall be agreed between them but in any event not less than
an officer with one vehicle and crew,         the appropriate
payment being made by the holder of the safety certificate.
This is in addition to the present attendance of St John
Ambulance Brigade or the British Red Cross.


First Aid Room


Each club being the holder of a safety certificate, should
maintain a first aid room, equipped to a basic standard, as
specified by the licensing authority after consultation with
the appropriate ambulance authority.
Doctor


The Football League, Football Association and the relevant
licensing authority should require clubs holding safety
certificates and Intending to stage a critical match to
arrange that the doctor In attendance:


a.   is trained and competent in advanced first aid to a
     standard equivalent to a NHS TA Paramedic;


b.   is available to treat any injured spectators and to
     attend the first aid room, when called upon to do so.




Communication


There shall be an agreed and common method of communication
between all the emergency services, if necessary with the
assistance of a dedicated radio and/or telephone direct link
to the ground and the respective headquarters.




Liaison


Before each critical match the liaison officers from the
police and ambulance service should make contact and arrange
to be in direct contact with each other during the match.
The police liaison officer should be in direct contact with
police control.


Emergency Plan


For all designated grounds there should be a joint and
common emergency plan drawn up by the relevant police
authority, fire service, statutory ambulance authority and
the holder of the safety certificate.            The emergency plan
should detail:


a.   The relevant      function of each service during an
     emergency.


b.   The liaison officer from each service, preferably by
     name,   their   respective     stat i o n    and   particular
     responsibility.


c.   The agreed rendezvous points for each service and the
     (named) police officer who is responsible for collating
     and issuing information to,          and coordinating the
     response of, the relevant services.


d.   Emergency access and egress.
e.   Casualty clearing point.


£.   Preferred routes to and from hospitals, to be kept clear
     by the police during an emergency.




Licensing Authority


The licensing authority should satisfy itself before issuing
the safety certificate that a joint and common emergency
plan (as described in paragraph 6 above) is in existence for
the designated ground.




Advice From Statutory Ambulance Authority


The statutory ambulance authority should be asked to advise
the issuing authority for each safety certificate on the
question of:


a.   access and egress for ambulances


b.   medical equipment


c.   attendance of ambulance personnel and vehicles at
     critical matches
    and should be consulted before there Is any variation in
    the terms of the safety certificate as regards items a,
    b and c above.




Amendment to 1975 Act


SSGA 1975 be amended so as to require the licensing
authority to deal with applications for safety certificates
within six months failing which it shall be deemed to have
been refused.
SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE - FAILURE TO RECOGNISE THE DISASTER


 SUMMARY


 SYMAS' submission is that South Yorkshire Police were in a
 position to identify the existence of a disaster by 1459
 hours at the very latest.         In fact,   as the attached
 chronology shows, they failed to do so before 1505 hours and
 failed to call SYMAS until 1508 hours.




 In view of the unchallenged medical evidence it is SYMAS'
 submission that those 9 minutes were critical, and of all
 the claims that lives could have been saved, this is the
 only one with any merit.




 SYMAS' submission is that there is evidence to indicate that
 supporters were being crushed to death by 1459 hours and
 that   this   was   evident   to anyone whose mind was not
 conditioned by the need to contain supporters within the
 central pens.
It is SYMAS' submission that the persons who were in a
position to, and should have recognised the plight of the
persons in pens 3 and 4, are the police officers in the
control box, and those stationed along the perimeter track
in front of pens 3 and 4.




Evidence


a.   Photographs South Yorkshire Composite Album 2.


b.   Photograph produced by leading Counsel for South
     Yorkshire Police on day 19 (transcript          19 p35D).
     DB17/15.


c.   Photographs taken by the Liverpool Echo and produced to
     the Inquiry by Counsel for the Football Supporters
     Association. Document 278.


d.   Transcripts of messages received and despatched by
     Force Control at Snig Hill.


e.   Evidence of witnesses - both fans and police.
In order to follow the above submissions the following
chronology which Counsel undertook to supply to the Inquiry
will be of use.
VIDEOS:


There are four videos to which reference is made, namely:
RJH2           - This is the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                 film taken from the camera which has a fixed
                 view onto the back of the courtyard behind
                 turnstiles A-G.
MAPI & MAP9 - These are tapes of videos made by BBC Outside
              Broadcast Unit one using an operator set
              database and the other using a computer set
              database. For the purposes of this schedule
              no distinction is drawn.
TB2            - This is the film made by South Yorkshire
                 Police on the CCTV system using operator set
                 database.



TRANSCRIPTS


SYMAS 1    -   Track 9              ) DOCUMENT 128A and 128B
                                      These are a
                                      transcription of tapes
SYMAS 2    -   Tracks 10 & 11         made at SYMAS HQ of calls
                                      received from Force
                                      Control SNIG HILL.
SNIG   I   =   SA/1. KWP 30/15/17    This is a transcription
Part   1        Document 34          of tapes made at SNIG HILL
                                     Force Control (F/C) con­
                                     taining messages received
                                     from SWFC Police Ground
                                     Control (G/C) and messages
                                     transmitted by F/C to
                                     other police units
»   t




             SNIG   I     =   SA/2 KWP 30/15/18    This is a continuation of
             Part   2                              the transcript of SNIG 1

             SNIG   II    -    SA/6 KWP 30/9/17    This is a transcript of
                              Document 129         a separate tape made at
                                                   F/C containing messages
                                                   from F/C to the Fire
                                                   Service and SYMAS

             SNIG   III       = F1A 1230           This is the Extended
                               Document 73         Incident Log compiled
                                                   F/C. For the purposes of
                                                   this chronology this tape
                                                   is not relevant.

             SNIG   IV    =    KWP 30/14/17        This is a further
                              Document 254         transcript of SNIG 1
                                                   containing the background
                                                   messages on the tapes
                                                   representing inter alia
                                                   traffic picked up from
                                                   VHF Channel 25 which was
                                                   being monitored by F/C.
                                                   The times on this tape
                                                   are identical to that on
                                                   SNIG 1.


        3.   NOTE


             There is a discrepancy between the times recorded on SYMAS
             computer transcript and SNIG HILL transcript. They are only
             a matter of seconds in most cases and for the purposes of
             this chronology the times have all been taken where two are
             available from the SNIG HILL transcript.       In such cases
             where there is no SNIG HILL transcript and the time
             sequence, as recorded on the SYMAS transcript, is not in
             line, a figure in brackets represents the best estimate if
             the SNIG HILL time is applied to the SYMAS transcript.




                                              16
C.      CHRONOLOGY


TIME          SOURCE            EVENT
14.48.04      Video RJH2        GATE C opened: Surge of about 150
                                people per HSE Report p.7.


14.48.31      Video RJH2        GATE C closed.


14.51.30       SNIG IV p.1      "Speech heard in background"
                                "Letting anybody through." "It's
                                bloody chaos at Leppings Lane
                                because thousands can't get in,
                                they have just broken gates down
                                and Superintendent M a r s h a l l ' s
                                screaming for them to open the
                                inner gates and to let people in
                                and Murray's saying in control,
                                we've got to monitor tickets, if we
                                get Liverpool mixed up with Notts
                                Forest t h e y ' r e going to have
                                trouble even if we get a serious
                                problem."


14.52.06      Video RJH2        GATE C opened for second time.
                                Entry of about 2,000 people per HSE
                                Report p.7.


14.53          SNIG I Part 1    F/C giving out messages to other
                                police v e h i c l e s c o n c e r n i n g a
                                missing policeman.


14.53 to       SNIG II pp.2-6   Chat and banter between F/C (PC
14.58                           Rook) and other forces about not
                                accepting any loads due to the
                                football match.
                                SYMAS submit that listening to the
                                tape gives no indication of any
                                crisis or concern in F/C.
14.57      SNIG I Part 1     Superintendent Brougham radios
           p.7               In that he attended Leppings Lane
                             end with a PA but "they've already
                             got a PA in use there so we are now
                             resuming back to driving school".
                             Again listening to the tape no
                             suggestion of any panic or concern
                             in F/C.


14.57.35   RJH2 & TB2        GATE C closed.   Area behind GATE C
                             is clear.


14.58      SNIG I   Part 1
           p.7               Reports from traffic control that
                             city centre clear of traffic.

14.59      SNIG I Part 1
           p.8               Telephone call to Ground Control "I
                             don't know whether we need any yet"
                              "No I'm ringing Ground Control".
                             PC Waugh rings G/C (PC Ryan) "Yes
                             it's ops.      Do y o u w a n t any
                             ambulances. We are trying to
                             monitor to you but you know it's
                             ..." Ryan: "It's chaos at the
                             moment, we've got no reports of
                             injuries but we, if you can monitor
                             the situation if you can just keep
                             standing by."


14.59.12   RJH2              GATE C opened third time.   Steady
                             stream being monitored by mounted
                             police.     Fans having to show
                             tickets (see evidence of
                             transcript day 30 p.99E-G).


15.02      SNIG IV p.8       "Background speech" "Superintendent
                             Marshall are you calling me, over"
                             "Can we close the gates again?"
                             "Yes, they can be closed, God
                             bless?"

                              18
*




    15.04      SNIG I Part 1
               p.9               G/C calls for dog handlers.


    15.04 to   SNIG I Part 1
               pp.9 & 10         F/C summons dog handlers to GATE 0.
    15.06


    15.06.10   SNIG I   Part 1
               p.10              G/C calls Operation Support.


    15.06.30   SNIG I   Part 1
               p.10              F/C sends more dog handlers.


    15.07.01   SNIG II p.8       F/C puts SYMAS on notice that
               SYMAS 1 p.l       "ambulances might be required".
                                 Conversation between PC Rook and
                                 Superintendent Clarke.


    15.07.50   SNIG I   Part 1
               p. 11             G/C - F/C: "Fleet of ambulances to
                                 Hillsborough."


    15.08      SNIG II p.9       G/C - SYMAS: (continuation of the
               SYMAS 1 p.3       same phone call as at 15.07.01)
                                 "Fleet     of  ambulances       to
                                 Hillsborough".


    15.08.50   SNIG I   Part 1
               p. 12             G/C (Ryan) to F/C: "Ambulances to
                                 Leppings Lane end please, Leppings
                                 L a n e . ” "Roger, a m b u l a n c e s to
                                 Leppings Lane end."
                                 PC Waugh to SYMAS



                                  19
*»   '   t




                        SYMAS 1 p.4
             15.09      per SNIG HILL     "Ambulances to Leppings Lane end
                        times             a big fleet immediately, as many as
                                          you've got please."
             15.09.40   SNIG I   Part 1
                        p.13              F/C to G/C: "Is ACC with you?"
                                          "Please confirm Operation Support"
                                          ACC gives confirmation.


             15.10.55   SNIG I Part 1
                        p.10              F/C (Rook) to SYMAS: "Just to let
                        SYMAS 2 p.l       you know we have called Operation
                                          Support.        There are hundreds
                                          i n j u r e d t r a m p l e d underfoot,
                                          everything." SYMAS tells Rook that
                                          they are responding.


             15.20.10    SNIG I Part 2
                        p.l               G/C to F/C: "Can you confirm we
                                          have more ambulances on route-
                                          only have 3 at this location at
                                          present."
             15.23.50    SNIG I Part 2
                        p.3               F/C to G/C: "Our last instructions
                                          were for ambulances to Leppings
                                          Lane. Is there any change? Over"


             15.24.30   SNIG I   Part 2
                        p.4               F/C to G/C: "We would like some
                                          ambulances also to GATE 0. Things
                                          are getting blocked up at the
                                          Leppings Lane, some ambulances to
                                          GATE 0 please."


             15.24.50   SNIG I   Part 2
                        p.4               F/C to G/C: "Where's GATE 0?"!!




                                           20
SNIG I   Part 2
p.7               G/C to F/C: "Could you ask for a
                  radio message Hallam to request the
                  crowd application - yes stand by
                  yes. Requesting for doctors to
                  attend at the stadium, doctors at
                  the stadium."


SNIG I   Part 2
p.7               F/C to G/C: "Roger, requesting
                  Radio Hallam for doctors to attend
                  at the stadium, over."
\




    D.   ARGUMENT


    1.   SUMMARY

    a)   SYMAS submit that the telephone call at 14.59 from Snig Hill
         to Ground Control by PC Waugh was not, as claimed by PC
         Waugh, prompted by overhearing the conversation between
         Superintendent Marshall and Ground Control.


    b)   It is SYMAS' submission that the length of time that elapsed
         between the end of the communication from Superintendent
         Marshall and the making of that call (some 8 minutes) is
         consistent with an urgent call being made as a result of
         overhearing scenes of desperation and crowd distress
         indicating a need for ambulances.


    c)   We propose to deal with each gate in turn in support of our
         contention that in fact it must have been the cries of
         distress from supporters within the perimeter fence and the
         request by officers stationed at the perimeter gates which
         prompted the call by PC Waugh.



    2.   WAS IT GATE C?

    a)   When was Gate C Opened?
         Gate C was opened for certain on three occasions.
              Opened                       Closed
              14.48.04                     14.48.31
              14.52.06                     14.57.35
              14.59.12                     15.02
                                   22
Could P.C. Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate C?


    Waugh alleges that it was Gate C in his statement and
    in his evidence to the Tribunal.
    However, his statement was not made until 27 June 1989,
    after the existence of that conversation had been
    discovered by Counsel for SYMAS.
    In chief (day 31 p.lllB) PC Waugh said that he had
    telephoned G/C "immediately after" the repeated
    requests for the gate to be opened.
    In cross examination (day 31 p.H4D) PC Waugh confirmed
    that he had made the telephone call "within seconds" of
    hearing the repeated requests to open the gates.
    There is no evidence from Marshall that he asked Gate C
    to be opened on the third occasion.   In any event the
    evidence is that the third opening of Gate C was a
    controlled operation not caused by a crush outside.
    See:
         - Bain: statement p.4 at the bottom of the page.
         -           : transcript day 30 p.99E-F
         - RJH2: supporters still entering at a steady
         stream               (14.59.12).
    The 8 minute time lapse between "Superintendent
    Marshall's screaming for the gate to be opened"
    (14.51.40) and the telephone call made by PC Waugh
    (14.59.30) is not consistent with PC Waugh's making the
    call "immediately after" or "within seconds of" hearing
    the repeated requests. No panic or dangerous crushing
    evident from the evidence on the video (RJH2) prior to
    Gate C being opened for the third time.
    No evidence as to precisely when Gate C was opened for
    the third time and no evidence that the third opening
    was occasioned by any repeated requests from an officer
    for it to be done.
    SYMAS submit therefore that it is unlikely that it was
    the request to open Gate C which occasioned PC Waugh to
    make the telephone call at 14.59.
3.     WAS IT GATE B?


a)     When was Gate B Opened


i.          Gate B was under the control of serial 15 and Sergeant
            Burns.
ii.         Stewards            and Ridge were also present at Gate B.
iii.        The evidence was as follows:

                         (Statement):        "Gate B not opened before
                                             kick-off."    If this is
                                             correct Gate B was not
                                             opened before 14.59.30.
                 RIDGE (day 21 P.128A)       "Police ordered me to
                                             open the gate at 14.55, I
                                             said "No way"".
                 PC AITKIN
                 (Statement p .4):           "Gate B opened.      200
                                             supporters came through,
                                             then with PC Ford and
                                                       we closed the
                                             gate.    I looked at my
                                             watch it was 15.02."
                 (day 17 p.61H
                 -p.62A):                    PC Aitkin confirms Ridge
                                             (... as to time) but PC
                                             referred to says Gate C
                                             already opened.


b)     Could PC Waugh have overheard requests relating to Gate B?


i.          There is limited evidence as to exactly how Gate B came
            to be opened.   The main evidence comes from Sergeant
            Burns.

                                     24
           SERGEANT BURNS            "I pleaded with Inspector
           (day 17 p.30G):            Bennett to open Gates
                                     (B) and stop the crushing
                                     outside."
But:
           a.     No mention of possible fatalities;
           b.     No mention of request being made by radio;
           c.     In any event Sergeant Burns's radio was not
                 working (see day 17 p.33G) "Radio dead since
                 14.30. Not working until I heard the call for
                 pitch invasion."


            INSPECTOR BENNETT (day 15 P.66E-G)

           a.    Not make any request to F/C to open Gate A.
           b.    Not aware of any such request to F/C.     Did
                 not notice how or why Gate B was opened.
           In all the circumstances, and in view of the
           evidence that has been given, we submit it is
           evident that conversations relating to the Gate B
           to be opened could not have been overheard by PC
           Waugh.
           Fans not shouting and screaming. Opening the gate
           probably surprised them because it was towards
           their side per Aitkin (day 17 p.62F-G).


WAS IT GATE A?

When was Gate A Opened?
                                                           *




       According to leading Counsel for the Inquiry Gate A was
       opened at 14.58
            INSPECTOR SYKES
            Statement p.7            "I have no actual time of
                                     the next event, but would
                                     estimate it to be at 2.50
                                     and I then saw Gate A
                                     open wide."
                              25
i-   *




                         SERGEANT HIGGINS
                         (day 17 p92C)           "Made a request that Gate
                                                 A be opened because I
                                                 thought someone might be
                                                 killed outside.      That
                                                 message was received."
                                                 No evidence as to when
                                                 this request was made.
                         SERGEANT GODDARD
                         (day 18 p.86B)          Confirms receiving
                                                 Higgins's message.         Says
                                                 he p e r s o n a l l y g a v e
                                                 permission (!!) relying
                                                 upon        the previous
                                                 i n s t r u c t i o n given by
                                                 Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                                 Duckingfield.         He places
                                                 t h e r e q u e s t 3 or 4
                                                 minutes after the opening
                                                 of Gate C.            If he is
                                                 r i g h t t h i s w i l l be
                                                 between 14.56 and 14.57.
               Statement p.6 "By the time Gate B was opened C Gate had been
               closed."
                         PC CAMMOCK
                         (day 29 P.38D-F          "Made     my  way    to
                                                  Superintendent Marshall
                                                  who was standing on the
                                                  parapet.        Asked
                                                  permission to open Gate
                                                  A.

               No evidence that this request was made by radio and
               therefore submit not been heard by PC Waugh.


         ii.        In any event we submit clearly not Gate A because the
                    entry through Gate A was orderly and controlled by a
                    serial of police officers directing the fans towards
                    the north stand.     In any event the weight of the
                    evidence seems to suggest that Gate A was opened
                    because Gate C was opened and it was thought that a
                    general permission to open gates had been given.

                                            26
     We submit that in all the circumstances this is
     unlikely to have been the urgent and unusual
     circumstances to cause PC Waugh to act as he did.


     In any event there is no evidence of any requests
     having been made over the radio and no evidence that
     such requests were repeated before it was granted.



WAS IT THE PERIMETER FENCE GATE TO PENS 3 AND 4?
We submit this is the most likely explanation for PC Waugh's
conduct.
The evidence is clear from other sources that by 14.59 the
disaster had already occurred.
EVIDENCE:

     (i)    Liverpool Echo Photo document 278.
            Taken at 14.59
            Four hallmarks of the crushing clearly present,
            namely:
     a.     Perimeter gates open;
     b.     Spectators climbing over the top of the perimeter
            fence;
     c.     Fans climbing up to the seated area of the west
            stand;
     d.     Press photographer taking close-up pictures of
            people behind perimeter fence in pen 3.


     (ii)        Further evidence from photograph DB17-15
                 (document 126 and transcript day 19 p.35D-
                 E):-
                 "That is timed at 14.59 and it clearly shows
                 the west end, the Leppings Lane terraces.
                 One can see to the right of the photograph
4   u   »




                         the back of the goal, the goal netting, and
                         one can see the gates In the terraces In the
                         perimeter fence open.    I think those gates
                         are 3 and 4, and at that time there are a
                         considerable number of people already outside
                         the perimeter fence. ? ... and your St John's
                         people are already assisting? - answer-
                         correct ."
            (ill)        Evidence from serial 1 officers on the
                         perimeter fence
                    PC SMITH
                    (day 17 p.114-115)
                                             stationed at Gate 3
                                             "I could see people were
                                             being pressed up tight
                                             against the fence; that
                                             they had not fallen back
                                             as they would normally
                                             fall back."
                                            "I think some people were
                                            shouting "Open the gate,
                                            we a r e c r u s h e d " or
                                            something like that."
                                            "Did y o u try to get
                                            through on your radio to
                                            anyone?"
                                            "I tried to shout "Come
                                            and open these gates.
                                            P e o p l e a r e dying in
                                            here." or something like
                                            that.       Quite honestly
                                            from past experience I
                                            had no doubt that they
                                            would not have received
                                            that at the time due to
                                            the noise of the crowd,
                                            sir."
                                             "Did you realise by then
                                             that p e o p l e w e r e in
                                             trouble?"


                                    28
                  A:   "Certainly, sir."

                  Q:   "So did you in fact open
                       the gate?"
                  A:   "We o p e n e d   them,    yes
                       sir."


PC ILLINGWORTH
(day 17 p.l35C)        On duty at Gate 4 after
                       14.50 (day 17 p.l34D)
P.135B-E               "As p e o p l e  became
                       distressed and I realised
                       they were in pain, I put
                       a radio message over to
                       say that there was a
                       serious situation at the
                       front."

                  Q:   "Apart from seeing people
                       in distress, could you
                       hear whether they were in
                       distress?"
                  A:   "Yes"

                  Q:   "In what way, what were
                       they shouting?"
                  A:   "Words to the effect of
                       "Help, I'm hurt, I'm
                       being crushed.""

                  Q:   "It was obvious to you
                       that people were being
                       crushed I take it?"
                  A:   "Blatantly obvious, yes.
                       PC I l l i n g w o r t h t h e n
                       opened Gate 4."
     Evidence from the fans
    Numerous fans gave evidence that in the time running up
    to kick-off and at the time of kick-off there were
    screams for help and screams to the police drawing
    attention to the plight of those at the front of pens 3
    and 4.


    We submit that it is unnecessary to recite all the fans
    whose evidence must be very much in the mind of the
    Tribunal. We particularly rely upon the evidence of Mr
    Hicks who was seeking to draw attention of senior
    police officers in the police control box to the
    evident crushing which he could see from his position
    in pens 1 and 2.



CONCLUSION


We submit that it is abundantly clear that the tragedy
commenced some time before 15.00, that the tragedy was
identified by junior police officers present at the
perimeter gates at 14.59 and onwards, that that tragedy was
not identified for whatever reason by senior officers until
15.05.24 (MAPI) when Superintendent Greenwood went onto the
pitch.

We submit that it is abundantly clear that although it is
possible that messages in relation to other gates could have
been picked up by PC Waugh which would have motivated his
telephone call to SYMAS headquarters, the balance of
probabilities indicate that it in fact was cries for help
emanating from the fans crushed behind pens 3 and 4.

We reassert this submission in view of the fact that again,
without request from G/C for them to do so, another officer
at F/C telephoned SYMAS at 15.06 merely to put them on
notice.  It is evident that many of the officers at F/C in
Snig Hill were disturbed by the messages that they were
receiving by monitoring the VHF radio channel 25 and these
were by 15.08 totally unconnected with any respect to open
gates outside by the turnstiles.
In our submission these calls for help and calls of concern
must have been coming from officers at the perimeter fence
who were clearly upset and perturbed by the evidence before
their eyes.

It is submitted that this would have been apparent to
officers in the police control box were they prepared to
believe the evidence before their eyes and also to
Superintendent Murray and Superintendent Greenwood when they
went down to the pitch and to investigate why fans were
climbing over the perimeter fence.

Superintendent Greenwood (day 12 p.99E) identified himself
as the inspector in photograph South Yorkshire Police 2
(bundle F) photograph PR1/9A.        At that stage 15.02
Superintendent Greenwood asserted that he was merely
assessing the situation.   He accepted that it was clear if
one looked at those crushed behind the fence that some were
in difficulties and being crushed.        A perusal of the
following photographs: 1/10A shows that far from assessing
the situation Superintendent Greenwood in fact has caught
hold of a fan and is pulling him back towards the fence.

From an early stage shortly after 15.00 the commentators
viewing the pictures being produced by the video (map 9 and
10) o b s e r v e d that the p r o b l e m is being caused by
overcrowding and fans are spilling over onto the pitch.



The call for Operation Support from G/C was clearly in
response to what was then identified as a pitch invasion and
not recognising that in fact a major emergency had occurred.


It is regrettable that no call was made to SYMAS until 15.08
for ambulances because given their response time it is
likely that they would have arrived at the ground in
sufficient numbers to have made a material difference to the
number of deceased than they were otherwise able to.
One is not able to say if in fact anybody's life would have
been saved or, if so, how many but one is able to say that
undoubtedly had the disaster been recognised by those in
authority earlier than it was and the appropriate assistance
been called some 8 minutes earlier than it was then
undoubtedly the chances of survival for many of the people
who were pulled out dead would have been enhanced.
          OUTLINE COMMENTS ON VARIOUS FACTORS RELEVANT TO THE
            MATTERS WITHIN THE INQUIRY *S TERMS OF REFERENCE


PREAMBLE
We expect that most of the matters set out below have been
accepted already by the Tribunal, but we list them to demonstrate
SYMAS' strength of feeling that the disaster should not have
occurred, and could have been avoided.
1.   CHOICE OF GROUND

     A.     Leppings Lane End
             1.1   Inevitably, because of need for segregation,
                   Hillsborough's design was not safe to accommodate
                   one set of supporters if they had to enter the
                   ground at Leppings Lane.
             1.2   There is an obvious bottle neck leading into the
                   outer perimeter gates and there is the added
                   problem of channelling the supporters into the
                   appropriate turnstiles for the north stand, the
                   west stand and the west terracing.
             1.3   It should be noted that the shortest distance
                   across the funnel leading into the outer perimeter
                   gates is only 24 metres.
             1.4   Once the supporters gain access through the outer
                   perimeter gates those heading for turnstiles A-G
                   have to negotiate a minimum bottleneck of 8 metres
                   between the handrail leading down from turnstile G
                   and the edge of turnstile 16.        The maximum
                   distance across turnstiles A-G is only 13 metres.

     B.      Turnstile Flow Rate

             1.1   T h e L i v e r p o o l s u p p o r t e r s were a l l o c a t e d
                   approximately 24,500 tickets for the semi-final,
                   covering the north stand and the west stand and
                   terracing.
      1.2   Paragraph 47 of the Green Guide gives a maximum
            notional rate per turnstile at which spectators
            can pass through, not exceeding 750 persons per
            hour.
      1.3   Based on the figure of 23 turnstiles for 24,500
            spectators, at the rate of 750 per hour, it would
            take almost 1 1/2 hours for 24,500 spectators to
            gain entry into the ground.
      1.4   If one then takes the figure of 7 turnstiles for
            the 10,100 s p e c t a t o r s for the west stand
            terracing, based upon the notional rate in
            paragraph 47, it would almost take 2 hours for the
            10,100 spectators to gain entry.
      1.5   It s hould be clearly noted that the above
            estimates represent the minimum possible time to
            allow spectators into Hillsborough based upon the
            Green Guide figures.
      1.6   The inadequacy of the turnstiles to accommodate
            24.500 spectators appears to have been recognised
            by the South Yorkshire Police and SWFC.       See
            Transcript day 11 p38D-G.
      1.7   In our submission it was absurd to believe that
            24.500 spectators could have been safely allowed
            entry through Leppings Lane in the time available.


FAILURE TO DELAY KICK-OFF
2.1   The senior officers inside the police control box
      should have realised by 1430 hours that the crowd of
      supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance could not
      get into the ground by 1500 hours even on the most
      optimistic of flow rates through the turnstiles.
2.2 It therefore follows that kick-off should have been
    postponed prior to or very shortly after 1430 hours,
    and indeed many people were under the impression that
    kick-off had been delayed.
OPENING OF GATE C

3.1   The decision to open Gate C was Inevitable In all
      circumstances, but the failure to prepare and cater for
      the resultant Ingress of supporters Into the concourse
      behind the west stand and then onto the terracing, was
      a clear and fundamental mistake by the police.


SIGNING AND LAYOUT OF CONCOURSE

4.1   Once supporters found themselves In the concourse area
      behind the west stand the directional signs onto the
      terracing was so poor that it resultedin the majority
      of supporters quite reasonably deciding that there was
      no way onto the terracing other than through the
      central tunnel.
4.2   The situation was made worse by the presence of the
      internal wall which although useful for a normal match,
      probably dissuaded many supporters going to their left
      after entering through turnstiles A-G and Gate C.
4.3   There were clearly enough officers in serial 14 to make
      a line to direct spectators to pens 1,2, 5, 6 and 7-
      see PC Burton day 17 p21G to p22D.
LAYOUT OF TERRACE

5.1   The layout of the radial fences, perimeter fence gates
      and barriers was, at the very least, piecemeal,
      haphazard and carried out with little or insufficient
      thought concerning the safety of supporters on the
      terracing.
5.2   The emphasis in erecting the radial fences, perimeter
      fence gates and barriers was clearly on containment of
      the supporters on the terracing, and for example we
      would point to:
      a.   the disagreements as to the use of the gates in
           the perimeter fences in the event of emergency
           evacuation;
      b.   Dr Eastwood's assertion (unsupported by other
           members of the Working Party) that breach of
           paragraph 115 of the Green Guide was a deliberate
           policy decision. Please see Dr Eastwood's plan No
           11424-8 which shows that the gaps were in
           existence before he obtained his retainer from the
           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, i.e. pre-1978,
           and were made by the removal of existing sections
           with no new uprights being constructed.

SIZE OF GATES IN PERIMETER FENCE

The perimeter gates leading onto the perimeter track are
clearly too narrow for the purposes of emergency evacuation
onto the pitch area.


ESTIMATION OF TERRACE CAPACITY

The capacity of the whole of the west stand terracing, and
in particular pens 3 and 4, has been clearly wrongly
calculated.   Reference should be made to document headed
"Sheffield Wednesday Football Club west terrace - ideal
distribution of persons" for pens 3 and 4.     The Health &
Safety Executive has calculated that the maximum numbers of
spectators for pens 3 and 4 are 822 for pen 3 and 871 for
pen 4. Furthermore, if one takes into account paragraph 216
of the Green Guide, the appropriate capacities of pens 3 and
4 are substantially reduced, to 542 for pen 3 and 605 for
pen 4.


LACK OF ANTICIPATION

8.1   Whatever criticisms can be made of the Liverpool
      supporters, it appears fairly clear that the South
      Yorkshire Police should have anticipated the sort of
      behaviour from the Liverpool fans which they alleged
      took place on 15 April 1989.
8.2   In particular, this is borne out by the evidence
      gathered by the South Yorkshire Police during the
      course of the Inquiry, and served in the last week of
      evidence given to the Inquiry. This documentation
          contains numerous reports of behaviour by Liverpool
          fans during the course of the 1988-89 football season
          which indicates a pattern of behaviour identical to
          that which took place on 15 April.
9   8.3   The following are examples of such reports:
             i. Humberside Police - Hull City v Liverpool dated
                18 February 1989.
            ii. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                dated 12 December 1988.
           iii. Metropolitan Police - Arsenal v Liverpool dated
                9 November 1988.
            iv. Hampshire Constabulary - Southampton v Liverpool
                dated 24 September 1988.
    8.4                     In addition, during the course of the
          there is a report from the Hertfordshire Constabulary
          concerning the Watford v Liverpool game which took
          place on 13 February 1988 where 1,500 Liverpool
£         supporters arrived at the ground without tickets and
          were allowed in.




                                          Michael Kallipetis Q.C
                                          2, Crown Office Row
                                          Temple
                                          EC4
                                          6th July 1989




                               37
r   r




                                            V
                             FRONT LINE EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT
                                     INVENTORY LIST
              LIST ITEMS
         Oxygen F 3/4 1/2 1/4
         Entonox F 3/4 1/2 1/4
         Suction Unit
         Resuscitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)
        ^prac Splints
         Bag and Mask
         Chloride Tablets (6)
         02 Masks
         Blankets (x 6)
         Pillows (x 2)
         Maternity Pack
         Waterproof Sheets
         Burns Sheet
         Nursing/Barrier Gown
         Green Sheets (3)
         Carrying Sheets
         Cervical Collar
         Bed Pan
         Urine Bottle
         Vomit Bowl
         Bucket and Lid
         Air Freshener Spray
         First Aid Box



                                     38
 Carrying Chair x 1
 Scoop Stretcher x 1
 Stretcher Poles x 2
 Rescue Box
 Fire Extinguishes (2)
 Wheel Brace
 Handle
 Ferno Ked x 1
# > emical Protective Suit x 2
 Details and Number of Crew
                       - 1
                       -   2

 Body Bag
 2 Pairs of Goggles
             LIST OF CONTENTS OF THE RESCUE BOX
              CARRIED ON FRONT LINE AMBULANCES

RESCUE BOX


anti-static gloves
crow-bar
bolt-croppers
screw-driver
hammer
all purpose saw
25 ft. rope lashing
           AMBULANCE AID SATCHEL
              INVENTORY LIST


QUANTITY                       ITEM

3                      7.5cm Roller Bandages
3                      5cm Roller Bandages
                        Triangular Bandages
                        15g Cotton Wool Packet
4
4
                        No 1 Wound Dressings
                        No 2 Wound Dressings
1                      No 3 Wound Dressings
3                      90cm + lm Gauze
1                      Pkt Gauze Swabs
1                      No 1 Guedal Airway
1                      No 2 Guedal Airway
1                      No 3 Guedal Airway
6                      Safety Pins
3                      Blanket Pins
1                        " Zinc Oxide Plaster
1                      Reflective Jacket
1                      Rubber Torch
1                      Brook Airway
1                      Pair of Dressing Scissors   5"




               41
              EXTENDED TRAINED AMBULANCEMAN'S EQUIPMENT
                              INVENTORY

  Carrying Case
  Laerdal Resuscitator
  Laerdal Adult Mask
  Laerdal Child Mask
  Airway Size 1
  Airway Size 2
  Airway Size 3
  Laryngoscope + 4 HP Batteries
  Laryngoscope Blade Size 3
  Laryngoscope Blade Size 4
^Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 6mm
■■ndotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 7mm
  tlndotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 8mm
  Endotracheal Tubes (cuffed) 9mm
  Catheter Mount (anti static)
  Catheter Swivel Connector
  Adaptors Female
  Lubricating Jelly
  Syringes 10 ml
  Stethoscope
  Sphygmomanometer
  Needle Box
  Scissors/shears
  Magi11 Forceps
  Spencer Wells
  Aspirator
  Laryngoscope Spare Bulb
  Tourniquet
  Catheter Mount Connector
  Vecafix
                                            inrlNNClinin'KNHHHHHHHHHNN




  Surgical Cloth
  Syringe Needles (19g)
  Catheter 14g
  Catheter 12g
  Cannulae 16g
  Cannulae 18g
  Cannulae 20g
  Administration Set
  Hartmanns Fluid IV 500 mis
  Haemaccel Fluid IV 500 mis
  Pre-injection Swabs
  Tape Adhesive Hospital 20 metres
  Tape Sleek 2.5 cm
  Tape Sleek 5.0 cm
 Arm Splint 18" x 4"
  Cotton Wool
 Gauze (1 metre)
  Triangular Bandages
  5.0 cm Bandages x 5 metres
4 V   >




          7.5 cm Bandages x 5 metres        2
          Gauze Swabs                       2
          Extractor Mucous                  1
          Oxygen Mask                       1
          Oxygen Tubing 3 metres            1
          Gloves Disposable                 2
          Antiseptic Solution               2
          Waterproof Sheet                  1
          Micro Pore Tape 2.5 cm            1
          Patient Report Form Pad           1
          Head Lamp and Battery             1
          Security Strap and 2 Keys         1
          Sharps Bin 500 ml                 1




                                       43
