                                         —   kJ—   *


                                        -r.y.
 From: Peter Edmundson                                        cc Mr O’Brien
       Operational Policing                                      Permanent Secretary
       Policy Unit                                               Mr Boys Smith
       Room 527, QAG                                             Mr Pugh
       » 273 - 2621                                              Mr Granatt
       13 May, 1997                                              Mr Warner
                                                                 Mr Owen




 1. Mr Michael

2. Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM THE LORD MAYOR OF LIVERPOOL

Issue

The Lord Mayor of Liverpool has written to lend his support to the campaign for a
new inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

l i ming

2.       We suggest that you send an early reply to the Lord Mayor.

Recommendation

3.     We recommend that you reply as set out in the attached draft, acknowledging
the Lord Mayor’s comments.

Consideration

4.     The Lord Mayor of Liverpool, Councillor Doran, writes to offer his
congratulations on your election success and to support the recent calls for a public
enquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy. Lord Taylor conducted a public inquiry after
the tragedy in 1989 but you are considering at present whether there are grounds to
order a new inquiry. Paul Pugh’s submission of 8 May provided advice on the issues
raised in the Granada television drama 'Hillsborough’ last year and the campaign by
the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG). The HFSG staged a benefit concert
at Anfield on 10 May to raise funds to support their campaign for a fresh public
inquiry and inquest into the disaster.

Presentation/handling issues
5.      There are no additional handling considerations.




                                                       Peter Edmundson
DRAFT LETTER FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE


Thank you for your letter of 7 May in support of recent calls for a new public inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster.


I am currently considering the representations which have been made for a fresh
inquiry. I have been following the families’ campaign for a new inquiry closely and
met members of the Hillsborough Families Support Group at the Commons on 17
December following the adjournment debate on the disaster. I am very conscious of
the strength of feeling on this issue.


There was, of course, a public inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster conducted by
Lord Justice Taylor immediately following the tragedy in 1989. Lord Taylor reported
on both the causes of the tragedy and on his recommendations for crowd safety at
sports grounds. I have to consider whether the information which has now been
submitted about new video evidence and as a result of Granada’s television drama
constitutes new evidence which is of such significance that, had it been put before
Lord Taylor or the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of
the inquest jury would have been different. I will, of course, have full regard for the
representations which have been made.


Finally, I would like to thank you for your kind comments on our election success. I
am very much looking forward to the task ahead.
                                           THE LORD MAYOR - COUNCILLOR FRANK DORAN

                                                                           hf P\r&                  \~9 MAY 1991
M .                                                                                   4" f        K (L J 'rt

                             fit.     /X . £                 St
THE          TOWN                   HALL                                             LIVERPO O L L2 3 S W

S e c r e ta ry : M   r.   J . K. GILLftf>PIE                                         T e le p h o n e :   0151 - 2 3 6 5181
                                                                                       F a c s im ile :    0151 - 225 5544

             /h rO                        Y\    0 P
                                                                                     May 1997


     The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
                                                                                             a ^     .
                                                                                                                    (\a\

     Home Secretary                                                                                                &c<jS
     Home Office                                                  *1
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     London
                                                                       n
                                                                           ■?
                                                                                                           M      )
     SWlH 9AT                                                                   7                        Ia jt    to



                                                                                                     k - J         0 u_rt/v_
                               4 |c w j2
     First of all may I offer you my congratulations on your election
     victory and I hope that you will enjoy the task which faces you.

     As you will be aware, the Hillsborough disaster has again been at
     the forefront of the news following the television play by Jimmy
     McGovern and the discovery of the missing police video.

     Consequently, there have been numerous requests for a public
     enquiry from various interested parties and my purpose in writing
     to you is to urge you to set up an enquiry into the terrible
     events which occurred at Hillsborough.

     I am sure that the families of those people who suffered would
     support such a move and I hope that you will look favourably upon
     my request.




                                                           LORD MAYOR
