                               OCMFTEEMTIAL



MMR294


Fran:    J A Chilcot
         Ext 3601
         3 August 1989

                                       cc     Ms Adams
                                              Mr Yates
                                              Mr Narris
                                              m ac
                                              Mr   Wauer
                                              Mr   Addisen
                                              Mr   Soden
                                              Mr   F Smitfe—

Mr Starr



HILLSBOROUGH - CHIEF OCNSTftHLE

As I mentioned to the Herne Secretary this morning, Mr Peter Wright,
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, has now seen the interim report on
Hillsborough and has concluded (only subject to his having informed the
Chairman of his Police Authority) that he should offer his resignation
to the Police Authority.   He intends to do this at a press conference
vdnch he will call tomorrow afternoon commencing probably at 2.00pm.


2.   X attach a copy of the draft of the statement he plans to issue *
that too must be subject to revision overnight, but he will confirm to
us first thing in the morning the final version.


3.   The statement accepts unequivocally the findings of the report and
the criticisms directed at the force and at individual officers; it
expresses sympathy for the bereaved and injured,
lord Justice Taylor and everyone concerned that the lessons of the
tragedy have been learned by the force and will be acted on, and he
will report to the Home Secretary on the action that he will take in
the light of the enquiry’s findings.



                              CXUFTEEMCIAL
                              OCMFILMfTIAL




4. Mr Wright has already consulted the Director of Public Prosecutions
concerning the possibility of any criminal proceedings against any of
those named in the report, and the Police Complaints Authority are ^
aware that the report is about to be published (there is already in
being a PCA supervised investigation into a complaint against
Mr Duckenfield}.


5.   Despite strong urging from HMCTC, supported by myself, Mr Wright is
not able to conclude so far that he would be justified in suspending
Mr EXickenfield and he will continue to consider that matter urgently
overnight.


6.   I will submit separately a short draft of a statement which the
Home Secretary might make later tomorrow following the announcement of
Mr Wright's offer of his resignation.




                                                 ISC

                                             j A CHirm r




                             OCMFTEENTTRL                                  2
Hie report of the enquiry by Lord Justice Taylor has been received by
me and I have noted the criticisms that have been directed against
members of the South Yorkshire Police both collectively and
individually.


I accept, without reservation, the finding and conclusions of the
enquiry in so far as they relate to the South Yorkshire Police and do
not seek to mitigate the failings attributed to the force.


That these failings contributed to the terrible tragedy of Hillsboroagh
is a natter of profound sadness to all members of the force and both
personally and on their behalf I once more extend my heartfelt regrets
to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury.


lord Justice Taylor and all concerned may be assured that the South
Yorkshire Police will pursue every action available to them to ensure
that such an event could not occur again.   I am grateful for the
carpliments he has paid in his report to the force and to the actions
of the vast majority of my officers who were on duty at the ground.


The Home Secretary has asked me for a report on the action I propose to
take in the light of the enquiry, and this will be pursued.   Before
responding it will be necessary to consult with the Director of Public
Prosecutions, the Police Complaints Authority and others.


In my report to the Police Authority on                     I indicated
that I accepted full responsibility for police action in connection
with the event.   In pursuance of this responsibility and in the light
of Lord Justice Taylor's findings, I have offered my resignation to my
police authority so that they may have the opportunity to consider my
continuance as Chief Constable and my office is now at their disposal.
