EDMUNDSON Peter

From:                   PUGH Paul
To:                     EDMUNDSON Peter
Cc:                     PYNE M atthew
Subject:                FW: Hillsborough
Date:                   05 February 1 9 9 8 10:33
Priority:               High


To see. Looks like 18 Feb - can we discuss next steps this afternoon - say 4pm?

From: CLIFFORD Sarah
To: BUTLER Brian; BAILEY Ivan; SUMNER Clare; PUGH Paul
Cc: HERBERT Giles
Subject: RE: Hillsborough
Date: 0 4 February 19 9 8 17:47

I will need to tip off the local media at the same time Clare is making arrangements with the families,
not least to tell them the how and when (but not the what) of the handling of the anncmt - perhaps we
can liaise??

Both sets of contacts will put the timing of the announcement in the public domain, so you may not
need to tip off the other parties unless on the day you want to tell them the content. May Sheffield FC
also be a consideration? given the new criticism of the stands, and that they hosted a visit from the
judge to look at the ground.

I will tell SY police press office about the timing when I tell the media as our Mr Wells didn't bother to
tell them last time!!

One or tw o media have already asked me whether the judge will be saying anything and I have told
them a firm no, and can highlight this point when I brief them on handling arrangements. The judge may
be doorstepped on the day though - he needs to be aware...


From: SUMNER Clare
To: BUTLER Brian; BAILEY Ivan; CLIFFORD Sarah; PUGH Paul
Cc: HERBERT Giles
Subject: Hillsborough
Date: 0 4 February 1 9 9 8 16:46

The business managers have provisionally agreed 18 February for the oral statement on Hillsborough.
This is not set in stone yet so there should be no indication to anyone that this is the plan.

Paul - w e will need to touch base on the handling of the families - I have booked half an hour before the
statement for the Home Secretary to meet them and I think w e will only be able to contact them when
we know this is all set in stone - probably a week in advance.

I think we should be cautious about contact with the South Yorks police as they should get equitable,
but not preferential treatment. W e will also want to tip off the staff associations on the day and possibly
Liverpool FC and the FA. Any other ideas?

Also from a CD point of view I think w e need to give consideration to the position of the judge who
does not want to do any media events - while this is OK on the one hand I think w e will need a
statement saying something along the lines of the judge stands on his report and does not w ant to make
any further comment.

I have not arranged a meeting as I think I need advice from Paul on it before w e can proceed.




                                                    Page 1
