 MEMORANDUM


 From: C F BONE
       Room 1106
       0171 273 2512


 Date:      12 September 1997

 To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




 You asked for a list o f videos you might usefully see. We now have a total o f 29 videotapes
 from various sources. I have not yet been able to look at all o f them or even most o f them. I
   .1 viewing them all one by one as time permits, taking them in what seems to me to be their

 rough order o f importance.

I have coded the ones I have looked through as HS1, HS2, etc.

O f these I suggest you see (in order of importance)

HS5 - BBC material, the main output from the ground, as recorded in London. There are
different camera angles, with the main shots from a high gantry in the South Stand (Leppings
Lane end to the left as you watch). I have detailed notes on this material but it is worth
looking right through from 1440 to 1540.

HS7 - more BBC material. The important stuff here is the film taken from behind the goal
at Leppings Lane, with a view down into pens 3 and 4 from the back. This starts at 00.48.00
on the tape. There are good views o f the match being stopped, o f people leaving and being
taken out o f the pens, and of what appears to be a pile o f dead bodies behind the fencing.
You should see up to about 1530.

H£!8 - BBC material from two portable cameras. Worth watching all o f it - about an
hour. Starts with close-ups o f the Leppings Lane terrace, from in front o f pen 2 looking along
to pens 3 and 4. At 150800, cries o f pain and ‘they’re all collapsed here’ - a girl’s face is
pressed against the wire. Then, at 001240 on the tape counter, there is footage from the
other camera, o f the orderly turnstiles at Penistone Road, the chaotic ones at Leppings Lane,
followed by scenes from the Leppings Lane terrace at the peak o f the disaster. Tape also
contains interviews with fans.



HS4 - The Hillsborough compilation tape made up by West Midlands police from a variety
o f sources - their own material, CCTV on the day, and BBC footage. Lasts 2 hours. Worth
watching all o f this. Supplied by S Yorkshire police.
G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\012.DOC
HS1 - Ann Adlington (Support Group’s lawyer) says this is what the Inquest jury were
shown as the best available tape o f what happened in pens 3 and 4. You and/or Graham have
noted it as completely useless - there are blurred images from post 1500 hours, with flaring,
interference, whiteout and jumps. The tape was supplied to the Home Office by the Family
Support Group in March 1997. You should see some o f it, if you haven’t already, to get a
general idea but there is no point in seeing it all.

HS2 and HS3 - You may have seen some o f these already, but worth sampling. Fuzzy
CCTV footage o f people on the Leppings Lane terrace from around 1430. Then people
milling about on the pitch, climbing over the fence, etc, post 1500. Tape HS3 starts at around
1512. Ann Adlington says HS2 and HS3 are the police tape from camera 5, not shown to
Taylor or the jury. Trevor Hicks is said to have made them up himself from tapes he was
lent by Yorkshire TV, who got them soon after the disaster from Peter Wright, then Chief
Officer o f South Yorkshire Police. Quality is not good - the story is that this is because what
we have is several generations removed from the original. The support group say the
importance o f HS2 and HS3 is that they show that police CCTV camera 5 was working,
moving and zooming in and out.

At the end o f HS3 there is footage o f ambulances queuing on Penistone Road. This was
 iainly not shot from camera 5 (could come from BBC film, HS8??). If it is true that Trevor
Hicks made up HS2 and HS3 to show that camera 5 was working it is not clear why he would
have put this stuff in.




CH RIS BONE




G:\HiLLSBGR\S-S\012.DOC
