Dear sir,

We were told by Doctor Popper that our son, Carl David Lewis,
died before 3.15 pm. However we were later told by our social
worker that he died at 5.15pm. Since recently receiving police
files it appears that there are now three different versions of
the time he died. The first version is from consultant James
Stoddard who says he pronounced my son dead at 5.05 pm. The
second version was by a doctor Lumb who the police say pronounced
him dead at 5.40 pm. Evidence from leading ambulance man John
Kevin Flack states he took my son to the hospital, arriving there
at around 4.30pm. Surgeon Christopher James Stoddard said he
himself was just arriving at the hospital at 4.30pm when my son
was being wheeled in on a trolley.

There is a further discrepancy from policeman Allan Thomas
Wadsworth who said a doctor Ashton of Liverpool University was
treating my son at the ground. Later in the statement he said it
was a doctor Ashmore. Further, John Kevin Flack in his statement
states that my son had a good colour when handing him over to The
Royal Hallamshire Hospital and that on returning to the ambulance
he found a mans wristwatch on the trolley. This was my sons watch
so this proves that it was definitely my son and that he was still
alive at 4.30pm going by doctor Stoddard.

What I really want to know was why my sons body was just dumped
down a lane by some hedges and not immediately taken to hospital.
For him to arrive at the hospital at 4.30pm means the ambulance
must not have left until 4.20pm. I have always felt that my son
would have lived if he had received treatment earlier. I am even
more convinced of this now after reading Leading Ambulanceman
Flacks ^statement which goes on about the complete breakdown in
communication.

This information has only just come to my attention. It was not
mentioned at the inquest because of the 3.15pm cut off time.
Now I know the 3.15pm cut off time was deliberately set down to
help the police in their cover up. For this reason the inquest
verdicts must be wrong as lots of important evidence was not made
known to the jury. The verdict should be struck down and there
should be a whole new inquiry into the entire cover up. Justice
must be seen to be done. Maybe then we can start to come to terms
with the needless death of our son.


Yours faithfully


Mr M Lewis
