        m th the C om plim en tsA )            A
      I o f the Private S e c r e ta r y ^




O v A O ^ -N             ]ddM




               ^         ^                   •V
                           f                 jr^X-
 {J w r c K ^



 «■    f * “f ^                                    ^
 w         |u'* ‘ ^
     .   ,v» «-
  ‘C T /
  VUjU^r'”^          -


  v    / g     a    ^          »* ^

      Utts/5 ^ X / Y ^
From: M J Pyne                                                cc Mr Howarth
      Operational Policing                                       Permanent Secretary
      Policy Unit                                                Mr Boys Smith
      Room 528, QAG                                              Mr Pugh
      @ 273 - 2433                                               Mr Edmundson
      5 May, 1998                                                Mr Granatt
                                                                 Mr Warner
                                                                 Mr Owen

Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH CORRESPONDENCE

Issue

To reply to correspondence from relatives of the Hillsborough victims about the
outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny.

Timing

2.   We should aim to reply in advance of the adjournment debate on Friday 8
May.

Recommendation

3.      Draft letters for Home Secretary signature are attached behind.           ■ 6 MM 1838
Consideration                                                                H 0M ESH 5B EV
4.      The attached correspondence has been received from Mrs Rose Robinson
(mother of Steven Robinson), Mr and Mrs Stan Roberts (parents of Graham Roberts)
and Mr John Glover (father of Ian Glover). I apologise for the delay in submitting
advice. The correspondence concerned was marked originally as Treat Official’, but
you have previously indicated that you would like to reply personally to
correspondence from the Hillsborough families.

5.      Mrs Robinson asks you to say whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Dr Popper
(the Coroner) and Mr Duckenfield were freemasons and she also re-iterates the
families view that there is no basis for the inquest’s verdict of accidental death. We
have previously indicated that whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a member of the
freemasons is not an issue here and that it is entirely a matter for him to decide
whether to disclose if he is a member. This is equally true in relation to Dr Popper and
Mr Duckenfield.

6.      Unfortunately, an earlier letter to Mr and Mrs Roberts enclosing a copy of an
extract of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report incorrectly referred to their son Graham
as 'Michael’. This was an error in the preparation of the letters. Mr and Mrs Roberts
raise a number of issues about the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny. In particular,
though, they ask for disclosure of statements made by St John Ambulance personnel
at Hillsborough. These were not part of the scrutiny papers and we are advised that
they are held by South Yorkshire Police as part of the Hillsborough archive. Mr and
Mrs Roberts also refer to the release of the scrutiny report to the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire in advance of its publication. The Chief Constable is mentioned in
the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny as the disciplinary
authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore, together with the CPS, Attorney
General and yourself, was one of the parties to whom the report was directed.

7.     Mr Glover expresses his dissatisfaction with the decision of the Chairman of
the Family Support Group to postpone your planned meeting with the families in
Merseyside and he suggests that in future you should notify individual families direct.
He also raises a number of issues about the conduct the inquest and the failure to
quash the inquest verdict or to take any other action against those found to be
responsible for the disaster.


Handling/presentational issues

8.     No further issues.




                                             Matthew Pyne
                                                                                          4   ( O T I   S'


 DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

Mrs Rose Robinson


Liverpool L23



Thank you for your letter of 3 March about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the
Hillsborough disaster.


I recognise that my decision not to reopen the inquiry is a bitter disappointment to the
families of those who died. I am satisfied, though, that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
conducted a thorough scrutiny of the evidence and considered its significance
carefully. He has considered all the material allegations about missing or concealed
videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness statements
and concerns about the use of the 3.15 pm cut-off time at the Inquest. His report is
comprehensive and sets out clearly the reasons for his conclusions.


You asked whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, Dr Stefan Popper and Mr Duckenfield
were freemasons. That is entirely a matter for them to disclose. As you may know, I
recently announced the Government’s response to the Home Affairs Select Committee
report, “Freemasonry in the Police and the Judiciary”. I announced that all new
appointments to the judiciary, the police, the legally qualified staff of the Crown
Prosecution Service, probation and prison services will have to declare their
membership of the Freemasons as a condition of their service. Any later admission to
the Freemasons after taking up post will also be declarable. In addition, I have now
written to the United Grand Lodge, requesting their members who are already
working in these professions to join a voluntary register. Failure on the part of those
already within these professions to return information would not, at this stage, be a
breach of conditions of employment, and nil returns would be shown as such on the
register.
You referred to the verdict of accidental death reached at the inquest. Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith says that he does not consider the inquest to have been flawed and he
supports the Divisional’ Court’s conclusion that there was no evidence of bias. He
found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court to quash the
inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned what he described as Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C.


I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of
his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing theirjob


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. In January the Home Affairs Select Committee recently made some
important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures. I
have recently announced my response to the HAC recommendations including my
intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures
and to remove the existing double jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and
disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also endorsed the Committee’s
recommendation that forces should show greater commitment to their powers to
verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a request
to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.


I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a
public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party
was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an inquiry has been
completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would
have spared the families of those who died unnecessary distress when the Taylor
Inquiry had covered substantially the same ground as the Inquest.


For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept my decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was equally rigorous. I am, as you know, ready to talk to the
families further to explain my approach. I met a delegation whilst in Southport on 7
March and I am in touch with the Family Support Group to arrange another meeting
in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have an opportunity to discuss Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in an adjournment debate on 8 May.
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE


Mr and Mrs S Roberts

Wallasey
Merseyside L44




Thank you for your letters 28 February and 30 March about the Hillsborough disaster.
I am sorry that you have not received an earlier reply to your letters about the outcome
of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of evidence about the disaster.


Let me first apologise for the mistake in my letter of 18 February with Graham’s
name. I am sorry for the distress which this must have caused you.


I realise that you and the other Hillsborough families are bitterly disappointed by the
outcome of the scrutiny. As I explained in the House, one of my first concerns on
taking office last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and independent
investigation of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about the disaster.


I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny of the
evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report covers in detail the
matters put to him by the families and others Mid the reasons for his conclusions. He
has considered all the material allegations about missing or concealed videotape
evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness statements and concerns
about the use of the 3.15 pm cut-off time at the Inquest.


I have considered the Judge’s report carefully and accept the conclusion which he has
reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add anything significant to the
evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that he does not consider the inquest to have been
flawed and he supports the Divisional’ Court’s conclusion that there was no evidence
of bias. He found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court to
quash the inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest. He also considered the arguments
about the 3.15 pm cut-off time. He says that the coroner did not say that all those who
died did so before 3.15 pm, or that all those who became unconscious subsequently
died. It was only in relation to how or by that means the deceased came to their
deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. The Taylor inquiry considered in detail the
response of the emergency services after 3.15 pm as well as before, and concluded
that no valid criticism could be made of them.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned what he described as Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that the fans had opened Gate C.


The Home Secretary has indicated that he shares the sentiments expressed by the Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing their jo b ”.


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which the
Government intends to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select Committee
published some important recommendations about the police complaints and
discipline procedures. I recently announced my response to the HAC
recommendations including my intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil
standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have
also endorsed the Committee’s recommendation that forces should show greater
commitment to their powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where
appropriate, to postpone a request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion
of disciplinary proceedings.
You asked about statements by members of the St John Ambulance. When I made my
statement on 18 February I said that I would place in the House of Commons Library
as much of the evidence which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered in his scrutiny as
possible, including the statements made by police officers about the events of the day.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report dealt with allegations about the amendment of a
number of those police statements and it was, therefore, appropriate to publish them.


All other statements made by those present at Hillsborough, including those made by
St John Ambulance members, are held by South Yorkshire Police. Copies of
statements should, therefore, be requested from South Yorkshire Police direct.
Requests should be made to Ken Greenway at the Complaints and Discipline
Department, Windsor Road, Sheffield, S8 8UB.


You also asked why the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire received a copy of the
scrutiny report in advance of its publication. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of
reference specifically referred to the Chief Constable as the disciplinary authority for
South Yorkshire Police and, therefore, one of the parties to whom the report was
directed. It was entirely appropriate for the Chief Constable to consider the report
once it was submitted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


I am, as you know, ready to talk to the families further to explain my decision.
Graham’s sister was among the delegation I met whilst in Southport on 7 March, and
you may be aware that I am in touch with the Family Support Group to arrange
another meeting in Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have an opportunity
to discuss Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in an adjournment debate in the House
of Commons on 8 May.
DRAFT REPLY FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE



Mr John Glover

Kirkdale
Liverpool L4|




Thank you for your letter of 9 April about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the
Hillsborough disaster.


I am very conscious of the strength of feeling surrounding the Hillsborough Disaster,
and I understand that my decision not to hold a fresh inquiry will be a disappointment
to you and the other families of those who died.


As I explained in the House of Commons, one of my first concerns on taking office
last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and independent investigation
of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about the disaster. I, therefore,
announced on 30 June 1997 that I had asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a
scrutiny of the evidence and to report his conclusions.


I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny of the
evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report is comprehensive and
sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his conclusions. He
has considered all the material allegations about missing or concealed videotape
evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness statements and concerns
about the use of the 3.15 pm cut-off time at the Inquest.


It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been heard publicly before. What the Scrutiny had to consider
was not only whether the evidence put forward was new, but also whether it was of
such significance that it would justify a new inquiry, or further consideration by the
Attorney General (with regard to the inquest) or the criminal or disciplinary
authorities.


I have considered the Judge’s report carefully and I accept the conclusion which he
has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add anything significant to
the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found no basis for the Attorney-General to apply to the
High Court to quash the inquest verdict or to hold a new inquest. He also said that the
effect of quashing the verdict without substituting any other verdict would be the
same as if the jury had returned an open verdict and that would only be appropriate
where there is insufficient evidence to record any other possible conclusion.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice Taylor’s
conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of police control.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself condemned what he described as Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lies” that fans had opened Gate C.


I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of
his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing theirjob


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. In January the Home Affairs Select Committee recently made some
important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures. I
have recently announced my response to the HAC recommendations including my
intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures
and to remove the existing double jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and
disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also endorsed the Committee’s
recommendation that forces should show greater commitment to their powers to
verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a request
to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.


I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a
public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party
was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an inquiry has been
completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would
have spared the families of those who died unnecessary distress when the Taylor
Inquiry had covered substantially the same ground as the Inquest.


For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept my decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was equally rigorous.


I share your disappointment that it was not possible to arrange a further meeting in
Merseyside with the families, although I understand the problems involved. I am, as
you know, ready to talk to the families further to explain my approach. I met a
delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March and I will arrange another meeting in
Merseyside. The House of Commons will also have the opportunity to discuss Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in an adjournment debate on 8 May.
                                                                                 Liverpool L 23



                                                                                 3rdMarch 1998




Dear Mr Straw,

When you met with the families of those who died at Hillsborough recently, you may recall I asked you
whether or not the following three people were free masons. Justice Stuart-Smith, Stefan Popper and Mr
Duckenfield. I would be most obliged if you would furnish me with this information.

I would like to comment also on your remarks to us before you went into the house.

1. You acknowledged that the police were guilty of gross negligence.

2. You acknowledged that the police had lied.

3. You acknowledged that the police had changed statements


Do you honestly think a jury would have come up with an accidental death verdict if these facts had been
known. I think not. That is our grievance. The Taylor Report was not allowed to be mentioned at the
inquest. The police in conjunction with the coroner were allowed to put up dozens of witnesses taking up
many days concentrating on drunken fens, when Taylor had already established this was not the cause of
the disaster. An inquest is supposed to look at how when and where. I doubt if you have ever read the
transcripts of the inquest, but they were not concentrating on these three things I can assure you, they
concentrated on making the Liverpool Supporters lode like drunken hooligans and the police like
guardian angels. The inquest was unjust, unfair and unacceptable. I lost my 17 year old son Steven. Put
yourself in my position and you will realise that we will never stop fighting for the truth of Hillsborough
to come out, and the verdict of accidental death overturned.


I would very much appreciate an early reply to my letter, that is the very least you can do for now.




Yours sincerely



                                             J:                                            OPPtl REGiSTRV
                                      Rose Robinson (Mrs)
                                             Wallasey
                                             Merseyside
                                             L44

                                             28 February 1998

                                  cc:   Mr Tony Blair
                                        Lord Justice Stewart-Smith


Dear Mr Straw,

We refer to your letter of Wednesday 18 February, given to us at
the House of Commons.  This letter has left us utterly speechless
and appalled, as it refers to our "brother Michael", however the
memo attached from Lord Justice Stewart-Smith correctly refers to
our son and brother - Graham Roberts.

We have written to you previously regarding the death of Graham
and find it very insensitive and totally unacceptable that you
get something as basic as Graham's name wrong.  Although we
realise this was an error it leaves us wondering how thoroughly
you bother to read other documents too? For example, do you
always merely accept that what you read as being accurate without
checking into all the facts? Does not your legal training lead
you to question when only one group's side of a case is being
supported? Maybe this could explain how you were able to accept
Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's scrutiny report? We feel that this
report is flawed, totally one sided and that there was no point
Lord Justice Stewart-Smith meeting with the families and others
important figures supporting the Hillsborough Family Support
Group's fight for justice.  He had reached his decision prior to
coming to Liverpool and decided to continue the unacceptable
pattern of preventing the truth from being printed.

You said in your meeting with us at the House of Commons that all
statements are now available in the House of Commons Library, so
please could you arrange copies of all the (preferably
unadulterated) statements from the St John's Ambulance members
who were present at Hillsborough to be sent to us? We requested
copies of these firstly from the Sheffield St John's Ambulance
HQ, then secondly Lord Justice Stewart-Smith said that he would
look into it, but so far none have been produced.

We will close by informing you how disappointed we are with "New"
Labour - who promised us so much and supported us so strongly
prior to being elected and who have now closed yet another door
in our faces.  The whole country is aware that the happenings
commencing on 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough and continuing even
today have been a show of total injustice and we will not rest
until the truth is allowed to be told and justice prevails for
the memories of our son and brother Graham and the other 95
victims who were unnecessarily killed that day.

Yours in defiance.



                   Daphne, Stan and Sue Roberts                  ?
          Graham John Roberts' Mother, Father and! Si^fsrCV15v
                                                        <=3^ '


                     •/;/0 '//»
                 /                           Wallasey
             /                               Merseyside
                                             L44

                                             30 March 1
                                                          gPPU REGISTRY
                                  Copy to:   Mr Tony BIJir ^2 R P R t t M

Dear Mr Straw,                                             RECEIVED
Please find below just some of the concerns we feel need
addressing following Lord Justice Stewart-Smith's scrutiny
report.   (Many of which we raised with him at our meeting in
Liverpool, but none of which were answered satisfactorily.)

Chapter 1,Paragraph 2 As stated in Lord Taylor's Inquiry: "the
main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control".
Why then did the police not have to answer any questions they did
not want to at the main inquest? And why did the Coroner not
even allow certain previously provided questions to be raised?

Paragraph 5 Mr Duckenfield retired on the grounds of illhealth.
Please can you explain why, when police officers retire on
illhealth, disciplinary charges against them are dropped? Does
the same happen in all walks of life, if not, why are/were the
police treated differently from others?

Paragraph 12 Lord Justice Stewart-Smith was sent "about" 30
letters from members of the public. Please can they be made
available to us?

Paragraph 17 Lord Justice Stewart-Smith states £hat "for one
reason or another they (ie Dr Walker and Mr Houldsworth) were not
called to give evidence to Lord Taylor or the Coroner".  We, the
families, did not know of their existence until they came forward
following the showing of the Hillsborough programme on TV.  The
question this raises in our minds is, were their statements
deliberately suppressed, and if so, just how many other
statements suffered the same fate?

Paragraph 19 Lord Justice Stewart-Smith states "I have looked at
all the evidence I have been asked to consider"...  If this is
the case, are the St John's Ambulancemen's statements now
available?  If so, as we have requested on numerous occasions,
please, can we have copies of them - and also any statements from
members of the other emergency services?  If they are not
available, then this would be just one (of probably many)
examples showing the above statement as being incorrect and very
misleading.

Paragraph 24  "I would recommend a further public inquiry if I
considered that there was an important aspect of the disaster or
its aftermath which had not been sufficiently investigated. .. "
Once again, we must emphasise that no information after the
unbelievable 3.15pm cut-off time has yet to be scrutinised.
Please, please will you reconsidfir this?

Paragraph 29 ".. no formal application has been made" (ie to
quash the verdicts of accidental death). Can we make such an
application now?
Paragraph 30  " .   quashing of the existing verdicts leaving
nothing in their place, I would regard that as absolutely
valueless".  We strongly disagree with this statement - we feel
it is in the public interest that this verdict be quashed.
History books are currently being written which mention that this
disaster was caused by the fans arriving late... and worse.  This
causes deep distress to the families and football fans in general
and as we all know this was not the case.  The verdict of
"accidental death" sits well with this version of wrongly quoted
history of the event and we urge you to reconsider.

Paragraph 39  "..due to the unexpected late arrival of a very
large number of supporters". The fans' late arrival was caused
to some (major) extent by the extensive police checks enroute to
the ground, in order to confiscate alcohol from vehicles at the
roundabouts leading from the motorways to the ground.  Therefore,
late arrival should have been anticipated and had any officer
thought to radio through to the ground from one of the "out
posts" that day, a late kick-off could have been requested and
the disaster need never have happened.

General questions:

When did the Sheffield Police receive the Scrutiny report - was
it before it was printed?

Can any policemen who were using batons to knock fans off the
fences be identified on video?

Barrier number 144 had been removed earlier?      Why has the
significance of this never been questioned?

Why were blood samples to test for alcohol levels taken from the
victims, and why was so much time at the inquest devoted to
alocohol? This aspect was considered by Lord Taylor to be
irrelevant.  We strongly object to Graham's blood alcohol level
being taken - he was not in a traffic accident and this should
not have been a factor addressed initially nor in the inquests.

We also feel it important to mention that we agree with Mrs
McBrien that Exit Gate C should not have been opened.  Had this
not have happened there may have been a totally different outcome
to this disaster.

We will finish by pointing out that as Mr Wells was not the Chief
Constable on the day of the disaster we do not expect any apology
from him - only the guilty persons.  As for apologies appearing
in the "Yorkshire Post" what good is that? We have no
opportunity of seeing this paper - what is wrong with a personal
apology - or one printed in the "Liverpool Echo"?

We eargerly await your response to this and O u r previous letter
of 28 February 1998.

Y o u e s -,




         Baphne Roberts     Stanley Roberts     Sue Roberts
                 (The family of the late Graham Roberts)
                                                       Hr John Glover

                                                       Kirkdale
                                                       Liverpool
                                                       L4 rn
Jack Straw
                                                        Tel
Home Secretary




Dear Hr Straw

I am the father of Ian Thomas Glover (Aged 20) who lost his life in the
Hillsborough Disaster 55-4-89.

Hay i first of all sap that i was not one of the families who turned down your
offer of a two hour meeting with you,on Saturday 21st Harch 1998,in fact,the
first i heard of this meeting was on Friday evening at approx 11.30pm on local
television.

I am a member of the H.F.S.G,and i thought that it would of been more
appropriate to invite individual families to the meeting,as alot of families
are very disappointed that the meeting was turned down by Hr Trevor Hicks.I
can assure you that the decision made,was not the decision by all of the
families,including my own.If there is to be a further offer,which would be
much appreciated,could you please notify individual families of the date,
time and place.

I was also wondering if you could answer   a few questions for me.I feel i must
also say that Lord Justice Stuart Smiths   report has not been accepted by my
family,the reason being,that we were not   given the chance to comment on it b
before we were told the contents.We also   found that it contains facts that
we do not agree with.

I will now give you a list of questions that i hope you will answer for me.



1.  In Parliament,you said that gross negligence was the cause of my sons
death,as well as the other 95 Hillsborough victims.So,why then was the verdict
of accidental death,still allowed to stand.


2. The evidence that Lofid Justice Stuart Smith looked at,also led him to say
that gross negligence was the cause of Hillsborough.

In 1989,the C.P.S add D.P.P also had the same evidence,as well as the
conservative government,so surely they should of come to the same conclusion,
and charges should of been given against the guilty party,s.



3.  In 1990,in a closeddcourt in Hanchester,The South Yorkshire Police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,Eastwood & P§ItN§B§ (Designers of Pens)
and Sheffield City Council,all admitted negligence,but this was not made
public.

In a statement made by The South Yorkshire Police,liability was admitted,but
not negligenee.This was a deliberate attempt to fool the public,before the
inquest started.
4.  The coroner would not allow The Lord Taylor Report to be used,except when
it suited himself.He would not allow any evidence after 3.15pm.on 15th April
1989.But the one thing that he did allow was the police to give evidence of
the Orgreve Miners Strike and the F.A cup semi-final which was a couple of
months after 15-4-1989.Can i say that the inquest which i attended every day
for approx 80 days,was plainly a P.R exercise for the police.

Could you please explain why this was allowed,as the Coroner.Dr.Stephen Popper
said,that he was being guided by people in London,so this must of been known
by the people who were guiding him.

Also,why were the police allowed to tell the same lies,as they did at Lord
Taylors enquiry.To my mind,that is definitely  perjury,as Lord Taylor also
said that the police had lied.

I would be very grateful to you,if you could answer all of my questions.

Thankyou

Yours Sincerely
Mr John Glover.
