I

I                                                                       (3
    A BILL TO CREATE FURTHER OFFENCES IN CONNECTION WITH
    ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL MATCHES


    Draft Instructions to Parliamentary Counsel


                  Part I:   Introduction, scope and extent


    1.1    These Instructions set out proposals for the creation of
    four new offences which should apply only at or in relation to
    association football matches.     The offences were proposed by
    Lord Justice Taylor in Chapters 7 and 9 of his final report
    into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.     A copy of that report
          962) is attached to these Instructions.


    1.2   The proposals for the offence of ticket touting are set
    out in Part II of these Instructions.     Proposals for the three
    remaining offences are dealt with together in Part III of
    these Instructions.


    1.3   As noted above, the offences should apply only in
    relation to association football matches, notwithstanding that
    there may be pressure to extend the offences to other sporting
    events.   Furthermore it would be inappropriate for the
    offences to apply at every association football match because
    problems of crowd control (to which the proposed offences are
    directed) occur only at the better attended matches.
    Accordingly, the Bill should provide that the matches to which
    the proposed offences should apply are those of a description
    or descriptions for the time being designated by order made by
    the Secretary of State:    cf. section 1(2) of the Football
    Spectators Act 1989 (c.37).     This power should be exercisable
    by statutory instrument and any such order should be subject
    to the negative resolution procedure:     cf. section 1(10) of
    the 1989 Act.   It is currently proposed to exercise the power
    in respect of matches where one of the teams is a member of
    the Football League and in respect of matches involving teams
    representing a country or territory.    The same designation
    should apply for all four proposed offences.
1.4 The proposed offences should apply in England and Wales
only.


                      Part II:   Ticket Touts


2.1   Counsel is referred, by way of background, to paragraphs
273 to 278 of the Taylor Final Report.     These describe the
problems which can be caused by ticket touts at association
football matches and (in paragraph 276) why touting elsewhere
does not create the same problems.    Paragraph 279 sets out
three possible offences directed at touts.      This Part of these
Instructions contains proposals broadly directed at giving
^ f e c t to the first of those possible offences:    that is, sale
of tickets on the day of a football match without due
authority.


2.2   One of the main purposes of the proposed offence is to
prevent the obstruction caused by touts at the entrances to
football grounds and on the highways leading to them.       But, as
the sale of tickets by touts potentially weakens the
segregation of fans, the proposed offence will also help to
prevent such weakening.   It might also discourage fans without
tickets from going to an all ticket match in the hope of
buying one from a tout.


2.3   The offence should consist of selling or offering for
sale tickets for certain association football matches on the
day of the match in question without the necessary consent to
do so (as to which see paragraph 2.7 below).     The matches to
which the offence should apply are those of the description
designated under the order-making power proposed in paragraph
1.4 above.


2.4   The essential feature of the proposed offence is selling
tickets or offering or exposing them for sale.       It should not
be necessary to prove that money actually changed hands (cf.
section 196(1) of the Licensing Act 1964 (c.26)).      it is


                                                                     2
recognised that such an offence may not be wholly effective in
catching all touts.    An offence of possession of tickets with
the intention of selling them would allow the police to act
against a person they believed to be a tout but who is not
actually displaying any tickets and has not been seen to have
sold any.    However, the disadvantage of such an offence is the
difficulty of proving intention and it is therefore not what
is required.


2.5   It is not proposed that the offence should be restricted
to the vicinity of the ground at which the match is played.
If, for example, it became known that touts operated from a
A r t i c u l a r area in Central London fans might buy tickets there
prior to travelling to the ground and the segregation of fans
would thereby be disrupted.     The offence is to be committed if
the selling or offering for sale or display of tickets takes
place in a public place or a place to which members of the
public have access, so as to ensure that touts cannot operate
from places such as public houses, cafes or shops (being
places to which the public have access).      Even this might not
be wide enough because^ttjere is a danger that a tout might
operate from his home^address (which becomes known to fans
whether by advertisement or by other means).       In such a case,
this is not a place to which members of the public have access
because only those fans who are going to buy tickets will have
admission.   Subject to Counsel's views, the Bill should
provide that the offence can be committed anywhere (whether a
place to which the public have access or not).           ^


2.6   If possible, the Bill should provide a defence to cover
cases such as that of the fan who has become ill (possibly on
the day of the match) and has sold his ticket to someone he
knows.   It seems unduly cumbersome to require him to obtain
the necessary written authority (as to which, see paragraph
2.7 below) and, in the case of illness on the day of the
match, it would not be possible for him to do so.       There
should be two elements in the proposed defence.       The first is


                                                                     3
that the sale should not take place in a public place or place
to which the public have access.     Fans should not be able to
stand outside a ground to sell spare tickets.     The second is
that the sale is an isolated incident and the person selling
does not otherwise deal in tickets.     This may not be an easy
concept to give effect to and any alternative suggestions
would be gratefully received.


2.7    Apparently it is not unusual for football clubs to have
authorised agents to sell tickets both before and on the day
of a match (where the match is not all ticket) in addition to
ttie clubs themselves.    It is necessary to ensure that such
™ e n t s are not caught by the proposed new offences.
Accordingly, the Bill should ensure that a person who has the
necessary consent in writing to sell tickets falls outside the
offence.    However, it is not sufficient to take up the
suggestion in paragraph 279 of the Taylor Final Report that
the authority should be that of the home club since the semi­
finals of the FA Cup are played on neutral grounds and the
final is played at Wembley.     The Bill should therefore provide



[2.8    Penalties]


2.9    The Bill should confer a power on a constable to arrest
without warrant a person whom the constable believes, on
reasonable grounds,is committing or has committed the proposed
offence.


2.10   The Bill should confer a power on the constable to
search any person he has arrested under the power proposed in
paragraph 2.9 above.     It should also confer a power on the
constable to confiscate from any person arrested under that
power any tickets to a match which is designated under the
proposals in paragraph 1.3 above, where the match takes place
on that day.    The power of search should also extend to any
motor vehicle which the constable reasonably believes the


                                                                  4
arrested person is using (and any tickets found should be
liable to confiscation).   What is more difficult is the extent
to which the power of search should extend to premises in
which the person has been arrested.    Where the person has been
arrested in a house where he lives or a shop he is using, it
seems reasonable that the power of search should extend to
those premises.   Where, however, he has been arrested in a
public house or cafe, it hardly seems fair to the owner of
such premises that they should be searched.      Any suggestions
from Counsel as to a means of limiting the search powers would
be gratefully received.


                    Part III;   Other offences


3.1   Counsel is referred to Chapter 9 of the Taylor Final
Report.   This Part of these Instructions attempts to set out
proposals to create offences in respect of the three
activities listed in paragraph 289 of that Report (throwing
missiles; offensive chants and running on the pitch).


3.2   The Government accepts that these activities should be
covered by specific offences rather than by introducing into
the law of England and Wales an offence equivalent to the
Scottish common law offence of disorderly conduct or breach of
the peace (see paragraph 290 of the Report).     In addition to
the argument about deterrence which is set out in paragraph
299 of the Report, the vagueness of an offence such as
"disorderly conduct" is unsatisfactory in that the potential
offender does not have a clear idea as to whether or not be is
breaking the law.


3.3   Nevertheless, the proposed new offences about missiles
and chanting are very much directed at anti-social or
disorderly behaviour rather than behaviour which necessarily
harms others.   It is this aspect that differentiates the
proposed new offences from the existing offences in sections
4, 5 and 18 of the Public Order Act 1986 (c.64).     For




                                                                   j
 instance, the conduct which it is proposed to cover with the
new offence in respect of chanting might not actually stir up
racial hatred (see section 18(1)), but it is conduct that is
liable to give offence.    The various sorts of anti-social
behaviour at which the proposed new offences are directed are
especially prevalent at certain association football matches.
It is for this reason that the Government proposes to depart
from the view implicit in the Report (see paragraphs 290, 291
and 3 01) that the offences should apply at most sports
grounds, and to limit the place where the offences can be
committed to those grounds where association football matches
 of the designated description (see paragraph 1.3 above) are
fla y e d .


3.4   The proposed offences go further than the existing law in
the type of conduct that is made unlawful.       The justification
for so doing lies in the type of conduct prevalent at certain
association football matches.       Since that conduct is not
prevalent at other sporting events, the justification for the
extended offences does not exist in relation to them.       The
offences are not really public order offences; they are more
concerned with the bad behaviour of football fans.


Throwing of missiles
3.5   Paragraphs 293 and 294 of the Report refer to the
existing offences in sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order Act
1986 and point out briefly why these offences are regarded as
being too narrow.    Section 4(1)    (read with the definition of
"violence" in section 8) would cover the throwing of missiles
but only if it is done in the circumstances set out at the end
of section 4(1).    Those additional elements would make it
difficult to prosecute under section 4(1) someone standing on
an upper terrace who showered persons below with coins.         It
might also be difficult to secure a conviction under section
5(1) of the Public Order Act 1986.      Whilst it might not be as
difficult to establish that a person whose head bears the
brunt of a torrent of coins has been caused "distress" as


                                                                     6
 paragraph 294 implies (if the head is unprotected and the
 coins descend with sufficient force the pain would outweigh
the delight at the unexpected largesse), the recipient might
be out of sight of the donor and the conditions in section
5(1) would therefore not be satisfied.         ✓'*’


 3.5   The Government therefore agrees with the Report's
conclusion that it should be sufficient for a missile to be
thrown without the need to show that it was directed at a
particular person or that anyone is likely to be alarmed or
distressed thereby.    Accordingly, the Bill should make it an
offence for a person to throw a "missile" anywhere within a
^ ^ o r t s ground at which a match of the designated description
 is being played.


3.7    Whilst these Instructions refer to "missiles" the sort of
objects that should be covered by the proposed offence are
probably wider than one might expect from the dictionary
definition.   The Concise Oxford Dictionary (1990 edition)
defines "missile" as "an object or weapon suitable for
throwing at a target or for discharge from a machine".      It is
not clear whether this would cover coin throwing, but (in
accordance with paragraph 289 of the Report) such activity
should be covered by the proposed offence.     The offence should
also cover the unpleasant practice (which sometimes occurs at
football matches) of the throwing of plastic bags filled with
urine, notwithstanding that such activity would probably
constitute the indictable offence at common law of committing
an act outraging public decency in public:     cf. Sidlev's case
 ((1663) 1 Sid 168, 15 Digest (Reissue) 1031) where the
defendant had relieved himself on the audience at Covent
Garden.   Once again, the unfortunate recipient might be out of
the sight of the thrower and so the offence in section 5 of
the Public Order Act 1986 might not be available.      Where there
is a recipient, the thrower could presumably be prosecuted for
the offence of criminal damage to the recipient's clothing
under section 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 (c.48).


                                                                    7
However, it ought to be possible to prosecute the thrower,
whether or not the bag actually lands on anyone.


3.8     It follows from the above that it is not sufficient for
the proposed offence to cover only missiles of a kind capable
of causing injury (cf. the definition of "violence" in section
8 of the Public Order Act 1986).      It should presumably also
cover objects which would cause offence; the test of
reasonableness needs to be incorporated in determining whether
offence is likely to be caused.     This is a vague concept and
introduces the element of uncertainty that the Taylor Report
had hoped to avoid.     However, those instructing Counsel have
^ e n unable to think of a better test.


3.9     The throwing of items such as lighted fireworks ought to
be covered by the reference to articles liable to cause
injury.      If pellets are discharged by catapultthese also
ought to     be caught by that phrase.


[3.10       ?   Tomatoes (rotten or otherwise); raspberries in the
context of damage to clothing; ? rolls of loo paper but not
paper darts; leeks at Welsh players etc.]


3.11    The proposed offence should not cover articles of
clothing that are thrown in the air in celebration.


3.12    There   is one particular practice that is sadly prevalent
at football matches which it is hoped to catch either by the
missile throwing offence or some variant of it.      This is the
practice of throwing whole or partially eaten bananas at black
players when they appear on the pitch or at black spectators.
Apparently banana skins are also thrown but, from the nature
of things, they are not likely to travel very far.      The
objection to this activity lies in the fact that it is
regarded as racially offensive (presumably those perpetrating
it are seeking to draw some comparison with the eating habits
of apes in the jungle).     However, the activity is so juvenile


                                                                     8
and just plain silly that it could hardly be argued that
racial hatred is liable to be stirred up by it.     Accordingly,
it is not caught by the offence in section 18 of the Public
Order Act 1986.     Indeed, it is not clear that the courts would
convict in respect of an offence of throwing objects which a
reasonable person would regard as offensive.     "Offensive"
almost pitches the test too high for this activity.       Would a
reasonable person (that is, one who is not unduly sensitive)
be "offended" by such activities?    Would he not instead regard
them with a contempt at their childishness which almost
excludes offence?    Counsel's views would be welcomed.


4)l3   It is proposed that the penalty for the proposed offence
of missile throwing and the power of arrest in respect of it,
together with other ancillary provisions should be the same as
for the other offences proposed by Chapter 9 of the Final
Taylor Report. These aspects are dealt with together at the
end of this Part of these Instructions.


Chanting
3.14   Paragraph 289 of the Taylor Final Report proposes the
offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse.     Paragraphs
295 to 298 of that Report explain why such activities could
not be prosecuted under sections 4, 5 or 18 of the Public
Order Act 1986.   The next following paragraphs attempt to
describe the offence that the Bill should create.     The only
place where the offence can be committed is at a ground where
an association football match of a description designated by
order under the power proposed in paragraph 1.3 above is
played.


3.15   It should be an essential feature of the proposed
offence that a number of persons are participating in the
"chant".   An isolated shout is liable to be lost in the din
created by the crowd and it is not therefore proposed that
that should be caught.    Nevertheless it should be possible to
prosecute a single individual for the proposed offence even


                                                                    9
     though proceedings are not brought against the other persons
     participating in the chant.


     3.16    The Concise Oxford Dictionary (1990 Edition) defines
     "chant" when used as a verb as "talk or repeat monotonously".
     This is a starting point for the offence that is envisaged,
     although there are a number of refinements.     The word "talk"
     may Be too limiting.    The slogans may be shouted or (after a
     fashion) sung.    The word "monotonously" may imply too long a
     span of time, although some degree of repetition should be an
     essential element in the offence.


     ^J|l7   One sound which it is hoped to catch by the proposed
     offence is the noise intended to resemble that believed to be
     made by apes which sometimes accompanies those moments when a
     black player is in possession of the ball.     There may be
     difficulties in describing this sound in the Bill.     One word
     that springs to mind is "grunt".    However, this word is
     defined, as a noun, by the Concise Oxford Dictionary as "1. a
     low guttural sound made by a pig.    2. a sound resembling
     this". The association the word has with pigs is misleading
 1   in the present context.
t


     3.18    The first type of chants or "grunts" to which the
     offence should apply are those that are offensive because of
     their racialist content or, in the case of "grunts",
     implications.    The second type should be what Taylor refers to
     as "obscene".    Included in this category should be the use of
     the well known four letter words originally associated with
     sexual intercourse and parts of the anatomy.    However, it is
     for consideration whether the courts could convict (in a
     properly argued case) if the word "obscene" was used in the
     Bill with the intention of covering chanting that uses words
     that are not used in public society.   In a legal context the
     test for obscenity is "the tendency to deprave and corrupt"
     (see section 1 of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 (c.66)).
     This meaning is referred to in the Concise Oxford Dictionary


                                                                       10
      (1990 Edition) which also defines obscene as "1. offensively
     or repulsively indecent, esp. by offending accepted sexual
     morality.   2. colloquial highly offensive or repugnant (an
     obscene accumulation of wealth^ .11.   Clearly the legal
     definition is inappropriate in this context.     But even the
"y   standard definition of the word "obscene" sets a test which is
     unlikely to be met by chanting at football matches.        The
     chanting is offensive rather than "repulsively indecent".


     3.19   Those instructing Counsel are aware that it may well
     prove difficult to bring a successful prosecution in respect
     of this offence.   Where a group of people are making a lot of
     ^ P i s e chanting, it may well be difficult for a constable to
     convince the court that he identified the accused's voice
     amidst the din in order to rebut the possible line of defence
     that the accused was opening his mouth along with his
     companions but no sound was coming forth.     Nevertheless, it is
     hoped that the existence of the offence may have some effect
     in altering the way some fans behave at football matches.


     FGestures
     3.20   In addition to the offences proposed in the Taylor Final
     Report, the Bill should also make it an offence for a person
     to made a gesture which is rude or offensive.]


     Going onto the pitch
     3.21   Paragraphs 289 and 300 of the Taylor Final Report set
     out the reasons for recommending an offence of going onto the
     pitch without reasonable excuse.     The Bill should create this
     offence which should be capable of being committed only at a
     ground where a football match of the sort designated under the
     power proposed in paragraph 1.3 above is being played.


     3.22   Paragraph 3.29 below sets out proposals for the times
     during which the offences proposed in this Part of the
     Instructions can be committed.     Accordingly, this offence
     could be committed not only before and during a match, but
also after it has finished.     In practice, spectators at
association football matches are likely to be prevented by
perimeter fences from running onto the pitch in jubilation
once a match has ended and so the problem raised in paragraph
301 of the Report may not be relevant to such matches.        The
problem about the traditions at Murrayfield will not arise
because Rugby football is played there and the Bill will be
limited to association football matches.


3.23   In the context of this proposed offence "the pitch"
means the pitch itself and any area around the pitch which
separates it from the accommodation for spectators.        It should
Jbcordingly include any area of grass around the pitch and,
for example, any running track around the edge of the pitch.


3.24   Obviously there are certain persons to whom the proposed
offence should not apply.     These include the players,
referees, managers, coaches,    [linesmen,] [ball boys,] the
police, any stewards at the ground, members of the emergency
services, disabled spectators sitting in wheelchairs in front
of the stands and press photographers.     These persons should
need the authorisation of .........    to be on the pitch.
However, in the case of the players, officials involved in       the
game, the police and stewards it is hoped that the
authorisation could be implied.


3.25   Emergencies may occur when other persons should be able
to go onto the pitch without committing an offence.        Counsel
will wish to consider whether this end should be achieved by
providing a defence or by so framing the offence that it does
not apply in such circumstances.    Broadly speaking, those
circumstances should either be an emergency or when persons
are directed onto the pitch by the police, stewards or other
persons in charge of the ground.    An "emergency" should cover
not only serious disasters such as the events at Hillsborough
or a fire in the stands (as happened at Bradford in 1985) but
also when, for example, someone has a heart attack and needs


                                                                     12
»*




     to be laid flat on the ground.     Possibly the phrase used in
     the Taylor Final Report "without reasonable excuse" might
     sufficiently cover such events.


     General provisions about penalties etc.
     3.2 6   The Bill should provide that a person guilty of one of
     the offences proposed in this Part of these Instructions
     should be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
     level 3 on the standard scale.


     3.27    Some of the offences in this Part of these Instructions
     are directed at offensive racialist conduct and are therefore
     ^ o s e to the offences   contained in Part III of the Public
     Order Act 198 6.   Notwithstanding this, the Bill should not
     contain a provision similar to section 27(1) of that Act
     (which requires the Attorney General's consent for
     prosecutions for offences in Part III of the 1986 Act).


     3.28    The Bill should confer on a constable a power to arrest
     without warrant a person whom the constable believes, on
     reasonable grounds, is committing or has committed one of the
     offences proposed in this Part.     Unlike subsections (4) and
     (5) of section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 there should be
     no requirement for the constable to give a warning before
     actually arresting.


     3.29    The Instructions have already mentioned that the
     offences should be committed only at grounds where football
     matches of a designated description are played.     The Bill
     should also ensure that the offences can only be committed
     during the period surrounding the match.     Provision equivalent
     to section 31(6) of the Public Order Act 1986 is required for
     this purpose.   To cover the eventualities of persons being
     admitted to a ground for a game which is postponed or
     abandoned before its start, provision equivalent to section
     31(7) and (8) is also required.




                                                                      13
         f




 3.30   Sections 30 to 37 of the Public Order Act 1986 (which
 constitute Part IV of that Act) provide for exclusion orders
 to prevent persons convicted of offences to which section 31
 of that Act applies from attending football matches of a
 description prescribed for the purposes of Part IV of that
 Act.   These provisions were prospectively repealed by section
 27(5) of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c.37); however, the
 repeals have not been brought into force following the
 abandonment of football membership scheme provided for in Part
 I of the 1989 Act.     Where the offences proposed in this Part
 of the Instructions have been committed at a football match
which has been prescribed under Part IV of the 1986 Act,
^ ^ c t i o n 31 of the 198 6 Act will apply to the offence because
 the condition in section 31(2) will be satisfied.       It will
therefore be possible for a court to make an exclusion order
under Part IV of the 1986 Act following conviction for one of
the offences proposed in this Part of the Instructions.        As
this achieves the desired effect, no further provision need be
made by this Bill.


3.31    Exclusion orders under Part IV of the Public Order Act
1986 are designed to prevent convicted persons from attending
matches in England and Wales that have been prescribed for the
purpose.     Section 15 of the Football Spectators Act 1989
enables a court to make a restriction order under that Act the
effect of which is to prevent a person who has been convicted
of a relevant offence from going to football matches played in
a country outside England and Wales where the match is of a
description that has been designated for the purposes of Part
II of that Act.      The relevant offences are those listed in
Schedule 1 to that Act (see section 14(5)).       The Bill should
amend that Schedule to add the offences proposed in this Part
of these Instructions.      [However, it should not add the
offence proposed in Part II of these Instructions.]



Home Office
              1991


                                                                      14
