The Institution of
Structural Engineers                                                                The Institution of
Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royai Charter 1934                                     Structural Engineers
                                                                                    11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                    London SW1X 8BH
            RJWM/MT                                 Cj£                             01-235 4535


            29 Septem ber 1989                                                      Fax: 01-235 4294




            R Whalley Esq
            S ecretary to th e Taylor Inquiry
            Home Office                                                      a
            Room 662
            50 Queen Anne's G ate
            London
            SW1H 9AT



            D ear Mr Whalley

           ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
           Thursday, 26 October : Grosvenor H otel, London

           I am writing to extend a form al invitation to you to a tte n d the above one-day sem inar
           as a guest of the Institution. I understand th a t you will a cc e p t the invitation and look
           forward to m eeting you a t the seminar.

            Yours sincerely




            R J
            A ssistant D irector of Engineering
               THE    INSTITUTION       OF   STRUCTURAL        ENGINEERS


                  ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    One-day seminar - Thursday, 26 October 1989 i Grosvenor H otel, London SW1


                  SESSION 1 : MANAGEMENT OF SPORTS GROUNDS



                               DISCUSSION             SLIP



I wish to take p a rt in the discussion. My principal topic will be:




NAME: __________________________ _
      (BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE)

ORGANIZATION:        ________________

ADDRESS:                       ______




This slip (with slides, if any, clearly marked and in the correct order) should be
handed in at the sem inar desk before the start of the session.

Slides should be recovered from the sem inar desk a fter the session.
                THE    INSTITUTION      OF   STRUCTURAL         ENGINEERS


                  ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    One-day seminar - Thursday, 26 October 1989 : Grosvenor H otel, London SW1


         SESSION 2 : CROWD FLOW : COMPARTMENTATION AND SAFETY



                               DISCUSSION              SLIP



I wish to tak e p a rt in the discussion. My principal topic will be:




NAME: ___________ _______________
      (BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE)

ORGANIZATION: ________________

ADDRESS:




This slip (with slides, if any, clearly marked and in the correct order) should be
handed in at the sem inar desk before the start of the session.

Slides should be recovered from the sem inar desk a fter the session.
               THE     INSTITUTION      OF   STRUCTURAL         ENGINEERS


                  ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
     One-day sem inar - Thurday, 26 O ctober 1989 : Grosvenor H otel, London SW1


                          SESSION 3 : FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY



                               DISCUSSION              SLIP



I wish to take p a rt in th e discussion. My principal topic will be:




NAME: __________________________
      (BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE)

ORGANIZATION: ________________ _

ADDRESS: ___________________




This slip (with slides, if any, clearly marked and in the correct order) should be
handed in at the sem inar desk before the start o f the session.

Slides should be recovered from the sem inar desk a fter th e session.
               THE    IN S T m m O N                            OF        stru ctu ra l                                                              e n g in e e r s



                 ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    One-day seminar - Thursday, 26 October 1989 i Grosvenor H otel, London SW1


                        SESSION 4 s APPRAISAL IN PRACTICE
                           ............     | ...............    ii   ■   ...................................................................... ...................




                                          DISCUSSION                                                         SLIP



I wish to take p art in the discussion. My principal topic will be:




NAME: ___ _______________ __
      (BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE)

ORGANIZATION:                                           ..

ADDRESS: ______________________




This slip (with slid es, if any, clearly marked and in th e correct order) should be
handed in at the sem inar desk before the start of the session.

Slides should be recovered from the sem inar desk a fte r the session.
                THE    INSTITUTION      OF   STRUCTURAL         ENGINEERS


                  ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
    One-day seminar - Thursday, 26 October 1989 t Grosvenar H otel, London SW1


                      SESSION 5 : THE SPORTS COUNCIL'S VIEW



                               DISCUSSION              SLIP



I wish to take p a rt in th e discussion. My principal topic will be:




NAME: __________________________
      (BLOCK LETTERS PLEASE)

ORGANIZATION: ________________

ADDRESS: ______________________




This slip (with slides, if any, clearly marked and in the correct order) should be
handed in at the sem inar desk before the start of the session.

Slides should be recovered from the seminar desk a fte r th e session.
         THE    INSTITUTION      OF    STRUCTURAL        ENGINEERS                 SsSc



                                 DISCUSSION

                          NOTES FOR GUIDANCE

A discussion slip for each session of the sem inar is a tta ch e d , and those wishing
to take p a rt in the discussion should fill in the relevant slip and eith er send
it to the Institution of S tructural Engineers, 11 Upper Belgrave S treet, London
SW1X 8BH, in advance, or hand it in to the sem inar desk a t the venue.

Speakers in discussion should not exceed 5 minutes for th e ir rem arks, including
the tim e taken for the showing of slides. The Chairman may have to reduce
this period if a large number of people wish to speak. As a rough guide, the
average ra te of delivery is about 100 words per minute.

Speakers in discussion should announce th e ir name and organization before
presenting th e ir contribution.

F acilities a t the sem inar will include a slide p rojector (suitable for slides
mounted in 50mm square holders), an overhead projector and a blackboard.

Pictorial slides should be prepared only from sharply focused prints of good
contrast, while diagram m atical slides should be as simple as possible with
a minimum of letterin g . L etterin g th a t can be read distinctly with the normal
eye in bright light on the finished slide itse lf will project satisfacto rily.
Anything sm aller is unlikely to be legible from the back of the hall when
projected.

Those wishing to display slides should hand them to the sem inar desk in the
c o rre c t order before the appropriate session. The slides should be collected
from the sem inar desk when the session has finished.

Speakers should use the microphones available.
The Institution of
Structural Engineers                                                                   The Institution of
F o u n ded 1 9 08 I n c o rp o ra ted by Royal C h ar ter 1934                       Structural Engineers
                                                                                       11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                       London SW lX 8BH

              RJWM/MT                                                                 01-235 4535


                                                                                       Fax: 01-235 4294
              19 O ctober 1989




              Dear D elegate

              SEMINAR ON ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
              Thursday, 26 October 1989, a t the Grosvenor Hotel, London SW1

             I have pleasure in enclosing a copy of the rep ort Appraisal of sports grounds, a
             programme and tim etab le, notes for guidance for those wishing to p articip ate in
             discussion, and a slip for each discussion period. A list of registrants and a name
             badge will be issued on the day.

             The sem inar will be held a t the Grosvenor Hotel, London. You are asked to reg ister
             a t the sem inar desk from 9 am onwards. The desk will be manned during the seminar.
             A 35 mm projector and an overhead projector will be available for use during the
             seminar.

             The sem inar will be opened prom ptly a t 10 am, and you are asked to be in your
             seat before this tim e.

             The Grosvenor Hotel is adjacent to Victoria (BR) station. The main entrance is
             in Buckingham Palace Road. There is also an en tran ce from the Victoria (BR) station
             concourse. Victoria underground station, bus statio n and coach station are nearby.
             I reg ret th a t th ere a re no parking facilities available a t the hotel.

             If you have any d ietary requirem ents (e.g. vegetarian) please le t me know.

             Yours faithfully




             R J W MILNE
             Assistant D irector of Engineering


             Encs
l^ /c c ri
 2 ? OCT 89
y

    The Institution of
    Structural Engineers                                                                    The Institution of
    Founded 1908 Incorporated by Royal Charter 1934                                         Structural Engineers
                                                                                            11 Upper Belgrave Street
                                                                                            London SW lX 8BH

                                                                                            01-235 4535


                                                                                            Fax: 01-235 4294

                                 ENGINEERING APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS
                                  One-day seminar a t the Grosvenor H otel, London SW1
                                           on Thursday, 26 October 1989


     LIST OF DELEGATES

     ABBOTT, M J                                         Staffordshire County Council
     ADEOLA, A                                           London Borough of Hackney
     ALLEN, R                                            Lam beth Borough Council
     ALLISON, Pierre                                     Portsm outh C ity Council
     ARLETT, M J                                         Wiltshire County Council
     ARMSTRONG, J H                                      President, Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers
     AYRES, B C                                          London Borough of Bromley

    BALL, Alan                                           Briitsh Showjumping Association
    BARDHAN-ROY, B K                                     Jan Bobrowski Sc P artn ers
    BARLOW, P A                                          Composite S tru ctu res Ltd
    BARNES, K P                                          Andrews Kent & Stone
    BIRCH, B M                                           Composite S tru ctu res Ltd
    BRAXTON, P                                           London Borough of Newham
    BROADBENT, M G                                       Edward Roscoe A ssociates
    BROWN, A S                                           T est and County C ricket Board
    BURT, D                                              White Young Consulting Engineers

    CANTER, Professor D V                                University of Surrey
    CAVE, R B                                            N orth Yorkshire County Council
    CHALLENGER, W                                        M anchester C ity Council
    COCKS, N A                                           CCP Consulting Engineers
    CONNORS, T L                                         S p ectato r M anagement Group
    COPPIN, Alan                                         Wembley Stadium Ltd
    CORRIGAN, R                                          White Young Consulting Engineers
    COULSON, R R                                         G albraith Hunt & P artn ers
    CRAIG, J T A                                         Strathclyde Regional Council
    CRAWFORD, Jack                                       The Football League
    CUTLACK, J G H                                       Jan Bobrowski & P artn ers

     DAVEN, A                                            London Borough of Newham
     DICKIE, Dr J F                                      University of M anchester
     DICKSON, M G T                                      Buro Happold
     DONOHUE, D                                          M arston 3c Grundy
     DOUGILL, Dr J W                                     Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers
     DUIVENVOORDEN, L                                    W A Fairhurst 6c P artn ers

     EASTWOOD, Dr W                                       Eastwood 6c P artn ers
     ELLIOTT, P A                                         N ew castle C ity Council
     ELLIS, D R                                           A lfred McAlpine M anagement Ltd
     EVANS, Chief Inspector Brian                         Association of C hief Police O fficers
                          - 2-

FLETCHER, J R             British Steel Stainless
FORD, D M                 Ernest Green Partnership
FOX, William              President, The Football League

GARDEN, R W               Mackie Ram say 3c Taylor
GIBBS, E A                London Borough of H am m ersm ith 3c Fulham
GILBERT, J J M            Nicholls Colton 3c P artn ers
GILES, D J                C oventry C ity Council
GILLIVER, A H             Bradford C ity AFC
GODFREY, A R              Rugby Football Union
GRANT, J M                Jenkins 3c P o tte r
GREEN, A B R              Dr I G Doran 3c P artn ers
GREEN, M G                Buro Happold
GUY, R G                  Steel C onstruction Institute

HAIGH, J                  Avon County Council
HANCOCK, R W              Taylor Boyd 3c Hancock
HAPPOLD, Professor E      Buro Happold / University of Bath
HAYWOOD, F W              Frank W Haywood 3c P artners
HILL, G R                 Campbell R eith 3c Hill
HIXON, Miss Beryl         Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers
HODGSON, David            Scott-W hite 3c Hookins
HOOKINS, B S              Scott-W hite 3c Hookins
HOPKINS, A G              Sir William Halcrow 3c P artners Ltd
HORGAN, M J               Horgan Lynch and P artners
HUGHES, A                 Sir William Halcrow 3c P artners Ltd
HUNTER-JONES, R M         London Borough of Ham m ersm ith 3c Fulham
HURDEN, M E               Hurden A ssociates
HUTCHINSON, B D           Husband 3c Co

ISTED, D                  Brands H atch C ircuit

JAMES, M                  H ealth 3c S afety Executive
JOHN, G eraint            The Sports Council
JOHNSON, D                Blackpool Football Club
JONES, B T A              Avon County Council
JONES, D M                Campbell R eith 3c Hill

KAYE, David               Ove Arup 3c P a rtn e rs
KHWAJA, \                 London Borough of Hackney
KIRBY, B R                British Steel Technical

LAW, Miss M argaret       Ove Arup 3c P a rtn e rs
LAWRENSON, J E            Cheshire County Council
LEWIS, John               Lancashire County Council
LUCAS, A F                West Sussex F ire Brigade

MCCARTHY, C T M           Ove Arup 3c P artn ers
MacLEAN, Duncan G         The Miller P artnership
McLEAN, J                 McLean 3c A ssociates
MCPHERSON, A              Scottish O ffice
MACEY, T J                Portsm outh C ity Council
MARSH, C om m ander Bob   Derbyshire County Council
MENZIES, B A              London Borough of Tower H am lets
MENZIES, Dr J B           Building R esearch Establishment
MILLAR, N D               Andrews Kent 3c Stone
MILLER, A                 N ew castle C ity Council
MILNE, R J W              Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers
MINTO, A                  Scottish D evelopm ent D epartm ent
MIRFIN, A                 Birmingham C ity Council
                          - 3-

MONTRASIO,                UNI - Ente Nazionale Italiano di Unificazione
MOORE, D r J F A          Building R esearch Establishment
MOULD, D G                Home O ffice

NASON, C F                Warwickshire County Council
NEAL, Professor B G
NEVILLE, T D              Blyth 3c Blyth
NIELD, W B                Fife Regional Council
NOAKES, R J               Suffolk County Laboratory

O'DOWD, L                 Lobb Partnership
O'NEILL, P                Lam beth Borough Council

PARK, S C                 Suffolk County Council
PARTINGTON, J R           Lancashire County Council
PATERSON, G               Norwich C ity Football Club
PIGOTT, B B               Fire R esearch Station

 RAMSAY, J S              Ram say 3c C halm ers
 REID, W M                Thorbum A ssociates
 RICKELL, P K             Maurice Baguley 3c P artners
 ROBERTS, I S             Ove Arup 3c P a rtn e rs (Ireland)
fROBERTS, J M             A llott 3c Lomax
 ROBINSON, A J            Simpson Coulson 3c P artn ers
 ROBINSON, P S            Birse C onstruction Ltd
 ROGERSON, P              H ertfordshire County Council
 ROWCROFT, C B            Cumbria County Council
 RUSSOFF, B B             Phillips C onsultants
 RUTHERFORD, D J          A ssociated S tru ctu ral C onsultants
 RYAN, M                  Frank W Haywood 3c P artn ers
 RYAN, P A                W S Atkins C onsultants Ltd

SADLER, M                 Norfolk County Council
SCHULER, R M              London Borough of H am m ersm ith 3c Fulham
SHAW, A C                 Lancashire County Council
SHAW, A F K               Pell Frischmann C onsultants Ltd
SILKOFF, A                London Borough of Hackney
SIMPSON, K D              McGregor A ssociates
SINGH, H                  C oventry C ity Council
SLATER, R                 Cam bridgeshire County Council
SMITH, D M                Ipswich Borough Council
SMITH, Professor R A      University of Sheffield
SNELSON, R
SPEARK, B                 Essex County Council
STANTON, R J C            G Maunsell 3c P a rtn e rs
STEEL, D J                West Glamorgan County Council
STEWART, D M              H orserace B etting Levy Board
STICKLEY, Brian           Home O ffice
STONE, Ms H E             W S Atkins C onsultants Ltd
STUART, W J               Strathclyde Regional Council
SWEET, Jonathan           Home O ffice / Taylor Inquiry
SWINDLEHURST, P e te r    The Engineering Council / St Johns Ambulance Brigade

TALBOT, J N               Salford C ity Council
TAYLOR, E H F             Ove Arup 3c P a rtn e rs
THOMPSON, R               University of Dundee
THORBURN, S               Thorbum A ssociates                                    \
TITCOMBE, Adrian          The Football Association
TOMLINSON, J L            Bullen and P artn ers
TORBETT, A B              Oliver B ennett Partnership
TOWNSEND, B               Galton 3c Townsend
TREANOR, Miss M argaret   Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers
                  - 4-

TURNER, 0 L       D epartm ent of the Environment
TWYMAN, B H       Kent Fire Brigade H eadquarters

VAREY, L S        Bingham C o tte re ll

WABY, D R         Bingham C o tte re ll
WADE, P J         Tapsell Wade and P artn ers
WALL, D           Dublin Corporation
WALSH, T G        Earley Campling Lee & P artn ers
WANLESS, G R      U niversity of M anchester
WATSON, J R
WESTON, Kevin     Alan Brough Associates
WESTWOOD, N       Scott-W hite & Hookins
WHALLEY, R M      Home O ffice / Taylor Inquiry
WILLIAMS, D M H   Mel Williams Partnership
WILLIAMS, J       Dyfed County Fire Brigade
WILLIAMSON, A     The Football League
WILSON, G W       Leeds C ity Council
WILSON, R         Melliss & P artn ers
WINFIELD, G H A   Kent County Council
WOOD, Alan        Alan Wood & P artn ers
WOOD, D W         Armand Safier & P artn ers
WOODCOCK, L R     Lancashire County Council
WROE, V           Tameside M etropolitan Borough Council
             THE   INSTITUTION      OF   STRUCTURAL        ENGINEERS




                     APPRAISAL      OF   SPORTS     GROUNDS

                             D raft for one-day seminar
                                   26 O ctober 1989




The Institution of Structural Engineers set up an ad hoc com m ittee to prep are a
report on Appraisal of sports grounds a f te r the Popplewell Inquiry reported in 1986.
This d ra ft rep o rt is the result of th ree years work and has been re-exam ined in light
of the interim report of the Taylor Inquiry.

The d ra ft rep ort is presented a t the one-day sem inar on Thursday, 26 O ctober 1989,
with a view to the d ra ft being c ritic a lly exam ined by those concerned with
m anagem ent, appraisal, licensing and oth er asp ects of sports grounds.

If you have com m ents on the d ra ft th ey should be sent to R J W Milne, A ssistant
D irector of Engineering, a t the Institution, by Friday, 10 November 1989.




OCTOBER 1989
 AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS


 CONSTITUTION


 M G T Dickson BA MS CEng MIStructE (Chairman)
   (Buro Happold)
 B K Bardhan-Roy BE CEng FIStructE FICE
   (Jan Bobrowski & Partners)
 Professor D V C an ter PhD FBPsS FBIM
   (University of Surrey)
 J F Dickie BSc PhD CEng MIStructE
   (University of M anchester)
 M G Green BEng CEng MIStructE MICE
   (Buro Happold)
*A J M Heselden FIFireE
   (Fire R esearch Station)
 D Kaye CEng FIStructE
   (Ove Arup & Partners)
 J R Partington CEng MIStructE
   (Lancashire County Council)
y B B Pigott BA BAI(Dublin) CEng MICE
    (Fire R esearch Station)
 A F K Shaw BSc(Hons) CEng MIStructE MICE
   (Fell Fnschm ann C onsultants Ltd)
 R J C Stanton CEng MICE MIHT
   (G Maunsell & Partners)
 B Stickley CEng FIStructE
   (Home Office)
 S Thorburn OBE FEng FIStructE FICE FASCE FIHT FGS
   (Thorburn Associates)
 O L Turner OBE ARIBA
  (D epartm ent of the Environment)
 R J W Milne BSc (Secretary)
   (The Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers)


 Special contributions have also been provided by:
 Professor A Bolton MScTech PhD FEng FIStructE FICE
   (previously with H eriot-W att University)
 N J Cook DSc(Eng) PhD CEng MIStructE
   (Building R esearch Station)
 T V Lawson PhD BSc DIC CEng FRAeS
   (University of Bristol)
 Jake Pauls
   (Life Safety Specialist, Hughes A ssociates Inc., USA)



 * Until re tire m e n t in mid-1988
 ■/ From May 1989
    CONTENTS

    FOREWORD

    1   SCOPE

    2   PLANNING MATTERS*          WHAT MANAGEMENT SHOULD KNOW
         2.1    Regulations and sa fety
         2.2    Management considerations
                2.2.1   Planning life sa fe ty requirem ents
                2.2.2   Preparation of drawings of sports grounds
                2.2.3   Access for em ergency vehicles
                2.2.4   Considerations a ffe c tin g capacity
                2.2.5   Division of ground
                2.2.6   Signposting
                2.2.7   Exit gates
         2.3    Refurbishment and reconstruction without disruption to club activ ities
                2.3.1   General
                2.3.2   Preplanning
                2.3.3   Control of unruly behaviour
                2.3.4   Spectator com fort

3       DESIGN MATTERS
        3.1   Ground aspects o f design and safety
        3.2   Other aspects
        3.3   Usage
              3.3.1  Place in the community
              3.3.2  Managing grounds safely
              3.3.3  Additional facilities beneath stands
              3.3.4  Com fort
              3.3.5  Viewing and sightlines
              3.3.6  C irculatory space
        3.4  Safety o f spectators
              3.4.1  Home O ffice guide
              3.4.2  Deviations
             3.4.3   Information transmission
        3.5  Structural safety
             3.5.1   Appraisal and Codes
        3.6  Loading
               3.6.1   Perm anent loads and load combination
               3.6.2   V ertical imposed floor loads
               3.6.3   Imposed roof loads
               3.6.4    Wind loads
               3.6.5   Imposed horizontal surge loads
               3.6.6    Dynamic loads
               3.6.7    Handrail loads
               3.6.8   C rush-barrier loadings
        3.7    Structural sa fety in fire
               3.7.1    Fire resistance
               3.7.2    Smoke venting

I       FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
        4.1    Fire sa fety appraisal strategy
               4.1.1     Allocation of stands to two categories
               4.1.2     C ategory 1: stands
               4.1.3     C ategory 2: stands
               4.1.4     C irculation a reas
               4.1.5     Use of n on-traditional m aterials
4.2    Guidance for assessing minimum standard o f construction and planning
       4.2.1    General
       4.2.2    C o m p artm en tation /p rotectio n of tie rs
       4.2.3    Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
       4.2.4    Measures to prevent or re ta rd early fire growth
       4.2.5    Fire resistance of stru c tu re and supplem entary stands
       4.2.6    Fire resistance appraisal
4.3    Guidance for assessing minimum standard for management activities
       and related active fire precautions
       4.3.1    Quality assurance for larger facilities
       4.3.2    Emergency procedures and sta ff training
       4.3.3    Public-address system
       4.3.4    Fire detectio n (fire alarm systems)
       4.3.5    Coordination of em ergency services
       4.3.6    Fire loading
       4.3.7    Construction and fixed elem ents
       4.3.8    L itter
       4.3.9    Provision of fire-fighting equipm ent
       4.3.10 Measures to re s tric t the e x te n t of fire spread in la te r stages
4.4    Fire and smoke assessm ent
       4.4.1    Smoke assessm ent
       4.4.2    Smoke control measures
       4.4.3    R estrictio n of flam e tra v e l under roofs
4.5    Covered grounds
4.6    New stands and covered grounds

CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT
5.1 General
5.2 Passageway blockages
5.3 Flow rates
5.4 Sequence o f calculation
5.5 Control o f crowd flow in em ergency
    5.5.1    Entry control
    5.5.2    Exit control
5.6 Crush barriers

STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL
6.1 General approach
6.2 Existing survey drawings
6.3 Survey o f condition and record o f findings
6.4 Potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard fabric
     6.4.1    Drawings
     6.4.2    Inspection
     6.4.3    Recording of resu lts of survey
6.5  Potentially com bustible m aterials and building fabric
6.6 T esting o f m aterials and elem ents
6.7 Testin. o f crush barriers/handrails
6.8 Appraisal o f e ffe c ts o f wind
     6.8.1    Wind tunnel te s ts
     6.8.2    Analysis of the e f f e c ts of dynamic loading
     6.8.3    R esonant wind loading
     6.8.4    Spectato r loading
     6.8.5    Regular inspection of slender stru c tu re s
    6.9    Appraisal o f structures against disproportionate collapse
    6.10   Replacem ent or strengthening of weak structural elem ents

7   OTHER PERMANENT STRUCTURES

8   ELECTRICAL AND GAS INSTALLATIONS

9   TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
    9.1    Temporary stands
    9.2    Other temporary structures


APPENDIX A1        DAY-TO-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT

APPENDIX A2        DRAFT RULES FOR INSTRUCTION OF STEWARDS ON EVENT
                   DAYS

APPENDIX B1        GROUND FLOW RATES

APPENDIX B2        CROWD DYNAMICS AND AUDITORIUM MANAGEMENT

APPENDIX C         PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS

APPENDIX D         TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS

APPENDIX E         SIGHTLINES AND VIEW DISTANCES

APPENDIX F         SPECIMEN LICENCE CERTIFICATE

APPENDIX G         BIBLIOGRAPHY

ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT
    1




    r




4
FOREWORD


In July 1986, the Institution of S tructural Engineers in itiated an ad hoc com m ittee
to bring to g eth er all current technical knowledge relevant to the appraisal of sports
grounds and th eir individual elem ents. The C om m ittee's task was to establish a
fully referenced body of knowledge within three years which would be com plem entary
to the Guide to safety of sports grounds (HMSO 1976). This Guide, first published
in 1975, had itse lf been reissued as a result of discussions by a technical panel chaired
by Mr Martin Killoran. This panel had been set up to advise Mr Ju stice Popplewell
in his inquiry following the tragedies a t Birmingham, Bradford and Hysel.

It is hoped th a t this report will help engineers and oth er professionals undertake
the d ifficult task of appraising the many existing sports grounds in the UK and
elsew here. The task is to provide uniform and accep tab le levels of safety to the
public users of these grounds under all operating conditions. However, the location,
age, size, condition and acceptable sp ectato r capacity of individual grounds and
their stands vary widely.

The establishm ent of satisfa c to ry and consistent overall perform ance of such facilities
throughout the country and for all conditions requires reliable engineering 'methods'
based on accep ted scien tific c rite ria . To e ffe c t appraisal satisfacto rily , th ere has
to be a thorough understanding of how th e ground will be managed and operated
and how orderly entry, containm ent and egress of sp ec ta to rs will be planned for
and managed, even in an em ergency. This requires appraisal which addresses the
in te rrela te d param eters dealt with in the sep arate sections of this repo rt as a
com plete system .

Knowledge of some of these p ara m eters does not particu larly fall within the
professional experience of m em bers of the Institution of S tru ctu ral Engineers, whose
task it often is to adjudge the condition and maximum allowable capacity of sports
grounds. Membership of this co m m ittee th erefo re consisted of members of the
Institution with a wide range of relevant professional experience, and members from
other allied technical professions whose prim ary skills extended the range of the
com m ittee's discussions.

Inevitably in its careful deliberations the com m ittee has encountered some a reas
where current knowledge in the public domain appears inadequate. Some of these
a reas are addressed in the appendices to this rep o rt. R eg rettab ly too, th e re has
been the fu rth er tragedy a t Hillsborough and so fu rth e r consideration of aspects
of this re p o rt may be necessary following the publication of Mr Ju stice Taylor's
Inquiry expected la te r this year.

N evertheless, it has been our aim to provide a properly referen ced docum ent which
is as com plete as possible in tech nical m a tte rs. This rep o rt will then form a base
for broadening the discussion to the sports authorities, ground managers, police
and oth er professional bodies concerned with the operation, appraisal and design
of sports grounds. There is an urgent need both to elim inate risk of fu rth e r failure
and to increase the chance of success and appeal of such facilities.




                                                                            M G T DICKSON
                                                                                   Chairman
                                                                         ad hoc C om m ittee
July 1989                                                       Appraisal of Sports Grounds




                                       5
        I




    V




    *




G
        1   SCOPE
            Broadly, the recom m endations of this rep o rt can be applied
            to all grounds and stru ctu res of assembly use th a t provide
            perm anent (or tem porary) seating or standing facilities
            for the public. Generically, in this report, such places
            are re fe rre d to as sports grounds. The range of sporting
            and leisure events, including occasional events is wide,
*           but includes soccer, rugby, crick et, tennis, greyhound
            and horseracing, certain athletics, swimming and other
            sp ec ta to r events.

            It is intended th a t the rep o rt be com plem entary to the
            Guide to safety a t sports grounds to improve the knowledge
            of and communication betw een d ifferen t categories of
            person concerned in the operation of sports grounds.

            It is aimed prim arily a t advising on life sa fe ty in existing
            sports grounds. As such, it a tte m p ts to take account
            of the constraints and difficulties th a t a re present within

    •
            these grounds. It is im portant to distinguish between
            life safety in existing grounds and dangerous actions by
            members of the public.

            Although it is not a design brief for new construction
            work or to ta l reconstruction a t sports grounds, the principles
            may well still be applicable. Such work should not be
            to a standard lower than th a t s e t out here, and the scope
            offered by new design work should lead to b e tte r standards
            than can be achieved a t grounds already built with regard
            to reliable standards of life safety.

            In particular, this publication aims a t providing methods
            and referen ce m aterial to help establish a balance of
            safe sp ec ta to r capacity, ingress and egress in respect
            of the arrangem ent, size and condition of all elem ents
            of th a t ground, and of its level of m anagem ent.

            It is to a c t as a reference source to th e m u lti-faceted
            problem of refurbishing, appraising, or designing sports
            grounds and of establishing the maximum approved capacity
            of each section of the ground in relation to its layout,
            construction m aterials and condition. It also aims a t
            developing an overall engineering methodology and body
            of scien tific knowledge to enable com petent and
            professionally qualified personnel to carry out reliable
            and com plete appraisal of existing sports grounds.

            As such, this publication provides a companion to Appraisal         Appraisal of existing


•
            of existing stru c tu re s first published by the Institution       stru c tu re s, Institution of
            of S tructural Engineers in July 1980. In conjunction with          S tructural Engineers,
            the Guide to safety a t sports grounds, it emphasises the           London, 1980
            need to 'secure reasonable safety a t the stadium ' by seeing
            th a t obvious d efects such as trip hazards, weak handrails,
            obstructed exit routes or impaired or inappropriate
            stru c tu ra l elem ents are rectified , and th a t exit routes
            are properly signed and available a t all tim es.

            One p articular such risk in many existing stands is the
            existence of u nprotected combustible construction. This
            report has th e re fo re developed a method whereby the
            maximum permissible tim e for evacuation to an area
            of safety can be assessed against the likely fire hazards,
            com partm entation      available, standards        of   egress,
            construction, e tc . and the level of e ffe c tiv e organization
            and m anagem ent.
                                                   7
A ssessm ent on this basis for fire s a fe ty is given in Section 4.

Above all, th e re p o rt is aimed a t achieving stru c tu ra l
adequacy under all th e relev an t loadings and conditions,
both of the overall construction and its individual elem ents,
and th e elim ination by m ethodical appraisal of p o ten tial
hazards th a t result from th e presence of dense crowds,
their behaviour and th e ir m ovem ents. Section 3, 5 and
6 (and for tem porary events Section 7) deal with this aspect
of appraisal.

Safety of crowds cannot reasonably be achieved w ithout
carefully considered action, and organized m anagem ent
techniques applied both to th e day-to-day running and
during public occupation. This is th e re fo re addressed
as an im p o rtant fa c to r in Section 2 in some detail.

Since th e process of appraisal for sa fe ty in such situations
is an in te ra c tiv e process, this docum ent is addressed to
all th e following persons:

   directo rs and m anagers of sports clubs who must run
   clubs to a budget and provide a service to th e custom er
   th a t can be afforded and which is satisfying, safe and
   controllable

   engineers, a rc h ite c ts and oth er professional consultants
   engaged by th e clubs' managers to appraise, design
   the    refurbishm ent       and   organize    any   necessary
   m aintenance

   public officers responsible for approving measures
   for refurbishm ent and m aintenance, and for certifying
   sports grounds for th e ir various uses.




                                           8
2   PLANNING   MATTERS             :    WHAT          MANAGEMENT
    SHOULD KNOW

    2.1   REGULATIONS AND SAFETY

          The S afety a t sports grounds A ct 1987 imposes a
          certifying system on sports grounds* with a capacity
          of more than 10 000 and individual stands having
          a capacity of 500 or more. The im plications of
          the A ct for club m anagem ents a re fa r reaching.
          In future m anagem ents will need to be aw are not
          only of the regulations and associated docum ents
          but also of w hat m easures will need to be im plem ented
          (see Appendix F for specim en c e rtific a te ).

          The H ealth and Safety a t work e tc          A ct is also     H ealth & Safety a t work
          relevant.                                                      e tc A ct, 1975

          Building Regulations are also relev an t and would
          apply to new stands and to c ertain a lte ra tio n s to
          existing stands. The main regulations are:

          The Building Regulations 1985 (for England & Wales)
          The Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1977
          (for Scotland)
          The Building Regulations       (N orthern    Ireland)   1977
          (for N orthern Ireland)

          For England and Wales Approved D ocum ent B2/3/4
          Fire spread gives guidance on the fire sa fe ty provisions
          of the regulations. For Scotland requirem ents are
          s e t out in P a rts D and E of the Regulations and
          for N orthern Ireland in P a rt E.

          It is the responsibility of club m anagem ent to appraise
          them selves of th e necessary measures to prevent
          risk to th eir clubs and th e public by employing
          professionally com petent personnel to advise them
          on any repairing, refurbishm ent, and requirem ents
          th a t will be necessary before th e ir sports ground
          can be used to its full potential or to an agreed
          capacity.

          M anagement will be responsible for overall safety
          of the public. This means, in te r alia:

              providing for stew arding of the right quality
              th a t is properly briefed for the p articu lar ev en t
              and present in su fficien t numbers to manage
              the event adequately

          .   seeing th a t th e re is proper coordination betw een
              stew ards, police and o th e r em ergency services


          * Sports grounds are widely defined in th e Act to
          include not only soccer, rugby, cricket, tennis, e tc .
          but also horse and greyhound racing, a th letics, e tc .
          grounds.




                                          9
    having available drawings of the overall facility
    (1 : 1000 city plan; 1 : 200 ground plan and section
    showing principal means of ingress and egress,
    com partm entation with capacity of each clearly
    indicated, and oth er facilities such as location
    of stew ards and public-address system

    being able to identify and redress where necessary
      p otentially combustible m aterials and building
      fabric
      potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard
      fabric

      potentially dangerous a reas of overcrowding,
      w hether on ingress or egress routes and sp ec ta to r
      viewing areas

   establishing the principles for good manageable
   access and egress

   providing good inform ation transmission system s
   both inside and outside the ground

   keeping the conditions of seated stands, te rra c e s,
   viewing slopes, stairw ays, e tc . in good condition

   establishing the need for appraisal, testin g and
   refurbishm ent (usually without disruption to
   the sports program m e and club facilities) to
   bring the ground to the required standard

   establishing a planned prev entativ e m aintenance
   routine

   establishing a stra te g y for means of escape in
  • em ergencies

   m aintaining reasonable first-aid provisions

M anagement will need to e stim ate the necessary
work and prepare a financial operating plan so th a t
the aims can be achieved. A list of many of
the day-to-day routine responsibilities is given in
Appendix A l.

Where an event is expected to draw near capacity
crowds, and it is considered th a t the n ature of the
event may lead to unruly or uncontrolled behaviour,
p articu lar a tte n tio n must be paid by the m anagem ent
to the filling and monitoring of te rra c es. In such
instances, w ritten agreem ent should exist betw een
the club and police settin g out th e ir respective
responsibilities for all aspects of crowd control.
The monitoring of crowd conditions for any self-
contained pen or te rra c e d a re a is of the utm ost
im portance, and a d ire c t line of communication
must be established betw een the appointed person
monitoring the area and the control room.




                               IO
MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS

2.2.1   Planning life safety requirem ents
        Planning for large numbers of people entering,
        staying within and leaving sports grounds
        requires skills beyond those needed for planning
        a system for inanim ate objects. People come
        in many d ifferen t shapes and sizes with varying
        capabilities and handicaps. They may well
        have varying reasons for coming to the sports
        ground and so expect d ifferen t things of it.

        Furtherm ore, although in general most people
        behave sensibly and appropriately most of
        the tim e, relatively small problems when
        experienced alone can be magnified to
        disastrous proportions in a large crowd. Broadly
        th e re are two ways in which crowd safety
        can be jeopardized.

        One is by an unexpected incident or disturbance
        or p a tte rn of crowd m ovem ent, as when a
        b arrier collapses or someone slips within
        a crowd moving down a flight of steps. Because
        people may not know what is happening or
        be confused by its unexpectedness, pressures
        can build up in the crowd fa r beyond those
        normally experienced.

        A second route to disaster is when some
        individual or group in the crowd sets out
        to cause damage or injury. E ither by eliciting
        reciprocal responses from others or by other
        form s of aggravation of th eir actions, a few
        people may in this way, have an e ffe c t far
        beyond th eir numbers.

        The only way to avoid both kinds of potentially
        dangerous   incidents   and    minimize        th eir
        consequences, should they occur, is by careful
        planning, design, m anagem ent, m aintenance
        and adherence to conditions of the c e rtific a te .

        An illustration of the American approach
        to life safety in auditorium m anagem ent,
        also applicable to sports grounds, is given
        in Appendix B2.

2.2.2   P reparation of drawings of sports ground
        The im pact of a new sports ground on the
        local     in frastru c tu re    requires      careful
        consideration from the asp ects of road safety,
        tra ffic congestion, environm ental changes
        and the e ffe c t on the lives of the local residents
        during m atch days.

        The convergence of large numbers of people
        on a locus within an urban neighbourhood
        can c re ate both tra ff ic congestion and the
        p otential for road accidents. The construction
        of a major sports ground within a community
        can also c re a te social and physical stress.
        An open-plan sports ground, free from boundary
        fences and having freedom of access from
        most points of the compass is the ideal and
        affords the best solution to smooth safe crowd
        flow.   However, in regard to the social
        behaviour of the sp ectato rs converging on
        the sports ground, where confrontation of
        supporters is to be avoided sep arate access
        points to the respective p a rts of the sports
        grounds will be necessary.

        Such e ffe c ts may be judged from a plan of
        the sports ground and surroundings a t a scale
        of about 1:1000. F u rther la rg e r scale (1:200)
        drawings of the ground and its constituent
        p a rts will be required, sufficient to show
        clearly all sp ectato r viewing areas, exit and
        en try    routes,     barriers,  capacities,     and
        dem on strate by calculation, appraisal or
        te stin g th a t the constructional and stru c tu ra l
        elem ents will provide adequate levels of
        life safety .

        Both plan and section drawings are required
        a t this larg er scale so as to illu strate the
        3-dimensional arrangem ent of each particular
        zone.

2.2.3   Access for em ergency vehicles
        A dequate roads for em ergency vehicles such
        as fire appliances and am bulances should
        be provided and m aintained, so th a t speedy
        and d ire c t access can be obtained to all parts
        of the ground.        Em ergency routes should
        be defined (in consultation with the licensing
        authorities) and marked on the plan.

        Where necessary, roads in th e vicinity of
        the ground should have re s tric te d parking
        so th a t a t all tim es th ere a re no delays or
        obstructions to the access of emergency
        vehicles.     This re stric tio n may extend to
        a distance in excess of 0.5 km.             When
        p racticab le, such roads should be kept entirely
        free of parked vehicles.

2.2.4   Considerations a ffe c tin g cap acity
        In many instances, the need to a tta in the              Guide to sa fe ty a t sports
        required safety standard will re la te to the            grounds,2nd edition, HMSO,
        maximum number of sp ec ta to rs who are liable          London 1986 (Section 16)
        to be ad m itted to the ground (or a particular
        p a rt of it). For exam ple, a sports ground
        a t maximum sp ec ta to r cap acity may pose
        significant    crowd    pressure    risks.    To
        accom m odate safely a maximum crowd a t
        such a ground might en tail substantial rem edial
        upgrading work; altern ativ ely , consideration
        might be given to accep tin g a much sm aller
        number of sp ectato rs who, properly dispersed,




                                    12
could be accom m odated safely without having
to incur costly repairs or a lteratio ns. The
first step, th erefo re, is to assess how many
people can be safely accom m odated in the
d ifferen t sections of ground given the existing
condition of the ground, i.e. to determ ine
a safe sp ectato r capacity. A range of increased
capacities can then be prepared based on
various im provem ents/rem edial works.

Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to
reduce some risks to an acceptable level,
rem edial work is likely to be necessary to
overcome others. Obvious d e fe cts such as
trip hazards (especially a t the head of stairs
or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs,
and obstructed sections of egress or ingress
routes, should be rectified as p art of the
general care and m aintenance of a ground.
Structures should be sound and inspected
by suitably qualified persons. Design, layout
and signposting of en tran ces and exits and
routes require p articu lar a tte n tio n so th a t
they can safely cope with the number of
sp ectato rs who will use them before and
a f te r an event or in an em ergency. Similarly,
the condition of te rra c e s or viewing slopes
and presence or otherw ise of crush barriers,
co rrectly sited and m eeting the described
strength te s ts are im portant factors.

Broken, uneven te rra c in g causes stumbling.
B arriers not only serve to break up crowd
pressures but also assist in controlling
movement onto and off the te rra c e s by
directing and re stric tin g the ra te of arrival
to suit the capacity, and             encouraging
the form ation of queues so th a t sp ectato rs
arrive in an orderly fashion.

It follows th a t in general in a ground where
it is proposed to retain a high sp ec ta to r
capacity, the m easures needed to be taken
to accom m odate safely such large crowds
are potentially more extensive. In this resp ect
the calculation of the sp ec ta to r capacity
of a te rra c e or th a t through a given route(s)
depends on the configuration and condition
of all the elem ents associated with calculation.
It is recom m ended th a t physical means of
directing crowd flows in and out a re
incorporated.

Division of ground
Where m igration of sp ectato rs could prove
hazardous, a ground should be divided into
sections. Each section of a ground has its
own lim it of safe capacity, and a major
m igration can cause dangerous overcrowding.
              Each section       of the ground (e.g. each end
              or side) should be self-contained with its
              own entrances, exits and to ile t and refreshm ent
              facilities. For football grounds in p articu lar
              th e re should be controlled access     from one
              such major         section to another. At o th er
              sporting events, such as greyhound racing,
              sp ec ta to rs may need to move freely betw een
              d ifferen t p arts of the ground, and this should
              be borne in mind when considering access
              to and from the sections of the ground.
              A utom atic     counting     procedures may     be
              necessary to ensure th a t the approved capacity
              of any p articular zone is not exceeded.

      2.2.6   Signposting
              A comprehensive system of signposting th a t           Safety signs regulations. ^
              clearly indicates routes to the various p arts         1980                     ^
              of the ground, and the exits from the ground,
              should be provided. Signs relatin g to fire            BS 2560: 1978, Specification
              s afety and oth er safety signs (e.g. first-aid        for exit signs (internally
              facilities) should also be provided. Exit gates        illum inated), British Standards
              them selves should be clearly signposted,              Institution, London
              preferably using illum inated signs. D irectional
                                                                     BS 5378: 1980 & 1982, Safety
              signs should be provided to encourage crowds
                                                                     signs and colours, British
              in any p articu lar section to flow in one
                                                                     Standards Institution, London
              direction when leaving the ground.
                                                                     BS 5499: 1984 & 1986, Fire
      2.2.7   Exit g ates                                            safety signs, notices and
                                                                     graphic symbols, British
              Locked ex it g ates should be manned by a
                                                                     Standard Institution, London -
              stew ard a t all tim es when the public are
              in the ground, so th a t they can be opened
              im m ediately from inside by anyone in an
              em ergency. The use of a common pass key
              for all exits should be considered, as should
              one-w ay exits to cope with norm al conditions.

              All g ates should open outw ards with the
              direction of the required flow. Inward opening
              and sliding gates are not suitable unless kept
              open while the public are present.

              All gangways and exit ro u tes must be
              unobstructed and capable of being used to
              th e ir full capacity a t all tim es when the public
              a re in the ground. Every p art of an ex it route
              should be able to accom m odate the required
              flow from the te rra c e         or stand ex it in
              accordance with the approved flow ra te s
              and ex it tim es.

2.3   REFURBISHMENT     AND     RECONSTRUCTION
      WITHOUT DISRUPTION TO CLUB ACTIVITIES

      2.3.1   General
              Changes in legislation and the need to make
              significant im provem ents in the provisions
              for sp ec ta to rs have presented football clubs
              with a serious challenge to th e ir existence.
Clubs of d ifferen t standing and for different
principal sporting uses are confronted by
major expenditure on th e ir existing grounds
in order to m eet future standards of com fort,
safety and com petition.

Functional and financial considerations often
ne ce ssitate redevelopm ent work being carried
out in phases, and m anagem ent of projects
of this kind requires special technical and
p ra c tic al skills especially in the case of
large-span stru ctu res. Whether the aim is
to construct a single stand within an existing
ground or to c re ate a com pletely new complex,
the project requires technical, m anagerial
and financial skills of a high calibre.

Safety provisions should comply with the
requirem ents of the Guide to safety a t sports
grounds. Conform ity with fire regulations
is of param ount im portance.

Ingenuity of design, construction and the
creation of new provisions should influence
the health and w elfare of sports facilities.
Good design linked to technology is sufficiently
advanced to p erm it reliable construction
of new concepts in sports grounds and help
establish th e ir com m ercial viability.

Preplanning
There a re many im portant m a tte rs to be
considered in the refurbishm ent or creation
of sports grounds, and preplanning and project
managem ent     are  essential   elem ents  of
reconstruction.

Preplanning comm ences with a definition
of the overall concept of the proposal for
developm ent, by identifying and researching
the p o ten tial m arket for the facilities and
by making arrangem ents for financing the
reconstruction work.

Control of unruly behaviour
2.3.3.1   Benefits of seatin g . Although seating
          all   sp ectato rs can never entirely
          remove unruly behaviour, malicious
          individuals are easier to identify
          and control            in seated facilities.
          It is also much easier for those who
          wish      to      p e rp e tra te   clandestine
          m ischief to          do so in terracing .
          Furtherm ore, seating is more likely
          to a ttr a c t those who wish to w atch
          the sport in com fort for itse lf
          compared with those few who may
          be    a ttra c te d to         th e  m iscreant
          possibilities         of        the   te rra c e s.
          D isturbances          in densely        packed
          standing te rra c e s a re d ifficult to
          control unless access is maintained.
2.3.3.2      Access and surveillance. To optim ize
             crowd control, easy access to groups
             of sp ectators is im portant and an
             adequate        system of passageways
             as illustrated in clauses 96-100 of
             the Guide to safety a t sports grounds
             fa c ilita te s crowd control. The use
             of both fixed and roving CCTV and
             video cam eras can help to identify
             m iscreants and also iact as a d e te rre n t
             to unruly behaviour.

             Because large q uantities of alcohol
             can    encourage     unruly behaviour
             in some people, the taking of alcohol
             into public areas of sports grounds
             in the UK has been re stric te d by
             the 1987 A ct, as have all form s
             of hard container th a t could be
             used as projectiles.

   2.3.3.3   Open planning. The                    provision
             of a high security fence betw een
             the sp ectato rs and the playing field
             prevents both the exercising of
             control over crowd misbehaviour
             and the egress of sp ectato rs a t a
             tim e of panic or disaster. The use
             of fences to re s tric t crowd m ovem ent
             in a cage environment may not be
             the best solution. Safety may well
             be b e tte r served by an open-plan
             concept for grounds where sp ectato rs
             a re placed within specific a reas
             to which access and egress are rapid
             and simple. Provided th a t sightlines
             are also open, the general feeling
             of spaciousness can enhance the
             overall a ttra c tiv e n e ss of the facility.

             Where such fences have to be
             provided,      em ergency    g ates    of
             sufficient     width   and    proxim ity,
             adequately linking with all a reas
             of the te rra c e and capable of being
             opened     w ithout   danger,    tow ards
             the pitch, should be provided. These
             must be manned a t all tim es the
             public are present.

   2.3.3.4   Open approaches              to  stands. The
             la tte r-d a y concept of high walls
             and fences around grounds within
             which paykiosks a re located is no
             longer tenable, and new grounds
             should        elim inate     the   re stric tiv e
             strips of land betw een the boundary
             fences and the sp ec ta to r stands.
             The positioning and number of pay
             kiosks,       or    tu rnstiles, should       be
             carefully         considered.       Sufficient
             capacity of controlled ingress points



                                  IG
          need to be provided to each sp ectato r
          zone to provide for orderly controlled
          access to the event and prevent
          excessive   queuing.   The location
          of such provision should be such
          as to avoid restrictio n to crowd
          flow on egress.

          Reliable counting system s should
          be provided to enable m anagem ent
          to have im m ediate knowledge of
          the number of sp ectato rs in each
          zone.

          The rem oval of the barriers to free
          movement         outside    the     stands
          elim inates the feeling of being within
          a stockade and may well prom ote
          b e tte r    crowd    behaviour.       The
          occasional misdemeanours by some
          sp ectato rs is readily handled within
          an       open-plan   system .    Incidents
          within strips of land betw een boundary
          fences and stands are difficult to
          handle and control, and the ease
          of access provided by the rem oval
          of boundary fences fa c ilita te s crowd
          handling by police, and operations
          by fire and am bulance services.

2.3.3.5   Barriers of sufficient stren g th for
          guarding stairs, ramps and other
          sp ec ta to r a re a s . Stairs providing
          access and egress to stands should
          be well designed to obviate dangerous
          jostling by sp ectato rs and dangerous
          forward m ovem ents to groups of
          sp ectato rs.   Collapse of a mass
          of individuals can cause severe
          crushing of persons caught in the
          zones of maximum th ru st, resulting
          in injuries and confusion. Therefore,
          barriers must be sited and designed
          to withstand crowd pressures and
          to prevent collapse and to control
          m ovem ent and divert flow (see Section
          5).

2.3.3.6   Readily      accessible   e x its. Rapid
          exit of sp ectato rs in em ergency
          situations is im portant. The capacity
          of the exits may govern the capacity
          of the stand. If necessary e x tra
          em ergency ro u tes/ex its should be
          provided.

2.3.3.7   Fire      s a fe ty . The   m aterials   used
          in the construction of new grounds
          should inhibit combustion and the
          spread        of      fire, thus    providing
          sp ec ta to rs with an opportunity for
          escape and survival.              Section 4
          considers this aspect of life safety.

                            17
                  Where     practicable       m aterials    in
                  existing stru c tu re s should be tre a te d
                  to improve resistance to fire.

2.3.4   S p ectato r com fort
        C om fort is a relative description in the context
        of open-air grounds since clim atic conditions
        largely control the am ount of com fort
        experienced by spectators.

        Seating should be clean and com fortable,
        and the manoeuvrable spaces betw een the
        sea ts should be adequate for all sizes of
        persons. Seating decks should be free of
        columns to perm it a clear view of the playing
        su rface by all spectato rs. S pectators should
        be as close as possible to the playing surface,
        com m ensurate with public safety in respect
        of the a c tiv ity in question.

        Quite a p a rt    from  sa fe ty considerations,
        enjoym ent will be enhanced by good lighting,
        clear audible public address system s. The
        use of fittin g s and fixtures th a t a re eith er
        reasonably vandal proof and easily replaceable
        should be considered.




                                      IS
DESIGN MATTERS

3.1   GROUND ASPECTS OF DESIGN AND SAFETY

      The safety of the sports ground covers two aspects.
      First stru c tu ra l safety , which means th a t each individual
      stru c tu ra l component as well as the whole stru c tu re
      should be sound, adequate and durable, and able to
      resist the pressures and loadings associated with high
      crowd densities and all oth er loading conditions.
      Adequacy inevitably includes stru c tu ra l fire protection.
      The second aspect is safety of sp ectato rs, which
      concerns hazards to the crowd and elim ination as far
      as practicable of the sources of such hazards.

3-2   OTHER ASPECTS

      However, the im plem entation of safer sports grounds
      has to be made with regard to human behaviour, so
      th a t both the risk of failure is reduced and the chance
      of success is increased. In the light of lim ited budgets
      priority (in term s of safety) has to be given to those
      aspects of any facility th a t most improve safety . Lack
      of adequate funding does not justify potentially
      dangerous conditions.         Such conditions will require
      re stric te d use or closure.

3.3   USAGE

      3.3.1    Place in the community
               Sports grounds need to be seen by the
               community as a com fortable recreatio n al
               facility suitable for the family. They should
               be capable of diversification of use. There
               is a need to think in wider design term s, e.g.
               the im plications of converting standing areas
               to seated areas, provision of family only
               sections, separation of home and away fans
               for soccer, and oth er uses.

               Grounds need th e flexibility to c a te r safely          Code of p ractice for
               and com fortably for m ultiple usage from                 pop concerts
               pop festival, football league, international
               tennis to, say, secondary school sports, which
               may require very d ifferen t crowd safety
               control arrangem ents.

      3.3.2    Managing grounds safely
               The g re a t challenge in designing sports grounds        C anter D, Comber M,
               to give g re a te r safety is to do so w ithout           Uzzell D: Football in
               creating th e impression th a t the place is              its place: an
               a fo rtress or prison.          Physical stru c tu re s   environm ental psychology
               carry meanings to the public th a t may not               of football grounds,
               be intended or even thought of by designers               Methuen 1988
               and engineers. It is th e re fo re necessary th a t
they consider what th e meanings and social
implications a re of what they design and
build.

They should consider im plicit messages th a t
th e ir stru c tu re s may carry for d ifferen t groups
who see and use them .                 The symbolic
implications of spatial arrangem ents, m aterials,
tex tu res and colours should all be examined
closely. Freedom of movement and standard
and range of secondary services all indicate
to sta ff, sp ectato rs and the interested public
the regard in which they are held.

Anxiety        and   distress  in    threatening
circum stances, are magnified by a feeling
of lack of control over one's own actions.
The g re a te r the freedom the sp ec ta to r feels
in using a sports ground, the happier th a t
experience is likely to be. Designers should
seek to enhance this feeling of being in control,
taking into account th e cu rren t significance
of the role of police in managing most large
crowds.

Designing to reduce th e im pact of vandalism
is a special case in which an im aginative
design response should be combined with
e ffe c tiv e  m anagem ent.      Making potential
ta rg e ts for vandals as tough as possible ('target
hardening') can c re a te an ambience in which
the public may feel alienated and vandals
challenged. Design and m aintenance strateg ies
th a t allow broken fitm ents to be rapidly
replaced ('targ et softening')         may c re a te
a situation th a t is more inviting to the public
and less a ttra c tiv e to vandals.

Additional facilities beneath stands
The use of grounds on an in te rm itte n t basis,
is a com m ercial lim itation th a t n ecessitates
additional income from oth er sources such
as pools and sponsors. The use of space for
diverse com m ercial businesses within sports
grounds can provide financial resources for
the club and can benefit the local community
by employment and service to industry. Space
available below inclined seating may well
be suitable to provide additional facilities
provided th a t such uses are adequately
com partm ented from the stands above. In
providing such facilities, full account must
be taken of its e ffe c t on th e safety of the
ground in general usage, including th e need
to provide adequate fire com partm entation
betw een the d ifferen t uses.
3.3.4   Comfort
        C om fort of the sp ec ta to r also forms a major
        consideration in the design of stands. Inevitably
        in these days of television, few er and few er
        people will be a ttr a c te d to sports grounds
        unless com fort conditions are improved. The
        level of com fort can be raised by providing
        a w arm er environment, com fortable seats
        or accom m odation,.protection against elem ents
        (i.e. against rain or chilly wind), refreshm ent
        facilities of reasonable standards, as well
        as to ile t facilities.

3.3.5   Viewing and sightlines
        One of the im portant p aram eters in the design
        of sports grounds is 'good viewing'. It is
        essential th a t the sp ec ta to r should be able
        to see the principal object of the sports (such
        as the football, tennis ball, th e a th le te , the
        horse or the car as the case may be. This
        is also a prim ary consideration in appraising
        an existing sports ground. When large crowds
        are present and densities a re high, the
        fru stratio n from lack of proper visibility
        of the principal object can cause distress
        and     other    em otional   reactions   with    a
        consequent build-up of pressure within the
        crowd. Where viewing areas do not afford
        a satisfa c to ry view of the event, they should
        be elim inated from capacity calculations.

        Some consideration of viewing and sightlines
        is given in Appendix E.

3.3.6   C irculatory space
        It is necessary to provide a g re a te r a re a for
        circulation in the case of peram bulatory
        viewing such as a th le tic s and horseracing
        than for station ary viewing such as football.

SAFETY OF SPECTATORS

3.4.1   Home O ffice Guide
        Since the Ibrox Park disaster on 2 January
        1971, th e safety of sp ec ta to rs in sports grounds
        has been extensively studied in the UK. The
        sources of problems have been identified
        and recom m endations given in the Guide
        to sa fe ty a t sports grounds to minimize hazards
        to th e crowd, with particular emphasis on
        football grounds. R ecom m endations include
        both ingress and egress arrangem ents to and
        from th e sports ground and means of escape,
        standards for stairw ays, ramps and handrails,
        fire precautions as well as th e standard for
        viewing slopes and te rra c e s , including layout
        of and design c rite ria for crush barriers.
        Pressures can be set up within a departing
        crowd by im patient people; such incipient
        pressures can and must be contained and
        controlled by careful a tte n tio n to the detailed
        design of barriers, stairw ays, gangways and
        exits. R eference should be made to Section
        5 for fu rth er inform ation on flow ra te s e tc .

3.4.2   Deviations
        Although th e recom m endations of the Guide
        a re not m andatory, they are accep ted as
        guidelines by the local authorities in enforcing
        th e Safety of sports grounds A ct 1975. The
        Guide however, was prepared prim arily in
        the experience of football grounds; th erefo re
        some of the recom m endations may need
        m odification before being applied to grounds
        used for oth er activ ities such as tennis,
        horseracing, etc.

        Deviations from individual guidelines are
        possible w ithout necessarily d e tra ctin g from
        th e overall sa fe ty of the ground. The variety
        of type, function and layout of sports grounds
        and the inter-relationship of the d ifferen t
        parts of them means th a t a flexible approach
        should be m aintained to tak e account of the
        particular circum stances a t individual grounds.

        It is necessary to evaluate flow c h a rac te ristic s,
        which a re generally based on notional ideas.
        The r a te of ingress a t which people move
        is variable and could easily change, e.g. parents
        looking for children e tc . Ingress and egress
        ra te s are hard to calcu late as people do not
        divide them selves evenly. People will go
        w here they w ant in order to 'ta rg e t' to where
        they are going, ra th e r than sorting out into
        an even distribution. At certain events, e.g.
        Olympics, people d rift in and out depending              Jak e Pauls: A m erican/
        on th e a ttra c tio n of the event. To have even         Canadian Olympic Games
        flow it is essential th a t exits are free from
        obstruction, and/or loose or ill-repaired                 Lathrop, Jam es K. (editor):
        surfaces and rem ain free of smoke in the                 Life safety code
        event of a fire in the facility. Crowds progress          handbook, 4th edition,
        a t d ifferen t ra te s, which are slower for old         N ational Fire Prevention
        than young people and are also reduced with               Association, Quincey, Mass,
        increasing density. Planning for oderly ingress           1988
        and evacuation of large crowds in any condition
        is difficult and needs serious q uan titativ e
        and      qualitative      consideration     by      an
        appropriately qualified professional person.
        Section 5 and Appendix B1 deal w ith this
        asp ect more fully.
        The types of safety problem to be considered
        within a ground and in its im m ediate
        surroundings, all of which are linked in some
        way, include:

        1.   hazards th a t cause individuals to trip,
             slip and fall, causing individual injury
             and possible serious fu rth er injuries as
             a result



                               22
        2.   uncontrolled  and unacceptable build-up
              of crowd pressures during ingress and/or
              within any sp ec ta to r zone during the
              perform ance

        3.   danger of      crushing of      people during        Lathrop, Jam es K (editor)
              evacuation,    particularly    in em ergency        Life sa fe ty code
              conditions.                                         handbook, 4th edition,
                                                                  National Fire Prevention
                                                                  Association, Quincey
                                                                  Mass, 1988
        4.   risk from fire (see Section 4)

        5.   failure of elem ents of construction under
             the e ffe c ts of crowd pressures (see
             Sections 6 and 7).

3.4.3   Information transmission
        The im portance of communicating clearly
        and audibly to people, particularly those
        w aiting e ith e r on exit or entry, cannot be
        stressed too strongly. Good public-address
        system s are required.

STRUCTURAL SAFETY

3.5.1   Appraisal and Codes
        Structural sa fe ty is the prim ary consideration
        of stru c tu ra l appraisal and design. For a
        new s tru c tu re , the design generally follows
        the recom m endations of the Codes of P rac tic e
        appropriate to the m aterial to be used. If
        guidance in some resp ect is not clear cut
        or sufficient in the Code it is based on
        engineering judgment and appreciation based
        on experience and/or te sts.

        In th e cu rren t Codes of P ra c tic e an accep tab le
        level of sa fe ty is deem ed to be achieved
        by the use of p artial safety facto rs on loads
        to allow for th e possibility of a given load
        being exceeded accidentally and by p artial
        s afety facto rs on the streng th of m aterials
        to c a te r for probable variation in the a ctu al
        construction. At th e design stage, for exam ple,
        many facto rs rem ain unknown and need to
        be covered by a safety margin in loads and
        m aterials.

        Where the design involves the construction
        of stru c tu re s of unusual configuration, long
        span or th e use of unconventional m aterials
        it is especially im portant th a t the construction
        be monitored on a continuous basis by
        com petent       engineers  fam iliar    with   the
        intentions of the design so th a t sa fe ty margins
        are not im paired by faulty or substandard
        construction.
              In th e appraisal of existing stands, however,
              th e situ ation is som ew hat d iffe re n t since
              most of th e p ara m eters a re known.                 In
              consequence, it is possible and o ften preferab le
              to apply engineering judgm ent as to the
              appropriate level of th ese sa fe ty margins
              such th a t th e assessm ent does not becom e
              inordinately conservative.           When appraising
              existing stru c tu re s p a rtic u la r a tte n tio n has
              to be paid to th e e ffe c ts of joints or elem ents
              from corrosion, from cracking and from
              p o ten tial degradation by fatig ue. What is
              most im p ortan t is th e application of rigorous
              methodology to th e m a tte r of appraisal so
              th a t nothing is missed or m isin terp reted .
              Accordingly, it is essen tial th a t this appraisal
              is carried out by a c h a rte re d engineer with
              appropriate experience of such s tru c tu re s.

              It is recom m ended th a t the general guidance             Appraisal of existing
              given in Appraisal of existing stru c tu re s should        stru c tu re s, Institution
              be followed in th e s tru c tu ra l assessm ent             of S tru ctu ral Engineers,
              of existing stands and th e ir com ponents.                 London 1980

3.6   LOADING

      3.6.1   Perm an en t loads and load combinations
              All re le v an t loads should be considered                 NFPA 102; Standard for
              invidually or in th e ap p ro riate com bination            assembly seatin g , te n ts
              to give the most c ritic a l e ffe c ts on th e             and m em brane stru c tu re s,
              elem ents and th e s tru c tu re as a whole.                C hapter 4, N ational Fire
                                                                          P ro tectio n Association,
                                                                          Quincey Mass. 1986
              In addition to its self-w eight and any o th er
              perm anent loads, th e s tru c tu re should be
              designed to w ithstand loadings from crowds
              and th e ir m ovem ent, wind, snow and any
              o th er forces to which it may be subjected.

      3.6.2   V ertical imposed floor loads
              For th e m ost p art, it is likely th a t the loading       BS 6399: Loadings for
              in BS 6399: P a rt 1, Table 7 is appropriate.               buildings P a rt 1: Dead
                                                                          and imposed loads, 1984
                   a reas w ithout fixed seatin g 5.0 k N /m 2
                   or a c o n cen trated load of 3.6kN                    Keene, P. W., Laurie,
                                                                          J . A. P. <5c Van Wyk, A.:
                   areas w ith fixed seating 4.0 kN /m 2                  'M easurem ents of l i v a ^
                                                                          load on a tem porary s l R d
                   corridors,    passageways      and    stairs           for sp ec ta to rs', Civil
                   5.0 kN /m 2 or a c o n cen trated load 4.5             Engineer in South A frica,
                   kN.                                                    13, 1971, p.272

              In some circum stances, it may be appropriate
              to appraise a stand in th e light of the s ta tic
              and dynamic loads it is likely to receiv e.

              In this c o n tex t a t peak crowd densities w ithout
              obstacles a person will occupy an ellipse
              equivalent to 54 persons per 10 m. Seated
              areas generally o p erate a t a density of 2.4
              to 3.6 sea ts per m 2 dependent on the type
              and arran g em ent of s e a ts.      These figures
              are exclusive of gangways.
                                        24-
             3.6.3    Imposed roof loads
                      The roof s tru c tu re must be able to w ithstand      BS 6399: P a rt 3
                      the e ffe c ts of imposed loadings given in
                      BS 6339: P a rt 3. A tten tio n should be paid         Loads on roofs from
                      to th e e ffe c ts of concentration or asym m etry     snow drifting against
                      caused by possible p a tte rn s of snow drifting       v e rtic a l obstructions
                      in valleys in relatio n to th e shape of th e roof     and in valleys, Digest
                      and to the possible e ffe c ts of previous rem edial   332, BRE, W atford 1988
                      works on the self-w eight of th e roof.

                       In determ ining the adequacy of th e roof
                       a tte n tio n should be paid to its accessibility.
                       This will apply particu larly to existing roofs,
                       where access oth er than for cleaning, although
                       unintended, may be possible.

             3.6.4     Wind loads
                       Both in the design of new stands and in th e          N ational building Code
                       appraisal of existing ones, th e assessm ent          of Canada 1985, P a rt 4:
                       of wind loadings is crucial.                          S tru ctu ral design,
                                                                             N ational R esearch
                       For locations in th e UK, re fe re n c e should       Council of C anada,
                       be made initially to CP 3: C hapter V: P a rt         O ttaw a, 1985
                       2* and BRE digests 283, 284 and 346.
                                                                             CP 3: Code of basic
                                                                             d a ta for th e design
                                                                             of buildings: C hapter V:
                                                                             Loading, P a rt 2: Wind
                                                                             loads*
                                                                             BRE digests:
                                                                             346 The assessm ent of
                                                                             wind loads ( l 989) (seven
                                                                             parts)
                                                                             283 The assessm ent of
                                                                             wind speed over
                                                                             topography (1984)
                                                                             284 Wind loads on
                                                                             canopy roofs (198*6)
                                                                             Cook, N. J.:
                                                                             'Reduction of wind
                                                                             loads on a grandstand
                                                                             roof', Journal of Wind
                                                                             Engineering <3c
                                                                             Industrial A erodynam ics,
                                                                             10, 1982, p.373
                                                                             Cooke, N. J ., <5c Mayne,
                                                                             J . R.: 'A novel working
                                                                             approach to th e assess­
                                                                             m ent of wind loads for
                                                                             equivalent s ta tic design',
                                                                             Journal of Industrial
                                                                             Aerodynamics, March 1979
                                                                             4 (2), p.149

* This code is due for rep lacem en t by:
BS 6399: Loading for buildings, P a rt 2: Wind loads
The new Code is expected to include a static/d y n am ic classification.
                                                                                   I


For stands of unusual configuration, form         Cook, N. J.: 'Calibration
or location, this assessm ent may require         of techniques for the
specialist    knowledge     where consideration   prediction of peak
of both quasi-static loadings and dynamic         pressures', BRE, 1982
e ffe c ts may be necessary, along with both
overall and localized effe c ts.

When wind loading data a re insufficient,
re fe re n c e should be made to available
m eteorological inform ation on wind speeds
and direction, and an appropriate assessment
of design wind speed made for th a t particular
location.

For c o rre c t assessm ent of wind loadings on   Cook, N. J.: Simulation
a particular group of stands or on a stand        techniques for short te s t
of unusual shape or form, a representative        section wind tunnels:
wind tunnel te s t may be required (see Section   roughness, barrier and
6 of Appraisal of existing stru c tu re s).       mixing device methods,
                                                  BRE, 1982
                                                                           •
Where necessary specialist lite ra tu re should   N. J. Cook, The
be consulted or specialist help sought.           designer's guide to wind
                                                  loading of building
                                                  stru ctu res: P art 1:
                                                  Wind and background,
                                                  damage survey and
                                                  stru c tu ra l classification,
                                                  B utterw orth, 1985
                                                  P a rt 2: S tatic stru ctures,
                                                  B utterw orth (in
                                                  preparation).
                                                  R edfearn, D.: A te s t rig
                                                  for proof-testing
                                                  building components
                                                  against wind loads,
                                                  IP19/84, BRE Watford
                                                  1984
                                                  Recommendations for
                                                  calculating the e ffe c ts
                                                  of wind on constructions,
                                                  Publication no. 52, 2nd
                                                  edition European
                                                  Convention for
                                                  C onstructional Steelwork,
                                                  Brussels 1987
                                                  National building Code
                                                  o f Canada 1985, P a rt 4:
                                                  Structural design,      ^
                                                  N ational R esearch      ^
                                                  Council, O ttaw a, 1985
                                                  Minimum design loads
                                                  for buildings and other
                                                  stru c tu re s, A58.1-1982,
                                                  American National
                                                  Standards Institute,
                                                  New York 1982
                                                  'A novel working approach
                                                  to the assessm ent of
                                                  wind loads for equivalent
                                                  s ta tic design' Cook, N. J .
                                                  & Mayne, J. R., Journal
                                                  of Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                  March 1979, 4(2), p.149
                  2.1%
                                                          Cook, N. J: 'Reduction
                                                          of wind loads on a
                                                          grandstand roof', Journal
                                                          of wind engineering
                                                          and industrial aerodynam ics.
                                                          10, 1982
                                                          Eaton, K. J.(editor):
                                                          Buildings and tropical
                                                          windstorms,
                                                          Overseas building note
                                                          no. 188, BRE, Watford
                                                          1981
                                                          Cook, N. J.: Calibration
                                                          of techniques for the
                                                          prediction of peak
                                                          pressures, BRE, Watford
                                                          1982

Imposed horizontal surge loads
In addition to wind forces, the stru c tu re will
need to resist applied longitudinal or transverse
horizontal loads resulting from combined
motions in the crowd.

R ecent research indicates th a t a force of              BS 5973: Access and
up to 156 N per person p arallel to rows of               working scaffolds and
people, and 200 N per person perpendicular                special scaffold
to seating rows should be allowed for. Such               stru c tu re s in ste e l
a force can be particularly significant to
fram eworks whose own self-w eight is low
(such as tem porary stands), or those in a
poor s ta te of m aintenance, and where crowd
densities are high.

Dynamic loads
Traditionally, design has dealt with dynamic
loads as equivalent s ta tic loads. The value
of s ta tic forces has been increased by perhaps
15% or 20% for this purpose. This is perfectly
satisfa c to ry both from stren g th and stiffness
requirem ents as long as th e dynamic forces
cannot excite resonant vibration. When an
existing s tru c tu re is known to be very lively
or for any new stru c tu re s, it should be
confirm ed th a t the am plitudes of vibration
are small enough to avoid discom fort, stru c tu ra l
damage and/or fatigue problems.

For flexible roof stru c tu re s, th e re is the
possibility th a t steady winds may ex cite vortex
shedding, the frequency of which may coincide
with th e n atu ral frequency of th e roof stru c tu re
and thus cause resonant vibration. In such
an eventuality, eith er the stiffness of the
stru c tu re should be substantially increased
or ex tern al damping device based on a scaled-
down model te s t, be introduced to avoid
dynamic      instability.    Likewise,    concerted
swaying, jumping or dancing by sp ectato rs
may excite resonance of floors, barriers or
handrails w here th e ir n a tu ra l frequencies
are below 4 Hz.
      3.6.7   Handrail loads
              Handrails and balustrades should be capable                BS 6180: P rotective
              of withstanding th e loads defined in Table                barriers in and around
              3 of BS 6180. The stren g th of handrails                  buildings
              (including supports) used to divide a stairw ay
              into channels should be as given in Table
              2 of th e Guide to safety a t sports grounds.
              This is especially im portant w here masonry
              or other discontinuous m aterials are employed.

      3.6.8   C rush-barrier loadings
              The loadings for which crush barriers, perim eter          Tuan, C. Y. & Saul,
              or dividing fences need to be designed are                 W. E.: 'Loads due to
              given in Section 9 of the Guide to safety                  sp ec ta to r movements'
              a t sports grounds. Clearly, the individual                Journal of Structural
              building elem ents to which such barriers                  Engineering, ASCE,
              are fixed must w ithstand such localized load              Vol 111, 1985, p.418
              e ffe c ts (see Section 6). The incline of the
              slope on which barriers are standing and the
              variation of the angle of loading need to
              be taken into account.

              The loading to which such barriers need to                 Crush B arrier Strengths
              be designed is lim ited by the number of rows              and Spacings, Home
              of people th a t can be p erm itted behind the             Office Note, March
              b arrier, th e a ctiv ity levels and th e incline          1973
              of the sloping te rra c e . D ifferent categories
              of a ctiv ity were categorized as 'lean', 'strain'         Creasy, L. R.:
              and 'heave' in studies carried out by the then             P ro tec tiv e crowd
              Ministry of Works. These studies form the                  barriers, Ministry of
              basis of forces for which crush barriers need              Works, 1948
              to be designed (see Section 6, Appraisal of
              existing stru c tu re s and Appendix C).


3.7   STRUCTURAL SAFETY IN FIRE

      3.7.1   Fire resistance
              The sta tu to ry requirem ent for the minimum
              period of fire resistan ce of a s tru c tu re is
              normally specified in th e Building Regulations
              or associated guidance.

              However,         single-storey       sports       ground
              stru c tu re s, being open to the air w ithout
              significant internal co m p artm en tation for
              additional uses, may not be required by Building
              R egulations to have a specific fire resistan ce
              ratin g for s tru c tu ra l m embers th a t only support
              a roof. S tructural members th a t are built
              into or support a wall or cladding however
              may need to be fire resisting depending on
              the distance of the wall or cladding from
              the site boundary. The re le v an t period of
              fire resistan ce may be ^h or l h depending
              on the size of the stand. However, when
              th e re a re additional enclosed uses (such as
              beneath inclined seating or if the stru c tu re
              supports tie rs of seats one above the other),
              then those elem ents must have a minimum
              1 h fire resistan ce.

                                     08
The stru c tu re should be able to w ithstand
a fire w ithout collapse and prevent its growth
and spread for a sufficiently long period to
enable safe evacuation of the occupants. The
degree of fire resistance required, th erefo re,
varies with th e fire risk of the building as
well as the facility for rescue operations.
In   general      it is   governed   by    th ree
considerations:

(i)    type of occupancy (i.e. the purpose          for
       which the building is used)

(ii)   floor   a re a and    cubic     capacity      of
       com partm ents and

(iii) general height above the average ground
      level.

Considerations (i) and (ii) are indicative of
the expected fire load, th e a re a of ventilation
and the geom etry of com partm ents th a t
influence the fire severity and thus determ ine
the degree of fire risk. Consideration (iii)
re la te s to rescue operations. The higher
the building, the more tim e is likely to be
needed to evacuate the occupants to safety .

Roof members do not normally need any
specific fire ra tin g unless they a re designed
to provide stab ility for the s tru c tu re . In
th a t case the period of fire resistan ce for
the roof m embers will be the sam e as required
for the p ertin en t a re a of the s tru c tu re . Also,
where the fire e ffe c t on a p articu lar elem ent
may cause a disproportionate a re a to collapse,
an additional protection may be necessary
for the elem ent to provide a minimum of
^h fire resistance. Steel columns supporting
large areas of roof on th e stands where th ere
is a potential for a large local fire is such
a case in point.

Smoke venting
The form, organization and constructional
m aterial of a stand or sports ground must
be such th a t accum ulation of the products
of combustion (smoke, toxic gases) does not
occur so as to inhibit escape to th e outside,
eith er in still wind conditions or under the
various directions of prevailing wind. When
th ere are significant fire loadings, wind-
tunnel studies may be required to assess the
likely    consequences  of    p articu lar wind
directions, and additional smoke venting
provided.

Outdoor places of assembly a re not to be
considered as inherently 'smoke p ro tected',
expecially  if    they    a re   constructed of
combustible    m aterial.    Such constructions
will need evaluation using applicable methods
if th e re is any doubt as to the integ rity of
the evacuation routes as 'places of safety'
free from smoke logging.

The provision of fire resistance as required             Cooke, G. M. E. &
by Building Regulations is usually sufficient            Morgan, P. B. E.:
to ensure stru c tu ra l stability during the tim e      Therm al bowing in fire
necessary to p erm it safe escape, and also              and how it affe c ts
professional     fire     fighting    from     inside    building design,
conventional      buildings.     Deformations      of    IP 21/88, BRE, Watford
substantial stee l, co ncrete and masonry can            1988
be large in fire tem p eratu res, rising as high
as 1200°C for considerable periods. Within
indeterm inate     constructions     second     order
stresses should be investigated. P rem atu re
failure from th erm al bowing of ta ll walls,
especially walls of (or containing) masonry
should be considered since standard fire
resistan ce te sts are conducted on walls of
only    3 m high.         Such     consideration    is
particularly necessary when th e failure of
one or more major stru c tu ra l elem ents subject
to fire can cause collapse re m o te from the
fire, where people have not y e t had tim e
to escape.

The period for which stab ility is required
for life safety purposes must allow tim e for
evacuation to com m ence and the a re a to
be vacated to a place of safety . P rotection
of elem ents to m eet th e half-hour standard
fire resistance te s t will achieve this, provided
th a t  th e  deform ation    e ffe c ts are  also
considered.




                         30
4   FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
    Safety from fire is achieved by m easures th a t re s tric t               Guide to safety a t
    initiation, ra te of early growth and la te r spread of fire; provide      sports grounds, 2nd
    and p ro te c t escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;           edition, HMSO,
    provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire;                   London 1986
    and assist with fire-fig h tin g operations. The fire o fficer
    should always be consulted on m a tte rs of fire safety.

    The type of accom m odation th a t can present the g re a te st hazard
    in the event of fire is the existing covered stand where
    sp ectato rs sit or stand, where the level of com bustibility
    may be high and the resistance to propagation and spread
    of fire is low. Such a combination of properties can endanger
    life, and because       these a re      many combinations of
    accom m odation fire engineering guidance should be obtained.

    Poor housekeeping, combustible stru ctu res, poor stew arding,
    no evacuation procedures, a lack of firefighting appliances
    or these not in the appropriate places, c re a te s a g reat po ten tial
    danger from fire. Before the granting of a safety c e rtific a te
    these hazards will need to be rem edied.

    It is essential th a t in the event of fire, people in a stand have
    ample tim e to be able to make th e ir way to sa fe ty by use
    of p ro tected exit routes w ithout having to endure smoke
    and toxic gases, h eat radiation, e tc . The means provided
    for escape depend on the ra te a t which the fire may develop,
    the number of people involved, as well as the size and geom etry
    of the stru c tu re .

    R esearch into behaviour in fire shows th a t untrained people
    do not easily receive a warning of fire from the frequently
    ambiguous clues it gives when th ey a re engaged on absorbing
    tasks such as eating, making a purchase or in this case w atching
    a sporting event. C entralized      control of the situation is
    th e re fo re of im portance.

    4.1    FIRE SAFETY APPRAISAL STRATEGY
           The age of existing stru c tu re s, th e ir construction and
           resistan ce to spread of fire will vary considerably
           along with the chances of safe escape. It is th e re fo re
           not considered p ractical or viable to produce a definitive
           set of rules from which a judgment can be made.
           T herefore an approach based on the experience of
           fire-p rev en tio n officers,   licencing au tho rities and
           club m anagem ent working within a set of defined
           p ara m eters is recom m ended.

           In order to enable a re latively reliable means of assessing
           the large number of p ara m eters th a t influence fire
           sa fe ty and the re su ltan t   means of escape tim e the
           following procedures should adopted:

           (i)        Appraise fire perform ance of existing stand,
                      which is based prim arily on:

                           layout
                           m aterials and detailing of construction
                           engineering services
                           m anagem ent of facility


                                          31
(ii)     A llocate stand to category 1 or 2 as defined
         in clauses 4.1.2 and 4.1.3, respectively, based
         only on the construction appraisal and check
         th a t the minimum standard is achieved (see
         subsection 4.2). However, it is im portant
         th a t the assessors, th e club m anagem ent
         and the local au th o rity recognize th a t a
         perform ance of one a sp e c t th a t is below
          minimum acceptable levels must result in
         severe restrictio n to the use of th a t elem ent
         or im provem ent to the minimum level.

(iii)    N ote the range of escape tim e from Fig. 4.2.

(iv)     Using the d a ta from the full appraisal
         determ ine the means of escape tim e from
         e ith e r Fig.     4.3 or Fig. 4.4 to suit the
         appropriate category and combination of
         fire -sa fe ty m eausres.

(v)      C alculate the capacity of the stand (see Section
          5) using the escape tim e established above.
          Only exits th a t lead to a place of relativ e
          sa fe ty should be accounted for in this
          calculation.   The em ergency tim e should
          not be confused with the norm al egress tim e.

If the calculated exit capacity of the stand is less
than a c tu a l capacity of the stand, it is feasible (subject
to the lim itations of Fig. 4.2 and guided by Fig. 4.3
and 4.4) to increase the escape capacity by the addition
of fu rth e r sa fe ty provisions.

Additional           m anagem ent a c tiv itie s or active
fire -p ro te c tio n m easures must be justified by the
m anagem ent and supported by a sound technical
submission, and agreed by the licencing authority.
It should be clear th a t the additional provisions will,
in reality , improve the safety of the facility.

A more detailed presentation of the tra d e -o ff procedure
is set out in the flow ch art in Fig. 4.1.

4.1.1    Allocation of stands to two categories
          An initial appraisal is required to determ ine
          the category within which the stand falls.
          In this resp ect, the most significant fe a tu re s
          a re the com bustibility, and the spread of
          fire and smoke c h a rac te ristic s of the cladding    BS 476: P a rt 6:
          and lining system s. D etailed definitions of           Definitions surface
          the two categ ories are given in clauses 4.1.2          spread of flam e
          and 4.1.3.

          Two categories of stand a re specified which re la te
          to the ranges of means of escape tim e in
          Fig. 4.2. This tim e is a notional tim e taken
          by all people occupying a zone d irectly a ffe c te d
          by the outbreak of a fire to reach a place
          of relativ e sa fe ty aw ay from th a t fire.




                              32
                                              Obtain drawings and appraise
                                                  existing construction
                                            and allocate to risk category 1 or 2
                                                    (S u b -s ec tio n 4 .1 )

 Up grade
construction


                                                         Does the
   Close           No       Can                      stand comply wit
                        constructio                minimum standard of
   stand
               '    /   be upgraded
                        economically
                                                     construction for
                                                       that category




                                                           Does the
   Close                                             it a n d comply wit
                   No
                                                    minimum standard
   stand
                                             Z    for fire s afety measures

                                                  see Figs 4.3 and 4.4




                                                             there
Calculate capacity                                             rement
of stand based on
lower escape time                                   lower escape time
  using Section 5                                      see Fig 4.2




                                             Increase the escape time using
                                                C h arts, Figs 4 .3 , 4 .4 and
                                                 general guidance in text




                                               Calculate capacity of stand
                                                   based on this time
                                                     using Section 5




                                                         poes exit
                                                      capacity exceed
                                                   the capacity of stand
                                                        or that for
                                                 non emergency condition




                                                Reduce
                                              capacity of
                                                                    Use stand
                                             stand to that
                                                                      to full
                                               based on
                                                                    capacity
                                                escape
                                                 time



Fig 4.1    Flow chart for assessing capacity of stand

                                33
        A place of relativ e safety, which is not
        n ecessarily outside the ground, is a location
        th a t is p rotected from smoke, fire and
        radiation.    Containm ent    by   fire-re sista n t
        construction is not essential. The fire potential
        is clearly g re a te r with category 1 stands,
        which may be constructed from m aterials
        such as tim ber.

        All form al provisions for escape a re d irectly
        re la te d  to the tim e a t which escape
        com mences, typically ra th e r la te in the
        developm ent of an em ergency. The ability
        to in itiate early m ovem ent is a major fa c to r
        in the economics of providing safety . This
        a sp ect is considered in more detail under
        m anagem ent a c tiv itie s (see clause 4.3.3).

        C alculated evacuation tim es should not exceed           N ational Fire Pro tag ^on
        8 min, as longer tim es can lead to restiveness           Agency 101 (1988)
        in the crowd and the build-up of physical                 Appendix D Life safety
        pressure th a t can also endanger life. Use               code 102 Appendix A
        of the 8 min maximum would be exceptional.                3-3 2.2


         C ategory                range of escape tim e
                                  min

         1                        2.5     to    4.0 maximum
         2                        4 .0    to    8.0 maximum

         F ig. 4 .2 Exit tim es for different categories


4.1.2    C ategory 1 stands
         EITHER
         A stand consisting of walls and roof with                BS 476 : P a rt 6 :
         a Class 1 spread of flam e ra tin g (BS 476:             D efinitions of
         P a rt 6). The seating a re a to have minimum            surface spread of
         Class 1, or Class 0 if cushions are used.                fla m e , British Standards
         Where the linings consist of a composite                 Institution, London
         of a number of m aterials the class ratin g
         is to be determ ined by a te s t for the composite       Building Regulations
         construction.                                            Approved Document
                                                                  B 2/3/4 (for Class 0
         OR                                                       definition)
         A stand consisting of combustible m aterials
         where it is possible to ju stify th a t the la te ra l
         spread of fire will not inhibit escape or
         fire fighting operations. For fire and flam e
         spread assessm ent see subsection 4.4.

4.1.3    C ategory 2 stands
        A stand consisting of walls and roof with
        a Class 0 spread of flam e ra tin g (BS 476:
        P a rts 6 and 7). The seating a re a to consist
        of Class 1 surfaces, or Class 0 if cushions
        a re used and all means of escape a re
        adequately smoke p ro te c te d .



                              34
      4.1.4    Circulation areas
               In all categories, circulation areas, stairw ays
               and exit routes leading away from the stand
               should have Class 0 surfaces.

      4.1.5    Use of non-traditional m aterials
               For non-traditional m aterials such as coated
               te x tile s the assessm ent is more appropriately
               based on large-scale ad hoc te stin g back­
               up by m anufacturers' fire te s t data.

4.2   GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
      OF CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING

      4.2.1    General
              Generally, the appraisal should be guided
              by Building Regulations and appropriate
              legislation (see subsection 2.1). However,
              specific item s th a t re la te particularly to
              sports grounds must be considered in addition
              to the basic planning and stru c tu ra l aspects
              defined in this rep ort and in the Guide to
              sa fe ty a t sports grounds. Fig. 4.1 to 4.4
              should be re fe rre d to assist in the appraisal.

      4.2.2   C o m p artm en tation /p ro tectio n of tiers
              F ire-resisting and fire-stopping construction
              is required to sep a ra te high fire risk a reas
              and voids.      Floors sep aratin g stand tie rs
              should also have appropriate fire-re sistin g
              construction     (see  minimum requirem ents
              defined in Figs. 4.3 and 4.4). Fire engineering
              guidance should be sought in these instances.

              A utom atic sprinklers could be considered
              as an a lte rn a tiv e to a lesser standard of
              com partm entation, although in the m ajority
              of cases com p artm entatio n is the b e tte r
              option. If sprinklers a re used in outside
              stands, a dry system may be necessary because
              of the problem of freezing.

      4.2.3   Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
              Escape routes should be planned to keep
              people well clear of the smoke from a fire.
              The hot buoyant smoky gases produced by
              a fire will flow upwards and will collect
              under and flow along roof spaces, balconies,
              e tc . and may be adversely a ffe c te d by wind.

              The escape routes should be planned with
              these facto rs in mind so th a t people can
              generally move downwards and away from
              the smoke and be p ro te c te d from radiation.

              The influence of the geom etry and the form
              of the roof influence the la te ra l spread
              of fire and smoke and th erefo re should be
              considered when planning means of escape.



                                     3£f
                                                                                               Size of ground
  Fire safety measures                         Less than 500 p eo p le                 1   500 to 2000 people                             2000 people


                    Smoke hazard and           Fire and smoke hazard assessm ent is required unless surfaces                             Surfaces to co m p ly with
                    f l a m e spread           co m p ly with C la s s 1 standard                                                        C la s s 1 standard. Fire
                    assessm ent                                                                                                          and smoke assessm ent
                    subsection 4 .4                                                                                                      required.
       w
       £
       H                                       If cushions are provided a l l seating a reas to be n o n -co m b u stib le .
       w
       a*
       <
       0            Management                 No w ritten submission from                 A written submission from                     Q u a lity assurance
       a>           c a p a b ility and        management e s s e n ti a l, but            management is required                        procedures are
       w
       2            q u a lity manual          recom m ended. Appointing                   for justification of their                    recommended
        1           cla u se 4.3               auth orities to be satisfied                proposals to approving                        R e f. clau se 4 .3 .1
       «-*«                                    with pro po sals. R e f.                    au th o ritie s. Principles
        C^l                                    c la u s e 4 .3 .                           p lu s w e l l d e t a il e d procedure
        <                                      P rin ciples required.                      requ ired.
       2

       o
                                                                                                                                                                   •
                    Fire resistance            D eterm inate             i .               D eterm inate              , .                 D eterm inate           ,
       -3                                                                i hour             .    .                    1 hour                                      1 hour
       <            of s tru ctu re            stru ctu re                                 stru cture                                     structure
       a>           cla u se 4 . 2 .6                                                                                                     Indeterm inate          , .
       2                                       Indeterm inate            i .               Indeterm inate             i .
                                                                         i hour                                       i hour                                      1 hour
       o                                       stru ctu re                                 stru ctu re                                    stru cture
       >
       o
       os
       a*           C om p artm en tatio n     Minimum i hour. Sprinklers                  Fire resistance to be i hour                   Fire resistance to be
       >-           of void and other          may be used to offset s h o r t­            or as su perstructu re which­                  1 hour or as superstructure
       8-
       W            fa c i li ti e s           fa ll.        Voids under seating           ever is g r e a t e r . Voids under            whichever is g re a te r.
       <            c l a u se s 4 .2 2 ,      a c c e p t a b le if cavity barriers       seating not a c c e p t a b l e .              Voids under seating not
                    4 .2 4 , 4.25              and a u to m atic detection                                                                a ccep tab le.
       Cd
                                               provided. 8m v e rt ic a l and
                                               20m h o riz o n ta l.
       s
       D
       S
       2            E a rl y warning,
       i            com munications,
                    fire-fig hting and         To be agreed with approving au tho ritie s.            R ef c la u se s 4 . 3 . 3 ,   . 3 . 4 , 4 .3 .8
                    em ergency equip­
                    ment                       D et a i ls to be included in operating p la n .
                    c la u s e s 4 . 3 . 2 ,
                    4 .3 .3 , 4.3 .4



        a>          Management                 Additional systems and                      As ' l e s s than 500' but
       2            ca p a b ility             trained personnel above                     a l l o w i min maximum
       o            i to 1 min                 th a t defined in operating                 ex tra ti m e .
       72
       >                                       p la n if measures are                                                                          N O
       o                                       considered a f f e c tiv e by
       os                                      the assessor.
       a*
       >*
       c.
       Ct«
       <            E a rl y warning           Additional f a c i li ti e s above th a t defined in operating plan                             E X T R A
       <            and                        if a pp ro pria te, e . g . au to m a tic detection and d i a l ,
       os           communications             monitoring p a n e l s , e t c .
       X            i to 1 min
       w
       os
       O                                                                                                                                       T I ME
       hi-
       w            C l a r i t y of           Section 5 determ ines c a p a c ity by c a l c u la t io n procedure.
       £            escape route               If escape route is very c l e a r short and e a s i ly id e n tifiab le
       H            + i to 1 min               ad dition al escape tim e is ap p rop ria te.
       < ^
       2      rr
                                                                                                                                                A L L O W A N C E          ’
       —      nU    Active f ire ­             Additional fire fighting system s above th a t defined in
       Q $          fighting systems           the operating p la n if app rop riate a l l o w s additional escape
       < >2         + 5 min                    ti m e .




Fig.          4.3    Category 1 stand



                                                                        36
                                                                                                    Size of ground
   Fire safet y measures                          Less than 500 peo ple                         500 to 2000 people                       2000   people

                   Spread of fl a m e             W a l ls and cilings to co m p ly             W a l ls and ceilings to                 W a lls and ceilin gs to
                   cha rac teristics of           with c la ss 'O' stand ard.                   c o m p ly with C la s s 'O'             co m p ly with C la s s 'O'
                   construction                   C la s s 1 a c c e p t a b le for             stand ard .                              standard. Fire and smoke
                                                  seating a r e a .                                                                      spread assessment is
       CO                                                                                                                                required.

       <
       £                                                                                        If cushions are provided a l l seating areas to be non-
                                                                                                c o m b u s ti b le .
       2
       £
       co          Management                    Written submission from                       A w ritten submission from                Q u a lity assurance
       2           cap ab ility and              management not e s s e n t i a l ,            management is required                    procedures are recommended
   o               q u a l ity manual            but recom m ended. Appointing                 for justification of their                R ef c la u se 4 .3 .1
   S2              cla u se 4.3                  authorities to be satisfied                   pro posals to approving
   >                                             with prop osals.
   o                                                                                           au th orities.
   as


   c-             Fire resistance                D ete rm inate            , .                 D eterm inate             , .             D eterm in ate          , ,
   X              of stru ctu re                 stru c tu re              * hour
   w                                                                                           stru c tu re              1 hour          stru ctu re             1 hour
                  cla u se 4 . 2 . 6
   5                                             Indeterm inate            , .                 In determ inate           , .             Indeterm inate          , .
                                                 s tru c tu re             * hour              stru ctu re               * hour          s tru ctu re            1 hour
   u
   o
   2
   <
                  C om partm entation            Minimum i hour. Sprinklers                    Fire resistance to be                     Fire resistance to be
   o              of voids and                   may be used to offset sh o r t­               i hour or as superstructure               1 hour or as su perstructu re
                  o th e r f a c ilitie s        fa ll.        Voids under seating             whichever is g re a t e r . Void          whichever is g r e a t e r . Voids
   <
   a              Ref c la u s e s 4 . 2 . 2 ,   a c c e p t a b le if cav ity barriers        under seating not a c c e p t a b l e .   under seating not
   £              4 . 2 . 4 , 4 . 2 .5           and d etectio n provided.                                                               a ccep tab le.


   2
   O              E a rly warning
                  communication and
                  fire-figh ting and             To be agreed with approving authorities
       <          em ergency equip­
                  ment                           D e ta i ls to be inc lud ed in operating p l a n .
                  c la u s e s 4 . 3 . 2 ,
                  4 .3 .3 , 4 .3 .4



                  Management                     Additional system s and trained personnel above th a t defined                              N O
                  s to 1 min                     in operating p l a n , if the measures are considered to be
   p
   c-                                            effe c tiv e and appropriate by the assessors.                                              E X T R A
   a
   %                                                                                                                                         T I ME
   H
   W              E a rly warning                Additional fa c i li ti e s above th a t defined in operating pla n                         A L L O W A N C E
    Cu            and                            if the measures a re considered to be a f f e c tiv e and ap pro ­
    <
    O             communication                  priate by the assessors.
    w             + i to 1 min



M  s
                  Smoke hazard
                  assessm ent
                  i to 1 min
                                                 Fire and smoke assessm ent is required and provisions to lim it
                                                 risks if n ecessary . E ffect of wind to be a l l o w e d for.
                                                                                                                                         If a l l surfaces a re C la s s
                                                                                                                                          'O' and n on-co m b u stib le
                                                                                                                                         and no cushions a re used
   O
   j                                                                                                                                     a i min maximum e x tra
   -3
   <                                                                                                                                     is a l l o w e d .
   2
   £2             C l a r i t y of escape
   >                                             Section 5 determ ines cap acity by c a l c u l a t i o n procedure, if
   O              route                          escape route is very c l e a r , short and e a s i ly id e n tif ia b le ,                  N O
   05             + 1 min
   a*                                            ad ditiona l escape tim e is ap prop riate.
   £ .                                                                                                                                       E X T R A
   P
                                                                                                                                             T I ME
   *              Active f ire ­                 Additional fire fighting systems above t h a t defined in the
   <
                  fighting systems               operating p la n if a p p ro p riate , a l l o w s a dd itio nal escape ti m e .            A L L O W A N C E
                  + 1 min




Fig.        4.4    Category 2 stand


                                                                          37
Proposals for means of escape and smoke
assessm ents should be referred to the fire
and licensing authorities. No routes th a t
can readily be smoke logged should be
p erm itted .

Measures    to   prevent or    re ta rd   early   fire
growth
It is absolutely crucial to re s tric t fire growth
ra te to manageable proportions because
of the im pact of fire growth ra te on escape.

There is a need to break the in teractio n
betw een fire spreading in cavities, wooden
seatin g and flooring. This can be done by:

   maintaining clean cavities (or filling
   voids with non-combustible m aterial

   providing adequate com partm entation

   replacing combustible m aterials in floors
   and seating.

Larger managed voids th a t a re cleaned and
d e te c te d can be considered if supported
by adequate fire pro tectio n measures.

Fire resistance of stru c tu re and supporting
stands
The fire-resistance period of the stru c tu re
supporting the stands should be compatible
with the com partm entation (see clause 4.2.2)
and usage and also sufficient to prevent
p rem atu re collapse or progressive failure
of a facility (indeterm inate stru c tu re s are
an advantage in this respect).

G eneral requirem ents for fire-resistan ce
periods are defined in Figs. 4.3 and 4.4.
C areful consideration is required in appraising
the consequences of failure of a p articu lar
elem ent and its im plications on means of
escape and subsequent fire-fighting.

Where provision of fire-resistin g separation
betw een stands and a re as under the tie rs
is not practicable appropriate m anagem ent
a c tiv itie s backed up by an enhanced zone
detectio n system could be considered if
the means of escape can be shown to be
adequate.

F ire-resistance appraisal
Where specific te s t d ata, BRE guidelines
and other sources a re not available, an
a lte rn a tiv e fire-engineering approach may
be adopted to make an assessm ent. This
approach recognizes the influence of fire
load, ventilation, location of stru c tu ra l
m em bers and th eir working stresses.
          The stability of stru c tu ra l members during
          a fire is controlled by the rise of tem p eratu res
          and corresponding reduction in the strength
          of the m aterial and the n ature and magnitude
          of    loading     in    the    members.        The
          fire-engineering method of design can quantify
          the conditions to which stru c tu ra l members
          will be subjected in the event of a fire.

         D ifferent approaches can be made when
         im plem enting fire-engineering, many being
         simple, while others a re com plicated, costly
         and time-consuming. For concrete structu res,
         guidance for appraisal of fire resistance
         is given in the joint rep o rt of the Institution
         and the C oncrete Society Design and detailing
         of concrete stru c tu re s for fire re sista n c e .
         In view of the cost implications involved
         in the length of a study, the level of potential
         cost savings should be evaluated to establish
         w hether the application of fire engineering
         is worth while.

GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
FOR MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND RELATED
ACTIVE FIRE PRECAUTIONS
In both existing sports grounds and in those of new
design, the way m anagem ent organize the ground,
th eir stew ards and supporting equipm ent is fundam ental
to th e sa fe ty of the sp ectato rs in the event of a fire.
Staff training, particularly for stew ards, in carrying
out th e ir norm al duties and seeing th a t they are aw are
of th e ir role in an em ergency situation should be
given the highest priority. It is the responsibility
of the m anagem ent who should have the best knowledge
of th e ir particu lar situation to produce the docum ented
evidence (operating plan) th a t they have considered
the to ta l problem and th a t the stand/ground is safe
for the certified occupancy. It is im portant th a t
the licence holder be a person with au th o rity to
im plem ent      decisions     made    e ith e r in  ground
im provem ents and/or during the use of the ground.

4.3.1    Quality assurance for la rg e r facilities
         For       larg er  facilities,  quality-assurance
         techniques can be used beneficially to provide
         the docum entary evidence and give an
         e ffe c tiv e means of monitoring the application
         of the m anagem ent in te n t. The following
         steps a re a simple resume of the process:

             produce an operating manual to cover
             all aspects relatin g to crowd m anagem ent,
             em ergency situations and equipment

             verify and m onitor the manual for, say,
             one year to show th a t it is adequate
             and consistent and th a t it forms a basis
             for certificatio n
           adjust and update the manual as necessary

           continue monitoring the         process,   based
           on the operating manual.

           include in the manual itself details as
           to how these procedures are to be
           monitored    on a  regular   basis   for
           effectiveness.

        Such systems are well established and have
        long been used in industry, and consequently
        th e re is much inform ation available.

4.3.2   Emergency procedures and s ta f f training
        It is essential th a t plans should be made
        for dealing with em ergencies including fire.
        The onus to do this lies with th e managem ent
        of th e facility. Jo int consultation betw een
        m anagem ent, police, fire services, local
        authority ambulance and other em ergency
        services should take place in order to produce
        agreed plans of action for all foreseeable
        types of em ergency. While the public are
        in th e ground, the number of s ta f f on duty
        should be sufficient to cover entrances,
        exits and other stra te g ic points and to fulfil
        other essential duties.         As well as fire
        stew ards, other s ta f f should be trained in
        the use of firefighting equipment, and in
        the action they should take in the event
        of fire. However, it should be made clear
        to fire stew ards th a t they should a tte n d
        to th eir defined duties first.

        It is necessary for m anagem ent to make
        provision for th e collection of inform ation
        of a quality th a t will convey real conviction
        a t a sufficiently early stag e for th e control
        c en tre to a c tiv a te plans for dealing with
        em ergencies.       This will alm ost certainly
        involve a control c en tre with authority to
        collate and a c t on inform ation and means
        of com m unication with individuals on the
        ground sta ff, police and the public. In many
        instances of major life-loss fires, the
        transm ission of inform ation through normal
        organizational hierarchies has been too
        slow to be e ffe c tiv e . Persons such as re ferees,
        gatekeepers, c a te re rs and sales s ta f f (implied
        by the additional facilities noted in clause
        3.3.3) must be included to rem ove the conflict
        of in te re st noted in clause 4.1.1.

        O rganization of stew ards and their training
        to respond appropriately in an em ergency
        is th e m anagem ent's responsibility, but the
        advice of the local fire and police authorities
        should be sought on the content of their
        training programm e and channelled through
        the club's licence h o ld er/safety officer.


                         40
        It       is         recom m ended       th a t  each
        s tew a rd /a tte n d a n t is issued with a w ritten
        se t of basic operating instructions appropriate
        to the particular location and responsibility
        (see Appendix A2).

4.3.3   Public-address system
        In dealing with any em ergency situation                C an ter, D. (ed): Fires
        it is im portant to recognize the way people            and human behaviour,
        behave. The seriousness and e x te n t of e ffe c t     2nd ed it., David Futton,
        has been found to depend considerably on                1989
        the reactions and p a tte rn s of a ctiv ity of
        people associated with the em ergency or
        fire situation.

        There is no basic aw areness of the extrem ely          C an ter, D.: Studies of
        rapid fire growth due to roofs and ceilings,            human behaviour in
        since experience of fire is, by and large,              fire; em pirical results
        derived from cooking and bonfires. There                and th e ir im plications
        is a strong tendency th erefo re to stand and           for education and
        w atch a fire, even in large rooms. A stand             design, BRE, G arston
        is an extrem e case, where very hot gases               1985
        collect and rapidly m igrate down its length.
        These radiate intense h eat, which a c c e le ra te s
        the fire growth and burns the occupants
        d irectly.  C entral m anagem ent must be
        aw are of this weakness in perception and
        have m easures capable of overcoming it.

        It is especially im p o rtan t th a t appraisers
        and designers recognize the need to minimize
        any delay to the s ta r t of the evacuation.
        In this context, clear au th o ritativ e and planned
        instructions th a t te ll people simply and
        d irectly th a t th ere is a need to evacuate
        the area and giving them d irect instructions
        on how to do this a re needed. It is im portant
        to identify exit routes and gates (see clause
        2 . 2 . 6 ).

        It is extrem ely im p o rtan t th a t these are
        given on a reliable and audible address system .
        At no stage should the term 'panic' be
        mentioned, especially not in the form of
        'don't panic' or even im plicitly in the form
        of 'please keep calm '. There should be no
        re feren ce to a ctu al or p otential em otional
        s ta te , simply directions telling people what
        to do. In a complex building, this may require
        d ifferen t instructions to be given to people
        in d ifferen t parts, but everyone should be
        kept informed of the procedures being put
        in motion. Staff should be made aw are
        of the situation. A prearranged se t of code
        words is one way of keeping s ta f f inform ed.
        The capability to arriv e a t an early decision
        to evacuate an area will assist the announcers
        considerably in making such low-key m essages.
        Experience of past fa ta l fires has revealed
        a tte m p ts to delay announcem ents of a
        developing fire in case 'panic' should occur.


                           41
Fire d etection (fire alarm systems)
A monitored autom atic fire-d etectio n system
is needed to enable reliable early detection
and s ta r t on evacuation procedures. This
must re g iste r in the control centre/ro om
where the public-address system is situated,
and    to    prevent   potentially    dangerous
confusion, should not be audible to th e general
public. This system should be backed up
by loud hailers.

When considering the specification of a
new system , BS 5839 should be used.
A ttention is drawn to the provisions for
life safety. The modern com puter based
analogue addressable systems are more
easily m aintained and have considerable
self-checking ability. They have an inherent
capability to provide inform ation giving
the precise location of the device th a t
d e te c te d the fire and a t many locations
rem o te from th e ir control equipm ents. This
is an essential for safe first-aid fire-fighting,
rapid discovery of false alarm s or to convey
sufficient inform ation for the control cen tre
to a c tiv a te the most suitable stra te g y to
deal with th e problem. Such system s could
be considered for major facilities

Coordination of em ergency services
The m anagem ent should be in a position
to take an overview of the facility and have
a clear understanding of the requirem ents
and coordination of the em ergency services
and possible conflicts. The principles and
responsibility  within this     com m unication
process could really be recorded in the quality
assurance manual.

On Football League grounds police video
surveillance of crowds is already provided.
Consideration should be given to using those
facilities   so th a t   m anagem ent  receive
sufficiently positive inform ation a t first
hand so th a t they can make decisions quickly
and positively. This will help avoid the
conflict betw een suspension of a c tiv itie s
and    financial penalties associated with
im plem enting    em ergency   plans.   Colour
equipm ent is necessary to make judgments
on fires.

Fire loading
Seating, partitioning and any o th e r fixed
or movable contents including s e a t cushions,
hired or sold, should possess a good
perform ance in fire. Cushions and seating
should    comply    with cu rren t    furniture
legislation.
4.3.7    Construction and fixed elem en ts
         C ontents should not be easy to dismantle
         and used maliciously as projectiles or to
         s ta r t a fire.

4.3.8    L itte r
         Accumulation of litt e r should be scrupulously
         avoided; easily accessible non-combustible
         litte r bins should be provided with provision
         for collection. The accum ulation of litt e r
         before, during and a f te r the event should
         be recognized as a po ten tial problem.

4.3.9    Provision of fire-fighting equipment
         Advice will need to be sought from the local
         fire authority. At le a st the following should
         be considered and should form p a rt of the
         safety c ertific a te :

              provision of adequate w a ter supply and
              hydrants

              hose reels to BS 5306: P a rt 1, of sufficient     BS 5306: P a rt 1
              length to reach the whole area

             provision of portable fire extinguishers,           BS 5423
             properly m aintained and p ro te c te d from        BS 5303: P a rt 3
             vandalism to BS 5423 and sited and
             maintained according to BS 5305: P a rt 3.

4.3.10   Measures to re s tric t the e x te n t of fire spread
         in la te r stages
         R estricting the e x te n t and speed of fire
         spread in the la te r stages of fire will reduce
         the possibility of people's escape being fu rth e r
         th reaten ed, assist the operations of the
         fire brigade, and reduce the u ltim ate size
         of fire and e x te n t of dam age. Most measures
         th a t reduce the ra te of fire growth in the
         early stages will help to re s tric t fire spread
         in la te r stages.

FIRE AND SMOKE ASSESSMENT
4.4.1    Smoke assessm ent
         Where the roof geom etry is not in itse lf              Thomas, P. H., &
         capable of ejecting smoky gases, then                   Hinkley, P. L.: Design
         reservoirs to contain them to g e th e r with           of roof venting system s
         roof venting to cause them to flow to the               for single-storey
         outside may be advisable. The design of                 buildings, DSIR Fire
         such system s is norm ally made for still-              research tech n ical
         a ir conditions. With an open building of               paper no. 10, HMSO,
         this kind, the effectiv en ess of the venting           London 1964
         can be strongly influenced by the wind because
         over-pressures generated above a roof and/or
         sections underneath it can oppose the flow
         of smoky gases out of a vent and even cause
         a com plete reversal of flow so th a t a ir from
         above the roof flows down through the vent.
         Thus roof venting cannot be a universal
         solution.
        As the gases rise, they entrain air strongly
        which increases th eir volume and lowers
        th e ir te m p eratu re. Furth er cooling takes
        place by radiation and convection h eat
        tra n sfe r as the gases flow under roofs e tc .,
        and eventually they may have lost enough
        buoyancy for them to follow air movements
        c re ate d by any wind. This could mean th a t,
        within a stand, smoke is brought down to
        ground level. Expert assessm ent and possibly
        wind-tunnel testin g may be required.

4.4.2   Smoke control measures
        It is vital to keep smoke away from escape
        routes by re stric tin g its trav el and even
        making it flow out of the building a ltog eth er.

        G eom etries of some roofs, e.g. transverse
        open-ended barrel vaults, can prom ote the
        rapid ejection of smoky gases from a stand
        and inhibit th e ir spread along it. Conversely,
        longitudinally vaulted roofs favour the rapid
        spread of smoky gases along a stand. Expert
        assessm ent and possibly wind-tunnel testing
        may be required.

4.4.3   R estriction of flam e tra v e l under roofs
        Flames from a large fire th a t impinge on
        the underside of a roof or balcony, even
        one made of in ert m aterial, will elongate
        very considerably as they flow along under
        the roof and, radiating downwards, can put
        people below in g re a t danger and greatly
        enhance the spread of fire horizontally a t
        floor level.    As with smoke spread the
        geom etry of the roof can inhibit or favour
        spread of flam e along a stand and should
        be carefully considered.

        A stand consisting of combustible m aterials
        w here it is possible to justify th a t th e la te ra l
        spread of fire and smoke will not inhibit
        escape or fire-fighting operations may be
        accep tab le.

        The desirability of preventing undue flam e
        tra v e l under roofs, even those made of inert
        m aterial, is im portant. Where this cannot
        be prevented by the intrinsic form of the
        roof, then it may be possible to re s tric t
        the trav el of flam e along the underside
        of a roof by installing deep roof screens,
        combined with substantial areas of venting
        in the roof to allow the flam e to pass to
        the outside. The reservoirs so form ed should
        generally be much sm aller than are needed
        for smoke ventilation in order to reduce
        the a re a of stand exposed to unacceptably
        high levels of h e at radiation. Much larg er
        a reas of venting would be required than


                            44
         are needed for smoke venting. However,
         with the g re a te r buoyancy of the flam es,
         the e ffe c t of wind is likely to be less
         im portant. The roof screens to g eth er with
         th eir fixings must be able to resist a tta c k
         by flam e and very hot gases for a period
         com m ensurate with escape and fire-fighting
         operations.

         Where the roofs of stands are so connected
         th a t smoke and flam es could trav el along
         essentially two     or more sides of a pitch,
         a wide break in the roof should be made
         to sep arate each side, unless flam e trav el
         could be elim inated by the measures above.

         In very difficult cases, rem oval of the roof
         alto g eth er should be considered.

COVERED GROUNDS
Although com pletely covered grounds in which both
the sporting a ctiv ity and sp ectato rs are covered by
one    single enclosure donot come under the Safety
a t sports grounds A ct, many of the c rite ria and
recom m endations concerning category 2 stands are
appropriate to covered grounds.

NEW STANDS AND COVERED GROUNDS
The recom m endations defined in     this section are
appropriate for both new stands and covered grounds
and can be used as a basis for developing and approving
new designs th a t a re 'sm oke-protected places of
assembly'.

To be described as a 'sm oke-protected place of            NFPA 102: Standard
assembly' all surfaces must generally have low             for assembly seating,
com bustibility of Class 0, means of egress must be        te n ts and m embrane
d irect, and the roof must be a t le a st 5 m above the    stru c tu re s, C hap ter 4,
highest seating. Further, a smoke ventilation system       N ational Fire
should be engineered to m aintain th e level of smoke      Protection Association,
gen erated by any possible fire within the a re a or       Quincey Mass. 1986
adjacent com partm ents a t a minimum of 2.5 m above
the highest seating or walking levels.

However where occupied areas open to the space are over
5 m above potential fire load then the clear height
from th e highest occupied level to the calculated
smoke base should be a t least 3.0 m.
CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT

5.1   GENERAL
      The Guide to safety a t sports grounds ontains procedures
      for evaluating the capacity of differen t parts of sports
      grounds. C hapter 16 of th a t Guide gives examples for
      the estim ation of safe ground capacity.

      Assessment must be made of:

               the holding cap acity of a te rra c e or viewing
               slope or seated area

               the capacity of a given exit routes from a te rra c e
               or stand in combination or singly.              Full
               consideration has to be given to the e ffe c ts
               of potential obstructions th a t could occur

               th e location of crush barriers to minimize
               pressures associated with crowd movements.

      The number of people th a t can be safely accom m odated
      on a te rra c e or in a stand (or oth er covered
      accom m odation) is e ith e r its holding capacity, or th e
      capacity of the exit system to be used in normal
      circum stances a t the end of an event, or the em ergency
      exit system , w hichever is th e least.

      Local conditions may require th a t capacities have to
      be set below those calculated in accordance with the
      Guide. Inspection of an existing ground should tak e place
      before calculation so th a t local conditions are taken
      into account.

5.2   PASSAGEWAY BLOCKAGES
      With a crowd moving along a passageway, physical blockage
      can occur once a c ritic a l density is reached. In these
      conditions crowd pressures can e scalate to a dangerous
      level, and if a person stum bles or falls the crowd cannot
      adapt to avoid him or to stop to help.

      The blockage may be 'spontaneous' and does not require
      an obstruction such as people forming a 'comprehensive
      arch' against the onward stream betw een the 'abutm ents'
      of the passage boundaries. Any obstruction such as people
      falling will of course aggravate the e ffe c t.

      Once a blockage occurs, the build-up of pressure and
      resu ltan t injury and asphyxiation may be rapid if the
      following crowd is not halted and is unaware of the
      obstruction ahead.

      Since this type of danger arises from crowd pressures
      its rem edy lies in th e ir rem oval or re s tra in t within safe
      lim its.

      The essential lim its are:

                the means of controlling the crowd density
                along th e rou te by lim iting the r a te of access
                into the route such th a t the r a te does not exceed
                the capacity of the ro u te itself

                the design of th e passageway to             elim inate
                obstructions to flow and o th er hazards
          provision of sufficient barriers on te rra c e s
          to restrain surges in 'peak' or 'other' viewing
          a reas without incurring pressures on the human
          body th a t cannot be 'to lerated '.

FLOW RATES
The recom m ended flow ra te s given in C hapter 17 of
the Guide to sa fe ty a t sports grounds are:

          From stands and stairw ays, a flow ra te of 40
          persons per minute per unit of exit width (i.e.
          550 mm) should be used. From te rra c e s (including
          covered terraces) and the ground generally
          a flow ra te of 60 persons per minute per unit
          of exit width should be used.

The design of each passageway              section against these
flow ra te s should be for those           flows expected in an
em ergency and where necessary              take account of the
possible loss of availability of o th er   exits in an em ergency.

It should be noted th a t all ra te s may be reduced where
sp ectato rs may be less physically able, a f te r consultation
with both the licensing and building authorities. For
such conditions Appendix B1 gives the derivation behind
the currently accepted ra te s of flow for crowds.

SEQUENCE OF CALCULATION
The cap acity of an elem ent is the product of the flow
ra te , the available width and the em ergency evacuation
tim e, as defined in Section 4.

The sequence of calculations for each elem ent in the
ground is illu strated in Fig. 5.1. It recognizes th a t should
a p articu lar elem ent fail to reach the required cap acity
the options a re generally to improve the elem ent or
to reduce the overall capacity (see Fig. 4.1).

CONTROL OF CROWD FLOW IN AN EMERGENCY
The need to control the flow of crowds in em ergency
situations is recognized. In an em ergency, reactions
may not be logical, and clear concise directions must
be given. It is im portant th a t exit passageways are
identified, signed and sized, and allowance should be
made for the em ergency situation when o th e r exits may
be unusable. C are should be taken in the planning of
exit system s so th a t, in the event of an em ergency th a t
blocks any of the usual exit routes, a lte rn a tiv e routes
will be available. E ffective coordination betw een the
m anagem ent and the various em ergency services is
fundam ental to controlling crowd flow in an em ergency.
M anagement and stew ards must be fam iliar with both
the layout and organization of the ground and the plans
for em ergency evacuation.         A rrangem ents for e n try
and ex it and those for seated or standing accom m odation
can conveniently be considered separately. D isasters
a t Ibrox (1972) and Birmingham (1984) occurred during
egress, while those a t Bolton (1946), Oxford and C arlisle
(1973) happened on the te rra c e s because of collapse
of barriers or insufficient barriers.
  D efin e e n c lo s u r e s , t e r r a c e s a n d s ta n d s




           C alcu late enclosure c a p a c ity



                                                                   Not ok   Reduce c a p a c ity
                 Check enclosure e xits
                                                                            or improve e xits



                               OK



            C a lc u la te t e r r a c e c a p a c ity



                                                                   Not ok   Reduce c a p a c ity
                 Check t e r r a c e exits
                                                                            or improve exits



                              OK



             C a lc u la te s ta n d c a p a c it y



                                                                   Not ok   Reduce c a p ac ity
                  Check s ta n d e xits
                                                                            or improve exits



                              OK



                  D efine exit ro u te s



         C a lc u la te c a p a c ity o f each
             e lem e n t on exit ro u te



                                                                   Not ok
        C heck f lo w a g a in s t c a p a c it y                            Im prove ro u te




                             OK


Fig. 5.1        Sequence of events in assessing capacity
5.5.1    Entry control
        Spectators generally arrive over an extended
        period and are 'filtered' by the turnstiles, which
        assist control. Entry should be controlled both
        into and within the ground. Crowd pressure
        can however occur outside the ground, because
        of la te arrivals or under ’house full1 conditions
        a fte r the turnstiles have been closed. An
        im portant provision is means of autom atically
        recording the numbers ad m itted a t each point.
        This inform ation should be continuously available
        a t a c en tral control point.             This allows
        managem ent to control the to ta l number of
        sp ectato rs to an area or section but will not
        necessarily prevent surge pressures th a t can
        even occur in partially filled pens if the crowd
        co n cen trates in a favoured a re a as is common.

        Procedures should be developed to manage
        situations where excessive crowds g ath er outside
        th e en tran ce to a ground. These procedures
        will depend on local knowledge, police advice
        and available options, such as opening additional
        entrances.

        The ra te of entry per tu rn stile will depend on
        the type of equipment and usage.                It is
        recom m ended th a t the capacity of each turnstile
        be separately m easured. It would not normally
        be in excess of 750 persons per hour. Sufficient
        turnstiles should be provided to allow all
        s p ectato rs to e n te r within one hour. In some
        conditions, a lesser tim e should be specified.

        Ideally, each tu rn stile /e n try g a te should feed
        a specific viewing a re a, choice being decided
        before entry. Where this is not possible, once
        through the tu rn stile /e n try g a te , sp ectato rs
        should be clearly d irected, by the use of
        channelled routes to th e appropriate viewing
        a rea. In th e la tte r case, adequate stew arding
        will be required.

5.5.2   Exit control
        Where problems occur as in the event of an
        exit passageway blockage for w hatever reason,
        it is essential th a t the entry to th a t passageway
        is closed quickly. The public-address system
        should be used to reinforce, and even inform,
        stew ards. However, such com m unication cannot
        be achieved unless the public-address system
        is aimed a t the specific passageway or the
        passageway itse lf is clearly identified in some
        manner for example, alphabetic or num eric.
        The labelling of each of the passagew ays/exit
        routes a t regular intervals such th a t, for instance,
        it could be announced th a t passageway R was
        closed and passageway T should be used as an
        a lte rn a tiv e would be of benefit. The ability
        to re d ire c t crowd movements by such clear
        identification of exit routes is of major
        im portance.

                               49
          It should be recognized           in the capacity
          calculations th a t sp ectato rs do not distribute
          uniformly      betw een     exits.      U nacceptable
          congestion a t p articular exits may arise, even
          if th ere are sufficient exits overall, e.g. if
          one exit is close to a railway station.

         Protection provided to stairs, landings and
         passageway should be enclosed to a standard
         such as not to pass a 100 mm d ia m e te r ball
         through the protection.

         Splitter barriers are those th a t are arranged
         parallel with the flow and split it into sep arate
         lanes. They have a regulatory e ffe c t, help
         to reduce surge pressures and provide a desirable
         hand support on one side. Some reduction of
         flow occurs with lanes less than 1.1 m wide,
         and such lanes should be excluded from flow
         calculations.

CRUSH BARRIERS
It is im portant th a t crowd pressures cannot be gen erated
so as to cause injury to those sp ectato rs pressed against
the barrier, and it is of param ount im portance th a t collapse
of barriers under crowd pressure does not occur. It should
be recognized, however, th a t on te rra c e s, viewing slopes
and elsewhere maximum pressures will occur when all
sp ectato rs contribute simultaneously to the build-up
of pressure. Although this seldom occurs it is likely
to cause gross discom fort ra th e r than a ctu al injury. It
is im portant th e re fo re th a t no undersized crush barriers
are p erm itted.

The Guide to sa fe ty a t sports grounds contains guidance
on the reduced spacing of barriers in a reas where
sp ectato rs may crowd to g eth er, for exam ple behind
football goals.

For some events, such as 'pop' concerts, barriers may
need to be provided in front of the audience to c re a te
a 'sterile' zone betw een audience and the stag e, race
track , e tc . C are is needed in the design of such barriers
th a t they are both adequate elem ents in them selves
and properly founded and th a t they do not cause injury
from excess pressure on individuals against th e barriers.
Padding out may be necessary to prevent this.
Consideration should also be given to curved barriers,
with areas for overspill a t each end.

Appendix C has been included to provide professional
engineers, a rc h ite c ts , surveyors, e tc . with the scientific
background to b arrier design and which may in certain
instances be necessary for a proper appraisal.

Where barriers are substandard e ith e r by stre n g th , height
or in any o th er way do not comply with the Guide they
should be excluded from capacity calculations. Where
any barriers are so substandard as to o ffer a positive
risk to sa fe ty they should be removed or such a re as taken
out of use.
6.   STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL

     6.1 GENERAL APPROACH
        In carrying out an appraisal of an existing ground or
        individual stand it is im portant th a t the survey of
        conditions of both the overall stru c tu re and all its
        individual details is m ethodically and meticulously carried
        out so th a t as com plete a 'picture' of its existing condition
        and likely stru c tu ra l perform ance can be identified.

        Any rem edial measures th a t may be required to provide
        stru c tu ra l adequacy can then be more precisely ta rg e te d .
        Although th e process of appraisal inevitably leaves less
        scope for choice of strengthening necessary than does
        the process of designing a new stru c tu re , it is nevertheless
        im portant th a t m easures should be as clean lined, simple
        and a ttra c tiv e as possible. The im agery of such basic
        stru c tu re s has been shown to play a significant p art in
        how th e facility is viewed by the public.

     6.2 EXISTING SURVEY DRAWINGS
        Original drawings should be sought. If not available,
        a survey should be undertaken to identify the construction
        and provide base drawings for use and annotation during
        appraisal (see subsection 6.3).

        For all new works (and old if possible), stadia should
        retain original as-built records on the prem ises, preferably
        in negative form so th a t they can be readily reproduced.

     6.3 SURVEY OF CONDITION & RECORD OF FINDINGS

        D eterm ination of the physical condition of th e stru c tu re      Appraisal of existing
        is im portant. The task of determ ining th e condition              stru c tu re s, Institution of
        of a stru c tu re should be approached with an open mind            Stru ctu ral Engineers,
        w ithout prejudging th e cause of any apparent d efects.            London 1980
        There is always th e danger th a t new d efects th a t are
        outside of previous experience will be missed, and much
        e ffo rt may go into trying to find a well known type of
        d efect th a t is not present. It is necessary to describe
        the conditions adequately so th a t the situation can be
        reviewed objectively.      However, previous experience
        of d efects should be borne in mind and checks made
        for them . R eference to sim ilar age and types of building
        should be made.


        The engineer should tru st only visual evidence. Members
        and connections th a t th e engineer judges may contain
        d efects will need to be exposed. Additional labour is
        needed to fa c ilita te necessary exposure and help close
        elem ents up again a f te r inspection. C lear notes, to g eth er   (Fig.6.1 to be based on
        with sketches and photographs should be kept; a possible            Appendices in Appraisal
        form is shown in Fig. 6.1.                                          of Existing Structures

        The rep o rt Appraisal of existing stru c tu re s should be
        consulted for guidance on surveying the condition of
        a stru c tu re .




                                      51
Fig. 6.1

Survey of condition:
observations record sheet
 subject of survey: building, level component
                                                checklists


 observations:                                  considerations
                                                checklist
                                                   loading
                                                   current use
                                                   adequacy for use etc.




                                                observations
                                                checklist




  observations by:                               date:



                                    52
POTENTIALLY   DANGEROUS,                  DEGRADED           OR
SUBSTANDARD FABRIC
6.4.1   Drawings
        Such drawings as exist of the stru c tu re should
        be examined with the view to identifying potential
        problem areas and details in the construction.

            W ater traps in m etal construction              are
            particularly notorious, for example:
            a channel on its side
            roof hook bolt fixings
            eaves and gable framing members
            column head connections, and oth er sim ilar
                details where rust can develop freely.

             'loose' te rra c e units resting on supports
             which could move sideways and fall off
             under sway loading should be noted. Thick
             packers under units can be potentially
             hazardous. Poor-quality in situ co ncrete
             te rra c in g can c re a te a tripping hazard.

             A ttention should be paid to block/brick
             walls enclosing public corridors, p erim eter
             walls    and    those     forming   en try /eg ress
             gatew ays especially if not adequately
             restrained , since they may be subject to
             significant    la te ra l  loads  from       crowd
             pressures.

             All parapets, barriers, e tc .

             In th e case of slender stru c tu re s with long
             cantilevers      and     long-span    stru c tu re s,
             a tte n tio n should be paid to th e e ffe c ts
             of       fatigue    resulting   from      possible
             fluctuations.      Principal welds should be
             inspected on a regular basis for evidence
             of cracks.

6.4.2   Inspection
        What needs to be inspected must be safely and                Appraisal of existing
        easily accessible. Tem porary staging may have               stru c tu re s, Institution
        to be e re c te d to make this possible.                     of S tru ctu ral Engineers
                                                                     London 1980

        There is always a tem p tatio n to view from                 S tru ctu ral renovation of
        a distance, especially in bad w eather, and reliance         trad itio n al buildings,
        must not be a tta c h e d to impressions gained              R eport 111, CIRIA,
        from distant viewing.                                        London 1986

         G utters/dow npipes should be included in a                 Bates, W. (compiler):
         'stru ctu ral fabric' inspection to see w hether            H istorical s tru c tu ra l
         leaking w a ter is g ettin g to m etal s tru c tu re        steelw ork handbook,
         (especially) not p ro te c te d against its e ffe c ts.     Publication no. 11/84,
                                                                     BCSA, London 1984
        Early grandstands may be 'light' on stability,              Use of redundant
        e.g. Victorian iron sheds are often dependent               buildings -
        on their corrugated iron for fram e bracing.                sheets 19, 20, 21 and 22.
        The engineer must th erefo re beware of removing            A rch itects Journal,
        cladding, without prior appraisal. He should                March 21 and 4 April
        consider w hether perm anent e x tra bracing is             1979.
        desirable.

        Checks should include identification of deleterious
        or hazardous m aterials. These will include:

           high-alumina cem ent in s tru c tu ra l elem ents

           woodwool slabs used as perm anent formwork

           calcium chloride in adm ixtures in reinforced
           concrete

           sea-dredged aggregates (inadequately washed,
           so containing residual chlorides)

           asbestos products

           c o n crete subject to alkali-silica reaction

        Toilet areas, designated or otherw ise,                or
        stru c tu re s below toilets are particularly          at
        risk from acids e tc . and should be checked.

        Pre-World War II co n crete may contain clinker
        or otherw ise su lp h ate/n itra te rich aggregates.
        Leaks through these can highly corrode existing
        embedded filler joists or supporting steelw ork.
        Embedded details may require sampling or
        widespread opening up.

        The services of an expert are recom m ended
        to inspect tim ber elem ents for ro t, insect a tta c k ,
        and to identify or warn of conditions th a t could
        encourage these.      (Damp unventilated areas
        are notorious for dry rot.)

        Details th a t contain junctions of ste e l and
        con crete should be checked for corrosion, e.g.
        precast te rra c e or seating units on ste e l fram es.

        GRC is a m aterial th a t will burn and become
        b rittle , and its presence should be identified.

6.4.3   Recording of results of survey
        Specific com m ents should be meticulously marked
        on a 'proform a' checklist as per Fig. 6.2. Ideally
        the locations of any p articu lar d efects should
        be cross referen ced to the survey plans, and
        photographs should be taken.




                            54
LOCATION       ITEM                              CONDITION   COMMENTS

Stru ctu re/   Colum ns    C ast/w rought iron
Buildings      & w a lls   S teel
                           C oncrete
                           Timber
                           Brickwork
               Beams       C ast/w rought iron
                           S teel
                           C oncrete
                           Timber
                           O ther
               Decking     Wrought iron
                           S te e l
                           C o n c re te ,
                              in situ
                           C o n c re te ,
                              precast
                           Timber
                           O ther
               Roof        Wrought iron
                              beam s/trusses
                           S te e l, beams
                           S te e l trusses
                           C o n c re te ,
                              in situ
                           C o n c re te ,
                              precast
                           Tim ber, beams
                           Tim ber,
                              trusses
                           O ther
               Advertising hoardings,
               Roof claddings
                           M aterial
                           Fixing and
                             fastenings
               W all claddings
                           M aterial
                           Fixings
               B rickw ork/blockw ork
                           In tern al
                           E x tern al
               L in tels
               Fire separation and
               com partm entation
               Retaining w a lls
               E x tern al envelope
               Foundations
LOCATION          ITEM                           CONDITION   COMMENTS

S tru ctu re /    Crush barriers
te rra c e        Segregation fences
                  L a te ra l fences
                  Pitch p erim eter fence
                  A ssociated boundary fence
                  A ssociated boundary w a lls
                  Retaining w a lls
                  Ground te rra c e
                  Suspended te rra c e
                  C olum n supports
                     Beam supports
                  A n c illia rie s
                     fastening and fixings

S tru ctu re /  B rickw ork/blockw ork
boundary w a llsC o n c re te  reinforced
                               p lain
                S teel
                Fences
                Exit gates
                T u rn stiles
                Retaining w a lls

S tru ctu re/     O v e ra ll stru c tu re
flo o d lig h t   P la tfo rm s
tow ers           Ladders and ra ils
                  Fastenings and fixings

S tru ctu re/     Gangways
exits             Stairways
                  H andrails
                  B alustrades
                  Fire protection
                  Crush barriers

S tru ctu re/     A dvertising hoardings
others            T o ile t blocks
                  A n c illa ry buildings
                  TV cam era positions

Tem porary        Anchorages
stru c tu re s    H andrails
                  Guy wires


Fig. 6 .2




                                             .
                                            50
(3.5 POTENTIALLY     COMBUSTIBLE             MATERIALS         AND
     BUILDING FABRIC
   Guidance on m a tte rs concerned with fire appraisal has
   been given in Section 4.

6.6 TESTING OF MATERIALS & ELEMENTS

   Where the survey provides sufficient inform ation to
   enable the engineer to com plete the appraisal and reach
   conclusions and make recom m endations with confidence
   th e re will be no need to te s t. Requirem ents for testin g
   will arise where, for exam ple,

          th ere is lack of inform ation on what m aterials
          are present in the stru c tu re

          the presence of d e te rio ra te d or deleterious m aterial
          or substandard m aterial is suspected

   Such requirem ents, w hether they be for m aterials testin g
   or for load testin g are described in Appraisal of existing
   structures

6.7 TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS/HANDRAILS
   Crush barriers should be te ste d in accordance with the             (Fig. 6.3 Testing of
   Guide to safety a t sports grounds using an approved testin g        barriers a t Bradford)
   machine (see Fig. 6.3 and Appendix D).

   Where testin g is carried out on isolated members, as
   opposed to com plete barriers, then the loading on the
   m ember should tak e account of any loading tra n sfe r
   due to fixity of components.

   The results of each individual te s t must be recorded               Guide to safety a t
   and kept in a log. Copies should be available to both                sports grounds,
   the licence holder and th e local authority. Tests should            2nd edition, HMSO,
   be carried out e ith e r on a five y ear cycle or to ta lly a t      London 1986
   least every fifth year. This inform ation should be noted
   on a 1:200 plan of the ground, and should be incorporated
   into an annual rep o rt for inspection by the licensing
   authority.

   Adequacy of barriers should be to the c rite ria laid down
   in the Guide.

   All failures should be repaired or renewed prior to the
   next a ctiv ity taking place, or the areas in question taken
   out of use until made safe.

   Any works of strengthening and refurbishm ent carried
   out as a result of a failure must be re te ste d and logged
   before being opened to th e public.

   All new or renewed work should be designed to comply
   with the Guide for loading capabilities and to the relev an t
   s tru c tu ra l codes of p ractice and, if supervised by a
   c h artered c iv il/stru ctu ral engineer, need not be te ste d
   on completion.

   The incorporation into a te stin g schedule of all new or
   renewed barriers/handrails should be determ ined by the
   engineer.

                               57
6.8   APPRAISAL OF EFFECTS OF WIND

      6.8.1   Wind tunnel te sts
              If during the process of appraisal, doubts are
              raised as to the e ffe c ts of the wind regime
              on the      stru c tu re or on smoke    venting,
              investigations by rep resen tativ e wind tunnel
              te sts may be necessary.

              Sports ground stru c tu re s tend to dom inate their
              environm ent and can make major changes to
              the original airflow p a tte rn . Sports grounds
              are seldom built on level sites free from
              obstructions, so th a t the topography and all
              stru c tu re s in close proxim ity will need to be
              included in any wind tunnel te s t. C are must
              be taken th a t this does not reduce the scale
              of the model so much, in order to fit the wind
              tunnel, th a t the model is too small to reproduce
              the dynamic e ffe c ts accu rately . Suitable wind
              tunnels are specially built to reproduce the
              gusty n ature of the wind to the same scale
              as the stru c tu ra l model and are available in
              specialist laboratories. Tests in the smooth
              and uniform flow of aeron autical wind tunnels
              give inaccu rate and misleading results since
              they are d irected m erely to the determ ination
              of q uasi-static wind pressures and forces. Special
              a tte n tio n needs to be paid to dynamic e ffe c ts
              if these are to be measured with any accuracy.
              Guidelines for wind tunnel te sts are given in
              Appendix K of CP 3: C hapter V: P a rt 2, and             CP 3: C hapter V:
              P a rt 2 of The designer's guide.                         P a rt 2, Appendix K

      6.8.2   Analysis of e ffe c ts of dynamic loading
              The two main sources of dynamic load are wind             Bolton, A.: 'Design against
              loads and s p e c ta to r activ ities, and damaging       wind exited vibration',
              e ffe c ts will follow only if these can excite           The Structural
              resonance of a part, or the whole, of a stru c tu re .    Engineer, 61A, no. 8,
                                                                        August 1983, p.237
              For existing stru c tu re s the am plitude of any         and discussion 62A,
              vibration th a t arises can be d irectly measured.        no. 5, May 1984, p.159
              For stru c tu re s subject to upgrading, calculations
              should be made to d eterm ine the n atu ral
              frequency, the am plitude of vibration and the
              dynamic stress.

              Approach to the assessm ent of wind loadings
              is covered in clause 3.6.4 and of other dynamic
              loading e ffe c ts in clauses 3.6.5 and 3.6.6. It
              is unlikely th a t the m ajority of stru c tu re s will
              have n a tu ra l frequencies within the bands th a t
              can be excited by e ith e r source and so can be
              analysed for response under q u a si-sta tic allowable
              values.




                                   52
        Gust loading excites vibration over a wide range         Redfearn, D.: A te s t rig
        of frequencies however, which may cause                  for p ro of-testin g
        problems of fatigue. D ata on the loading cycle          building components
        for fatigue assessm ents are given in Table 1            against wind loads,
        of IP19/84 and in Fig. 24 in ECCS publication            IP19/84, BRE, Watford
        no. 52.                                                  1984
                                                                 Recommendations for
6.8.3   Resonant wind loading                                    calculating th e e ffe c ts
        Flexible stadia stru ctu res, especially those           of wind on constructions,
        including slender cantilevers, ta ll flag poles          Publication np. 52,
        and lighting masts, may display excessive dynamic        2nd edition, European
        e ffe c ts because of vortex shedding. L attice          Convention for
        stru ctu res and typical stand enclosures are            Brussels 1987
        not usually subject to this problem.

        If     investigation,   for   instance   using    the    Cook, N. J.: The
        classification procedure in BS 6399: P a rt 2,           designers guide to
        or C hapter 10 of The designer's guide, shows            wind loading of
        th a t n atu ral frequencies of the stru c tu re exist   building stru ctu res
        close to the bands of possible vortex excitation,        P a rt 1: Background
        care should be taken to consider these aspects.          damage survey, wind
        Further studies investigating the in teractio n          d a ta and stru c tu ra l
        of the stru c tu re and the a ir flowing over it,        classification,
        the determ ination of the forces th a t this causes      B utterw orths, London
        and the response of the stru c tu re itse lf to these    1985
        periodic forces may be necessary.

        It is unlikely th e re will be need to assess the
        complex behaviour of large am plitude responses,
        since the engineer is required only to avoid
        such an occurrence. This can be achieved by
        altering the form of the stru ctu re to elim inate
        periodic aerodynam ic forces a lto g eth er by
        changing the m ember stiffness to move the
        n atural frequencies away from any aerodynam ic
        forces th a t cannot be avoided, or by increasing
        the damping to reduce vibrations to negligible
        proportions.

        Even relatively simple arith m e tic calculations
        as in BS 6399: P a rt 2 and ECCS publication
        no. 52 will be sufficient as long as they can
        dem onstrate th a t th e re is no danger to the
        stru ctu re from wind loading or any feasible
        behaviour of the sp ectato rs.

6.8.4   Spectator loading
        Spectators usually a c t independently, but a t
        moments of ex citem en t the crowd may surge.
        This is best dealt with by normal quasi-static
        analysis using loading considerations of clause
        3.6.8. C oncerted swaying in tim e or dancing
        may, however, cause forces of up to two or
        th ree tim es the to ta l weight of the sp ectato rs
        vertically    with    a   considerable   horizontal
        component. N either of these e ffe c ts will distress
        a normal s tru c tu re unless th ere is a n atu ral
        frequency th a t the crowd can excite, but it
        should be realized th a t the presence of any
        such n atu ral frequency will bias the sp ectato rs
        towards it. The maximum frequency th a t this


                              5d
              concerted action can a ffe c t is about 4 Hz, and
              any n atu ral frequency of the stru ctu re below
              this value is best removed by increasing the
              stiffness of m embers or by changing the
              construction to incorporate more damping.

              Section 7 deals with the e ffe c ts of sp ectato r
              loading on light demountable stands.

      6.8.5   Regular inspection of slender stru ctu res
              Occasionally, appraisal will reveal a stru ctu re
              th a t is sufficiently light, slender or ill-conditioned
              th a t possible exciting frequencies approach
              the n atu ral frequency, and resonance is possible
              with an am plitude considerably g re a te r than
              in statica lly loaded conditions.

              Such a condition may cause some fatigue damage
              over the years, which coupled to the e ffe c t
              of im perfections in the construction, corrosion,
              e tc . can lead to reduction in reserves of strength
              in the stru c tu re , and eventually to a dangerous
              s ta te .

              In consequence, it is im portant th a t any such
              stru c tu re s receive adequate supervision during
              initial construction from the design consultant,
              so th a t construction follows the designer's
              intentions, and th a t sufficient regular and
              thorough annual checks are made on key elem ents
              for damage, corrosion, e tc . A full record of
              the initial construction supervision and all
              subsequent inspections, rem edial works, e tc .
              must be kept.

              Should possible resonance of a stru c tu re be
              established, then specialist advice must be
              taken, possibly using techniques of stru c tu ra l
              appraisal from the a irc ra ft industry to establish
              the possibility of cum ulative dam age. It may
              be necessary to a lte r the c h a rac te ristic s of
              the stru c tu re to suppress resonance.

6.9   APPRAISAL     OF     STRUCTURES                       AGAINST
      DISPROPORTIONATE COLLAPSE

      With so many people collected in one a rea, it is necessary
      to check th a t sports ground stru c tu re s would not collapse
      disproportionately to the cause.

      A graphic exam ple of such a condition is shown in Fig.
      6.3, where w ithout any secondary action betw een adjacent
      principal beams, collapse of the front column would
      lead to collapse of th a t section of the roof. Such a
      po ten tial condition could be aggravated by a roof form
      th a t enabled the build-up of considerable snow drifts.

      The engineer must th e re fo re consider in his appraisal
      the degree of redundancy of the stru c tu re and the
      p otential fo r redistribution of loads, possibly using
      'm em brane' action from two-way s tru c tu ra l continuity.



                                 ao
  Such consideration may be especially im portant in the
  assessm ent of the adequacy of early 'structurally light'
  constructions, or on stru ctu res where degradation of
  initial strength is evident from corrosion or oth er e ffe c ts.

•10 REPLACEMENT OR STRENGTHENING                            OF       WEAK
    STRUCTURAL ELEMENTS                                                  "
  Where eith er the survey or subsequent testing or appraisal
  shows an elem ent to be unsatisfactory, it should eith er
  be replaced or be suitably strengthened.




                               If this is enclosed and full of ru b b is h ,
                               you could have a fire th a t w eakened
                               the front s ta u chio n enough to c a u s e the
                               canopy to collap se on to th e spec ta to rs




   Fig. 6.3

  Such considerations may well require th e installation
  of tem porary support until such tim e as the perm anent
  rem edial work can be undertaken. All such tem porary
  works should be designed and constructed with the
  location and n ature of usage in mind and be reasonably
  proof against vandalism.

  Adequate access will need to be provided to undertake
  these measures, so th a t they can be co rrectly e ffe c te d
  and inspected prior to commissioning.
OTHER PERMANENT STRUCTURES

Besides stands, many sports grounds will have perm anent
stru c tu re s such as floodlights, pylons, scoreboards, indicator
boards, lighting trusses, flagpoles. All need to be surveyed
and assessed in any ground appraisal. Many of these stru ctu res
are relatively tall. All need to be properly designed to resist
loads to which they may be subjected. In general, members
of the public should not have access to such stru ctu res
ELECTRICAL AND GAS INSTALLATIONS

8.1 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION

   The e le c tric a l installation should be installed in accordance
   with The Regulations for E lectrical Installations published
   by the Institution of E lectrical Engineers current a t
   the tim e of installation.

   Main distribution equipment should be in a separate
   switchroom or enclosure and must not be liable to
   unauthorized in terferen ce.    A diagram of the main
   distribution should be displayed in a readily accessible
   position for authorized technical sta ff.

   Systems of wiring for low -voltage circuits of the
   perm anent installation should be those in which all cables
   and conductors are enclosed throughout in pro tectiv e
   covering of m aterial of adequate strength to resist
   m echanical        damage,      e.g.    arm oured     cables,
   m ineral-insulated m etal-sheathed cables, insulated cables
   p ro te c te d by screw ed m etal conduit or m etal trunking
   or high im pact rigid PVC conduit.

   Where the n atu ral lighting in any section of the ground
   accessible to the public is deficient, adequate a rtific ia l
   lighting should be provided. If the ground is to be used
   a f te r dark, all p a rts accessible to the public should be
   provided with means for lighting adequate to enable
   them to see th e ir way into, within and out of the ground.
   These provisions are particularly im portant in relation
   to exit routes, stairw ays and illum unation of all signs.
   Local sw itches for the control of lighting in p arts of
   the prem ises accessible to the public should be avoided.
   A rtificial lighting installed must be compatible with
   and adequate for CCTV surveillance equipm ent in use
   a t the ground. Close liaison is essential betw een police,
   the enforcing auth o rity and the club.

   The bases of       all floodlighting tow ers should be earth ed
   in accordance      with BS 6651 : 1985. Advice on the bonding
   and earthin g      fo r lightning pro tection on all stru c tu re s
   a t large sports   stadia is also outlined in the same standard.

   The e le c tric a l installation should be regularly inspected
   and te ste d as prescribed in the current edition of The
   Regulations fo r E lectrical Installations published by
   the Institution of E lectrical Engineers.

8.1 EMERGENCY LIGHTING

   The Guide to safety a t sports grounds calls for th e
   provision of em ergency lighting for use in the event
   of failure of the general lighting. This should be provided
   in all p a rts of the stadium accessible to the public and
   along all exit rou tes with clear and adequate illum inated
   exit indication to current British Standards.           The
   em ergency lighting installation should preferably be
   installed in accordance with BS 5266 : P a rt 1 and should
   be com pletely sep arate from the general lighting system .
   The Guide does, however, not preclude consideration
  being given to a one-circuit system incorporating staggered
  subcircuits   as   an acceptab le        alte rn a tiv e . Unless
  exceptionally two e n tirely independent supplies can be
  obtained from outside sources, the em ergency circu it
  should be connected to a source of power located on
  the premises, e.g. storage b a tte rie s or a diesel g en erato r
  with a delay of not more than 5s.

  The em ergency lighting should be capable of m aintaining
  the necessary level of illum ination for a period of 3 h
  from the tim e of failure of the normal supply and should
  operate a u to m atically on failure of the normal lighting.

  Em ergency lighting system s must be m aintained             and
  te ste d in accordance with BS 5266 : P a rt 1.

.3 GAS INSTALLATION

  All gas installations should be provided and m aintained
  in accordance with Gas (Safety) Regulations 1972 and
  the Gas Safety (Installation and Use) Regulations 1984.

  The means of isolation fo r the gas supply to any appliance
  or to the whole of the gas installation should be readily
  accessible and positioned so th a t access to them is unlikely
  to be impeded by the public in the event of em ergency.
  There should be no storage in fro nt of controls, and
  controls should not be liable to unauthorized in te rfere n c e .

  No portable liquified petroleum gas h e a te r should be
  in a sports stadium when m em bers of the public are
  present, unless it is kept in a suitable store specially
  designed for the purpose. The num ber of LPG appliances
  should be kept to a minimum, and they should be stored
  in a sep arate fire-resisting store to the cylinder sto re.
  A suitable store is one th a t is designed to the guidance
  outlined in paragraphs 104 to 114 of HSE Guidance note
  CS 4, The keeping of LPG in cylinders and sim ilar
  con tain ers.

  Where caterin g facilities are provided using liquified
  petroleum gas cylinders, these must be safety stored
  and used in accordance with HSE Guidance note CS 4,
  The keeping of LPG in cylinders and sim ilar containers
  and Note CS 8, Small scale storage and display of LPG
  a t re ta il prem ises.

  The advice of the a u th o rity responsible for the
  enfo rcem en t of the Health and Safety a t Work A ct 1974
  and any conditions imposed in any general sa fe ty
  c e rtific a te in force a t the stadium also have to be
  observed.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURES

9.1 Temporary stands
    While many of th e aspects are common to the design                    Safety considerations
    of perm anent stands, th ere a re a number of item s th a t            for the design and
    are likely to be of g re a te r im portance for those classified       erection of
    as tem porary, or demountable, or used for special public              demountable
    events such as pop concerts and golf tournam ents.                     grandstands, The
                                                                           Institution of Structural
                                                                           Engineers, London,
    These features include:                                                May 1989

            overall stability                                              Dickie, J. F., &
            disproportionate collapse in the event of the rem oval         Tomlinson, G. R.:
            of a component                                                 'Demountable grand­
            dynamic response                                               stands’, S truct.
            e ffe c ts of rep eated use                                    Eng. Review,
            lack of fit                                                    1, 1988, p.15
            e ffe c ts of added loadings from fabric stru ctu res,
            flagpoles,      scoreboards,    a tta c h e d guy wires
            supporting o th er stru ctu res
            presence of adjacent high fire loads.

    In such circum stances it is necessary to check th a t the
    original design is capable of providing the public with
    an adequate margin of safety .

    Inspection should be made for e ffe c ts of corrosion on               BS 5973: Access
    all elem ents of the stru c tu re , and th a t the fire separation     working scaffolds &
    of the construction from oth er stru c tu re s is sufficient.          special scaffold
                                                                           stru c tu re s in ste e l

     Fixings and handrails for all platform s, stairw ays, e tc .
     must be adequate.

    Means of escape from such tem porary stands on evacuation
    must be d ire c t to a sufficient place of sa fe ty outside.
    Special care needs to be taken so th a t in providing
    sufficient means of egress from a tem porary stand or
    place of assembly th a t the capacity of means of egress
    from existing or adjacent stru c tu re s is not impaired
    (and vice versa).

9.2 O ther tem porary stru c tu re s
     P articu lar events in sports grounds and other places
     of assembly will require, in addition to tem porary stands,
     the provision of tem porary stru c tu re s such as te n ts,
     fabric stru c tu re s, flagpoles, e t c ., additional floodlighting
     pylons, lighting trusses, protectio n barriers and additional
     means of escape. All such stru c tu re s used in the presence
     of the public need to be properly designed to resist the
     loads to which they might be subjected.

     An occasional licence for such an event may well be
     needed from th e local authority. This licence will be
     comprehensive and will need to cover most of those
     elem ents re fe rre d to in th e specimen of Appendix F.
     This will require a prior appraisal under the direction
     of an experienced professional engineer of all m a tte rs
     mentioned earlier in this rep o rt for sports grounds in
     normal operation. In particular:
       Crowd capacities section by section in relation
       to adequate means of managed ingress and egress.

       Additional exit routes, bridges, zones should be
       sized as in the Guide to sa fe ty a t sports grounds,
       and appropriately signed and taken d irectly to
       an outside place of safety , without surpassing
       the cap acity of existing or o th er exit routes.

       Crowd barriers and th e ir anchorages will need              NFPA 102, Assembly
       to be designed to resist the loads from crowds               seating, te n ts and
       to which they are subject (see Section 9 of the              membrane stru ctures,
       Guide). In o th er cases these horizontal barriers           1986
       will need to be designed on the basis of the purpose
       for which they are needed and detailed to prevent
       crushing. Additional padding may be required.

For instance, the b arrier betw een the front of the audience
and the perform ance should provide a sterile a re a , and
the barrier and its foundation or anchorage should be
designed fo r 3.0 kN/m.

All te n ts, pylons and p ro tectio n barriers should be properly
anchored to resist the loads from snow, wind and people
on them . It is appropriate to amend the wind and snow
loads to account for the tem porary duration, season
of the year, and likelihood of the event proceeding in
the circum stance of bad w eather. A service load of
20 k g /m 2 in addition to self-w eight and consideration
of 1 in 10 year wind loading condition for the location
a re then appropriate, unless higher snow loadings are
specifically required.

       The back guys to tem p o rary stru c tu re s should
       not be low er than 2.5 m above any means of escape,
       and no anchorages should lie within any escape
       route to provide a possible trip hazard.

       Appraisal should be made of any existing elem ents
       of the grounds to which such facilities a re tied
       back so th a t the combined loading does not im pair
       the in te g rity of e ith e r stru c tu re .

       M aterials used for fabric stru c tu re s should be          BS 3199/3120
       durably flam e proofed and inherently re sista n t           DIN 4102: Flame spread
       to flam e spread to BS 3119/3120 (or B1/B2 of                resistance of membrane
       DIN 4102) or BS 5438.
                                                                    BS 5438              A

       Lighting bridges should be adequately designed               BS 6399: Loadings for
       for th e access required of them and for th e loads          buildings, P a rt 1 : 1984
       of lighting e tc . to be carried by them . Wind loading      Dead and imposed
       is often a c ritic a l elem ent in the design of such        loads,
       stru c tu re s. Handrails and sa fe ty harnesses should      Table 7
       be provided. They should be designed so as to
       prevent access by unauthorized personnel and,
       in p a rtic u la r, by the audience.

       Unless specifically approved and properly designed,
       equipm ent, lighting trusses should not be suspended
       over a re as occupied by the public.



                               Q>0>
Any e le ctrica l installations should comply with
the relev an t British Standards and IEE Wiring
regulations, and th e ir installation should be to
the satisfactio n of a professionally qualified
e le ctrica l engineer of appropriate experience
(see Section 8).
    APPENDIX Al            DAY-TO-DAY        RESPONSIBILITIES       OF
    MANAGEMENT

    A list of the ’day-to-day’ routine responsibilities of th e club
    includes:
    1.  Maintain c e rtific a te in force
    2.  Keep Local Authority informed of alterations
    3.  Provide and m aintain crush barriers
    4.  Provide police control room
    5.  Provide and m aintain em ergency lighting
    6.  Provide and m aintain fire-fighting equipment
    7.  Provide and m aintain communication and warning system
    8.  Provide and maintain first aid room
    9.  C arry out crowd control measures deemed necessary by
        police
    10. Provide and m aintain notices re fire-fighting equipment
    11. Provide and m aintain fencing

•
     12. Provide and m aintain wind measuring equipment (if required)
    13. Provide and m aintain general fabric of stadium
    14. Provide annual inspection (before 1 August of each year
    15. Before each specific activ ity , te s t exit doors and gates,
        emergency lighting and communication system s etc.
    16. A fter each specific activ ity , check condition of te rra c es,
        staircases, stand seats, crush barriers, p erim eter fences,
        penfences, gates and balustrades
    17. Record inspections 15 and 16 in log book and log work
        requiring rem edial works and tak e steps to carry out th a t
        work
    18. Have responsible person in atten d an ce
    19. Provide first aid s ta f f
    20. Arrange adequate policing
    21. Arrange adequate stew arding
    22. Arrange atten d an ce of electrician
    23. Make sure all escape g ates are easily openable, except
        th a t certain gates may be locked, provided th a t stew ard
        is in atten d an ce with key
    24. Open all gates to evacuate stadium , as directed by police
    25. Maintain ingress and egress routes clear from obstruction
    26. Maintain self-closing doors
    27. Provide and m aintain non-slip surfaces to exits
    28. Provide and m aintain exit signs
    29. Provide and m aintain escape routes in p e rim e te r fencing
    30. Record crowd atten d an ce figures
    31. Record inspections
    32. Record training and instruction to s ta ff
    33. Give each m ember of s ta f f and stew ard a copy of em ergency

•
         procedures
    34. Train s ta f f and stew ard in em ergency procedures
    35. Give means of I/D to people (e.g. press) having free access
    36. Only sto re flam m able gases and liquids to Local A uthority
         approval
    37. C lear all combustible rubbish
    38. Park vehicles only in an approved manner
    39. Provide record drawings




                                            Al
APPENDIX A2      DRAFT RULES                    FOR     INSTRUCTION
OF STEWARDS ON EVENT DAYS

INSTRUCTIONS FOR SAFETY STEWARDS

1   Safety Stewards to rep ort to Cash O ffice a t ... two hours before specified   activity.

2   Holder                   to allocate responsibilities.

    Responsibilities
    (a)      Door stew ards, stands and ground:
          - Each door stew ard to collect standard keys and distinctive surcoat
             -    R eport to allocated a rea. Check exit door(s) for egress
          -      Remain in position to monitor exit door(s) during all of specified activity
          -      Unlock exit door(s) ten minutes prior to end of m atch or on instructions of
                 a police o fficer or public address message.                                 I

    IN EVENT OF FIRE*
             -   O perate n earest fire alarm point
          -      Unlock exit door(s)
          -      Await instructions of fire picket

    ON HEARING EMERGENCY PA MESSAGE*
             -   Unlock exit door(s)
          -      Assist in evacuation if required
             -   Secure exit door(s) a t end of specified a ctivity, or on instructions of a police
                 o fficer or responsible person
             -   R eturn standard key and surcoat

    (b)      Door stew ards - Stand B area
    BEFORE EVENT
    R eport to stadium A dm inistrator two hours before the event startin g tim e

    C ollect distinctive bib and em ergency exit keys from stadium A dm inistrator. Receive
    instructions as to allocated areas etc.

    R eport to allocated a rea. Check the exit door(s), rem ove lock and securing bar and
    place in Stewards room adjacent invalids tunnel. Open doors fully to ensure easily open
    obstructions. Inform Stadium A dm inistrator of any problems encountered.

    Check position of fire alarm call point and position of n earest fire and door stew ards.

    DURING EVENT
    Remain in close proxim ity to exit door(s) throughout th e event.

    Open exit door(s) ten minutes prior to th e end of th e event or on instructions of a police
    o fficer or public address message i.e. 'Stewards O perate Code 1’.

    AFTER THE EVENT
    A fter the event the sp ectato rs have le ft the stadium or on instruction from the police
    or stadium adm inistrator, secure the exit doors.


    * Coded by Stand Area
Return bib and keys to stadium adm inistrator.

Note: Replace security bars only a fte r the public have le ft th e premises.

(c)   Fire stew ards:
      East fire stew ard to collect standard key and surcoat.         Each fire picket team
      leader to collect em ergency communications radio.

      C arry out prem atch inspections and tests:
      - Radio
      - Fire alarm
      - Fire fighting equipment
      - Housekeeping

      Fire picket team leader to deploy fire pickets

ON HEARING FIRE ALARM
Check th e location of fire on the fire alarm indicator panel

Team leader report a ffe c te d zone to control via radio

Proceed to a ffe c te d zone. Team leader to assess th e incident and decide on the action
to be taken.

Team leader to rep o rt circum stances or incident to control, and advise on evacuation
e tc .

Team leader to liaise with fire brigade on arrival.

AT END OF SPECIFIED ACTIVITY
Check stand/ground and ensure all patrons have le ft. Check all fire fighting equipment
is in place, and report any deficiencies to the holder.

Return all equipment.

(d)   Police control room:

ON HEARING FIRE ALARM OR BEING INFORMED OF FIRE
Call th e fire brigade by telephone im m ediately (999)

Ensure all exit door(s) in a ffe c te d zone a re unlocked by making the           following
announcem ent over th e PA system : 'Stewards Stand A/Stand B e tc . Code 1'.

Await inform ation from fire picket. If required by fire picket team leader announce
evacuation message over PA system for a ffe c te d zone.

Note: th e word 'FIRE' should not be used over th e PA system .
APPENDIX B1       GROUND FLOW RATES

OUTLINE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION
    Ages
    Gender
    Density
    Level of service
    D irections
    Topography
    Light and visual
    Physical fitness / speed relationship

PREFERRED RATE

ANALYTICAL MODELLING OF FLOW RATE
    Ramp
    Stairways
    Doorways
    S ta tic crowd / circulating crowd
    Emergency situations

REFERENCES




APPENDIX B2       CROWD DYNAMICS AND AUDITORIUM MANAGEMENT
This Appendix will be drafted taking into account the 'system s’ approach to such
problems as indicated in J Fruin's a rtic le 'Crowd dynamics and auditorium management'.
APPENDIX C      PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS

OUTLINE OF CONTENTS

GENERAL

CROWD PRESSURES
    Lean
    Strain
    Heave

MEDICINE

STRENGTH
    (See also Appendix D)

NUMBER OF ROWS

HEIGHT <3c WIDTH

GRADIENT & SPACING

REFERENCES
APPENDIX D          TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS

(To be developed)




                             A6
APPENDIX E           SIGHTLINES AND VIEW DISTANCES


The maximum distance a t which an object is just recognizable           Bobrowski, J ., Bardhan-Roy
to a sp ectato r's eye is given by the relationship                     B.K., & Maciag, T.: 'The
                                                                        design and analysis of
           d   =         0.86 s                                         grandstand stru ctu res',
                                                                        Structural Engineer, 52,
where      d   =         distance in m                                  no. 2, Feb. 1974, p.37
and        s   =         size of the object in mm
                                                                        Reed, J.: 'The layout and
Table A l shows the maximum distance against d ifferen t sizes (s)      construction of sports
of the object, while Fig. A l illu strates this point.                  grounds and grandstands',
                                                                        S tructural Engineer, Feb.
Table A l Maximum distance (d) against different sizes (s)              1933, p.74
o f the object
                                                                        Serby, M.: 'The good-view
                                                                        fa c to r in stadium design',
s              d                   s                d                   Engineering new s-record,
(size of                           (size of                             103, 11 July 1929
object)                            object)
mm             m                   mm               m



  40                35              160             138
  60                52              180             155
  80                69              200             172
 100                86              222             190
 120               103              240             206
 140               120


As th e d iam eter of a football is 220 mm, it follows th a t the
maximum distance betw een a s p e c ta to r and th e fu rth est point
on the football playing a re a should not exceed 190 m. It should
be borne in mind th a t a t this distance th e object is barely
recognizable and does not in fa c t provide a good and unstrained
visibility. The maximum distance th erefo re should, where
possible, be reduced by 20-40% of th a t calculated by the above,
i.e. for a football ground the fu rth est point of the field to
a sp ec ta to r should be lim ited to, say, 150m. In a football (and
also in a rugby) ground this will correspond roughly to a circle
of 90m radius from the cen tre spot as shown in Fig. A l.

Figs. A2 and A3 show the optimum viewing circle and the
maximum distance in two existing grounds. In th e case shown
in Fig. A3 a section of the sp ectato rs will rem ain outside the
optimum sight distance or even the maximum sight distance
of the full arena.

This consideration som etim es is most crucial in deciding w hether
th e stand should have a single rake or m ulti-tiered ones.




                                              A7
Another aspect in te r-re la te d to good viewing is the sightline.
The slope of the rakers should be such th a t th e lines of sight
from th e eyes of sp ectato rs in each row to the focal point
should be clear of or a t least tan gen tial to, the top of the
head (together with the head cover) of th e sp ec ta to r in the
row in front. The focal point is taken as the near edge of
the playing field or the centre-line of the n earest line of the
n earest lane of the a th le tic tra c k . The profile of the rak er
can be determ ined graphically and by calculation. Simplified
form ulae can be obtained from referen ces listed in the                   Handbook of sports and
Handbook.                                                                  recreatio n buildings design

There a re th ree main categ ories of raker:

1.    straig h t rakers of constant slope

2.    series of straig h t rakers of d ifferen t slopes, and

3.    curved rakers.

The curved arrangem ent is th eo retically ideal but cumbersome
in p ractice, and a p art from the high cost, th e re can be a safety
hazard where crowd movement is involved. O rientation of
th e stand as well as positioning of the first row with resp ect
to th e arena (touchline, for example) is im portant to allow
a good view of th e whole of the touchline by all viewers.

Depending on the n ature of the perform ance th e re appear
to be th re e broad p a tte rn s of crowd circulation in stands:

(a)   S tatic crowd: which exists where th e show is continuous
      or even in te rm itte n t such as football, rugby and some
      ath letics, but w ithout any in te rre la te d diverse activ ities
      during the interval.

(b)   C irculating crowd: which exists where the show consists
      of several consecutive events with in te rre la te d e x tra
      activ itie s during the interv al betw een them , and generally
      associated with betting, such as horse racing, dog racing
      e tc .

(c)   A combination of (a) and (b), where one p art of the stand
      could have a s ta tic crowd while the oth er p arts have
      circulating sp ectato rs.

Com pared with (a) crowds are sm aller and more leisurely in
the o th er two categories, especially in (b). The design c rite ria ,
of necessity, will be d ifferen t and th e facilities provided by
the designer will, of course, have to be com patible with the
requirem ents of th e patrons in each relevant category.




                                                                                                          *




                                             AS
                 Fig. A l Maximum distance between recognizable
                 object and the spectator's eye


                                        Maximum viewing distance
                                        190 m radius from each corner

                                        Limit of optimum
                                        viewing distance
                                        150 m radius from each corner
             /
            /




                                        Assumed optimum viewing circle
                                        9 0 m radius from centre spot




                 Fig. A2 The maximum view ing distance
                 for football is 190m. The optimum
                 is about 150m. An optimum viewing
                 circle can be assumed a t 90m from
                 the centre spot for both football
                 and rugby




Fig. A3 An exam ple showing the value of using           Fig A4 An exam ple with much too long
com ers                                                  an arena which also suffers from a single­
On site, with transverse dimensional                     tier arrangement would bring more
constraints, the additional accom m odation can          spectators into the optimum viewing
becom e indispensable.                                   circle



NOTE FIGS. A2, A3 AND A4 ARE BASED ON THE SPORTS COUNCIL’S PUBLICATION
HANDBOOK OF SPORTS AND RECREATION BUILDINGS DESIGN.
                                      A9
APPENDIX F    SPECIMEN CERTIFICATE

  To be compiled


APPENDIX G     BIBLIOGRAPHY

  To be compiled


ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT

  To be provided




                                 AlO
