    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                   The
    STADIUM DISASTER
                                            I       50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                                    01-273 2577/3602/2370


    Brian Hill Esq DL LLB                              Your Ref: BH/61
    Chief Executive/Clerk
    Lancashire County Council
    P 0 Box 78
    County Hall
    Preston                                         Date
    PR1 8XJ
                                                       9 October 1989

*


           IW- lUU
    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


    Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
    27 September about the recent consideration by the County
    Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Special Sub-Committee about
    designated stadia in Lancashire. Lord Justice Taylor has noted
    the results of this consideration, and, in particular, the Sub­
    committee's request that he consider recommending the removal of
    perimeter fences at all grounds.

                                                /Ouj-o J^CtVvL
                                                                 /
                                                    R HW
                                                      A“3-
                                           R M WHALLEY
                                      Secretary to the Inquiry
 Lancashire
 /^\              .           JL
                                                           Brian Hill DL

                                                           G A Johnson
                                                                           llb


                                                                            ba
                                                                                 Solicitor Chief Executive / Clerk

                                                                                 Solicitor D eputy Clerk

 County                                                    P O B o x 7 8 County Hall Preston PR1 8XJ
                                                           Telephone (0772) 5 4 8 6 8




R M Whalley Esq                                            Please ask for
Secretary to the Hillsborough                              Extension
   Stadium Disaster Inquiry                                Your ref
Home Office                                                Our ref        BH/61
Queen Anne 's Gate                                         Date           27th September 1 9 8 9
London       SW1H 9AT



TDear Mr Whalley

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

The County Council's Safety of Sports Grounds Special Sub-Committee have
recently considered Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report into the tragedy
at the Hillsborough Stadium and the implications of his recommendations for
designated stadia in Lancashire.

The County Council issued instructions and advice to the four Football League
Clubs in the county on the recommendations for implementation before the
start of the 1989/90 season on 19 August, 1989, and I can advise that all
these were complied with either before or very soon after that date. The
Clubs have also been advised of revised capacities for terraced areas at
their grounds.

The Sub-Committee have asked their officers to undertake an immediate and
thorough review of safety at Lancashire sports grounds and this has now begun.

The Sub-Committee have noted that Lord Justice Taylor has delayed advice
on the future of perimeter fences until his Final Report. They have, however,
expressed concern about these fences and asked that I write requesting that
Lord Justice Taylor consider recommending their removal at all grounds in
his Final Report.

I would be grateful, therefore, if you could bring the Sub-Committee's concern
to the attention of Lord Justice Taylor in order that he may take this into
account in making his final recommendations.

Yours sincerely




Please address your reply to the Chief Executive / Clerk
\y




     *




         i
