                                                             2 2 MAY 1989
E.R. From:   E Soden                               cc   Ms   Adams
             F2 Division                                Mr   Yates
             Ext 3141                                   Mr   Moriarty
             19 May 1989                                Mr   Chilcot
                                                        Mr   Turney
                                                        Mr   B o y s h
                                                        Mr   Watt
                                                        Mr   Godd    , F8y
                                                        Mr   Mower
                                                        Mr   Lidington
     Mr Storr

     COMMENTS BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OFFICERS ON HILLSBOROUGH:
     CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN DAVID ALTON MP AND THE POLICE COMPLAINTS
     AUTHORITY

     David Alton MP sent to the Home Secretary a copy of his letter to
     the Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority asking the
     Authority to initiate an enquiry into the propriety of remarks
     passed by police officers of the South Yorkshire Branch of the
     Police Federation about the conduct of Liverpool fans at
     Hillsborough. This note records the outcome.


     2.   Sir Cecil Clothier wrote to Mr Alton to say that the
     Authority has no statutory power to initiate investigations and
     questioned whether Mr Alton was making a formal complaint as a
     member of the public or as a Member of Parliament. He suggested
     that in the latter case Parliament was the proper place for Mr
     Alton to raise his concerns.


     3. Mr Alton has subsequently replied to the effect that his
     initial letter was written as a citizen of Liverpool and
     repeating his request for an investigation.   In reply, the
     Chairman has explained the complaints procedures to Mr Alton but
     has strongly urged him to await the findings of Lord Justice
     Taylor's enquiry. That is how matters now stand.


     4. There is one loose end. At the end of his first letter to
     the PCA Mr Alton asked what guidelines exist for the publication
     of statements once a judicial enquiry has been announced. The
     Chairman has referred this point to the Home Office. I
     understand from Legal Adviser's Branch that no such guidelines
     exist and I attach a short draft to Mr Alton which I suggest
     might be signed by Lord Ferrers.




                                        E SODEN
                             DRAFT


David Alton Esq MP
House of Commons
London
SW1



                                     FOR SIGNATURE BY LORD FERRERS




         You sent the Home Secretary a copy of your letter of 19
         April to the Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority
         asking the Authority to institute an immediate enquiry
         into the propriety of remarks passed by South Yorkshire
         police officers about the conduct of fans at
         Hillsborough. You also asked whether guidelines exist
         for the publication of statements once the judicial
         enquiry has been announced. In his reply, Sir Cecil
         referred this latter point to the Home Office.

         We are not aware of any guidelines which might bear upon
         a non-statutory enquiry of this kind. But we are
         entirely confident that the enquiry now being carried out
         by Lord Justice Taylor will establish the facts of what
         happened at Hillsborough, regardless of whatever
         controversial remarks might have been made at the time.
