*   C‘          Ip.a/>
                                                                         2 9 SEP 1989 | l 3 0 S ^
         E.R.
                                                                            OCT 1939 ) o i 3 V
                                                                   cc   M r . Storr
                                                                        Miss Nicholson
                                                                        Mr. Boys Smith
                                                                        M r . Turney
                                                                        M r . Bolton *—
                                                                        M r . Osborne
                                                                        M r . Lidington
                                                                        M r . Godfrey
            M r . Goddard

            FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:           COMMITTEE ISSUES

            Together with Mr. Osborne, Mr. Smith and Ms. Jago you briefed
            Mr. Lloyd on Tuesday 26 September on the Football Bill and
            discussed with him your submission of 21st September.

            2.   Mr. Lloyd was grateful for the briefing session which he found
            useful. On the points raised in your submission, he expressed the
            following views

                         (i ) Minimum period in which initial reporting should take
                              place (para, 5).Mr. Lloyd agreed    that a concession of
                              28 days would be over-generous and said that we should be
                              ready to offer 14 days if there was pressure for this
                              during Report.

                     ( )       Minimum period in which initial reporting should take
                               place following discharge from prison (para. 8). No
                               amendment to be prepared.

                    (iii)       Place of residence as criteriafor making a restiction
                               order (para. 11). No amendment to be prepared.

                               Minimum notice of reguirement to report (para. 13). No
                               amendment to the Bill, but guidance to the enforcing
                               authority along the lines proposed to be issued.

                         (v)    Extension of relevant offences in Schedule 1 (para. 18).
                               The offence should be extended in the way proposed.

                     (v i > Defences to Part I offences (para. 22). A defence of
                            lawful authority was sufficient. A defence to cover the
                            ’foreign visitor' point in paragraph 21 was not necessary
                            since he would not normally be regarded as committing the
                            offence.

                   (vii) Police intervention in an emergency (para. 24) Mr. Lloyd
                         would be grateful to see the shape of the draft
                         amendments when they are ready.

                  (viii) Away bans (para. 25). Mr. Lloyd thought that such a
                         proposal would be highly contentious, but said that, if
                         successful, it would greatly strengthen the Bill.

                                                     -   1-
E.R.


   3.    It was agreed that no action should be taken until
   Lord Ferrers had had a chance to see the proposals over the
   weekend.   Subject to Lord Ferrers' agreement, I should be grateful
   for a draft letter for Mr. Lloyd to send Mr. Moynihan as proposed
   at paragraph 18, please. As I also mentioned, I am sure that
   Mr. Lloyd will wish, nearer the time, to write to the Committee
   Members explaining the Government amendments which are to be
   tabled.




                                SUSAN REX

                            Private Secretary




   28 September 1989




                                   -   2-
