                                                                    PROF. A. USHER


                        <1. In fact, of course, the problem was that there were already
                            deceased people within the building? - A. Yes.

                        <$. So we did not have quite as much space as - it was not empty,
                            in other words? - A. No.

                        0. Which did create a few problems for us. - A. Yes.

                    B        But I am right in thinking that there is a room which we know
                             as the Special PM room which is in fact chillable? - A. Yes.

                        (I. And that was done? - A. Yes, it was.

                        (I   Prof. Usher, what I want to do was, I wanted to go through one
                             or two of the terms which we use in post mortems.

                                   THE CORONER:  This, ladies and gentlemen, forgive me, is
                             a short course in pathology.  What I am going to do is to ask
                             Prof. Usher to explain some of the words which are used,
                             because you will hear them over and over again, and it may
                             easier if you have had them explained at the beginning, just
                             as w o r d s .
                                          -

                        o    If I start off by saying, can you help by a word that occurs
                    D        very often is "petechia" and "haemorrhage".  Could you just
                             explain what the word "petechia" means and what the word
                             "haemorrhage" for that matter means in that context? - A. Yes.
                             I could do it perhaps better if I said that petechial
                             haemorrhages are signs of asphyxia and then define asphyxia.

                        o    Yes, if you would. - A. Asphyxia is a process which takes
                             place when there is some mechanical interference with normal
                    E        breathing.   The causes of the interference might be external,
                             as when a pillow is put across the face.   That is called
                             suffocation.   It may be hands or a ligature round the neck
                             which is called strangling.   It may be the inhalation of some
                             foreign body into the throat, which is called choking.    Or it
                             may be, and this is relevant in this case, the fact the
                             person's chest is simply not allowed to move in and out as it
                             does in the normal course of respiration.   If that happens
                             these people are asphyxiated in all the examples I have given.

                                  In traumatic asphyxia the picture is usually fairly
                             typical. When respiration stops oxygen cannot be given into
                             the blood from the lungs and the haemoglobin which is present
                             in the little red cells and which is used to carry oxygen from
                             the lungs to the tissues where it is needed, these little
                    G        packets of haemoglobin give up their oxygen and then turn into
                             what is called reduced haemoglobin, which is a bluish colour,
                             and this gives a bluish cast to the face and often elsewhere
                             in the body to a person who is being asphyxiated.

                                     When this happens the heart begins to fail and there is
                             back pressure on the very small blood vessels called
                             capillaries.   So the pressure in the fine vessels of the skin
                H            arid elsewhere in the body increases, and the cell walls which
                             are only one cell thick, are not getting oxygen either, and so


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        31
                                                                  PROF. A. USHER


                            these fine vessels burst, and little bursts of red cells pass
                            through the wall into the tissues.  If this happens in the
                            skin they can be seen as little pin-point haemorrhages in the
                            skin.  They are not entirely specific for asphyxia, but it
                            would be difficult to diagnose asphyxia if there were not such
                            petechiae.  Larger haemorrhages which are formed in exactly
                            the same way are call ecchymoses.

                    g            So that the general picture of a person who has died from
                            asphyxia is of bluish cyanosis, as it is called, bluish
                            appearance about the face and elsewhere, and the presence of
                            petechiae somewhere in the body, frequently in the eyes,
                            frequently in the lax skin of both the eyelids, frequently
                            internally on the surfaces of the lung and on the heart
                            itself, and sometimes elsewhere.  The picture that we saw in
                            general in the people who died at Hillsborough was an
                            asphyxial picture, and it was due to the fact that at some
                            time they must have been packed so close that they were unable
                            to move their Chests and thus asphyxiated.

                                 If the asphyxia is prolonged it begins to affect other
                            organs and in particular the brain.  The brain is very
                            sensitive to oxygen lack, and so after four or five minutes of
                            asphyxia then damage occurs to the brain.  The more prolonged
                    D       the asphyxia is the more damage there is to the brain, and
                            eventually the vital centres in the brain are damaged and then
                            the person is technically d e a d .

                     <J). How long does it take for a person who is asphyxiated to (a)
                          lose consciousness, and (b) get to the stage where irreparable
                          damage has been done? - A. Well, once the chest becomes
                          absolutely and finally fixed in the situation I imagine as we
                    E had it at Hillsborough - there were moments of intermittent
                          fixation of the chest in many of the cases - but once the
                          chest becomes finally fixed then it is a matter of minutes,
                          between four and six minutes usually, before the person dies,
                          but it is a very short time mercifully before they lose
                          consciousness.  They may lose consciousness in 10 to 15
                          seconds.

                        <t». So in other words, once asphyxia actually takes hold properly,
                             shall we say, then the loss of consciousness is very quick? -
                             A . Yes.

                        $>. And death between four and six minutes, of that order? - A.
                            Yes, that is the usual.

                    G<f>-   If a person is active and struggling, does it make any
                            difference? - A. They use oxygen.  They use what oxygen they
                            have up more rapidly, of course.  It is also true to say that
                            if someone has a disease say of the chest or the lungs or the
                            heart, where they are already hampered with regard to their
                            use of oxygen, then of course they will stand asphyxia very
                            badly, and they may die in a much shorter time than that.

                H<P- Now, in some cases we will hear in these PMs there was what is
                     known as coning.  In other words, there was an enlargement, a


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       32
                                            PROF. A. USHER


   swelling of the brain and in others there was not.  If we deal
   with the cases where there is coning, that is a very serious
   situation, is not it? - A. Yes, it is.  It is unfortunately a
   non-specific situation.  If you insult the brain in more or
   less any way it reacts by swelling.  If you cause it to be
   shaken around inside the head or if you fail to supply it with
   oxygen, it reacts by swelling, and since the skull is a closed
   boney box with only one outlet and that outlet is where the
   spinal cord leaves it at the base, then it tends to push the
   brain down into that cone.  Unfortunately, the part of the
   brain that is pushed down is the part that contains the vital
   centres for respiration and for the regulation of heart beat
   and blood pressure.  So if that happens then it is likely to
   cause death.

(b. But it is not an absolute requirement   for asphyxial death? -
    A. Oh, no, by no means.

<). Because it is at the cellular level I   think you are saying the
    damage is done? - A. Yes.

O. Which is microscopic,    I believe, if you like? - A. Yes.

(I. You were talking about the very short  period when a person
    actually becomes asphyxiated before he loses consciousness.   -
    A . Yes.

O. What is the position if as I think you have also said there
   are intermittent episodes of asphyxia, shortish periods,
   compression and then relaxation and then compression and
   relaxation and then final compression? Does that make any
   difference? - A. In the intervals when they are able to
   breathe properly then they to some extent replenish their
   tissue oxygen stores, but of course once the pressure is on
   again then the same process operates.

O. Operates again.  So if a person has been squashed, if I can
   say that, and the pressure is taken off him before he loses
   consciousness, and there is no further pressure on him, then
   he ought to be able to breathe and recover? - A. Yes.

O. If he breathes and    then a further episode of pressure is put
   on then the effect    of that additional pressure will depend on
   how much oxygen he    has managed to take in in the interval? -
   A. In the interval,    yes.

<3. And of course, the shorter the interval....   - A. Exactly, sir.

O. We know in some cases - in fact in many cases - there is some
   reference to vomiting? - A. Yes.

0. Can you deal with the whole question of vomiting in traumatic
   asphyxial deaths and what it signifies? - A. Well, in any
   asphyxial death, as a terminal event, right at the end, there
   is often vomiting, and for that reason many pathologists when
   reporting such cases simply say, and I do this myself, if
   there is vomiting I simply say, "Traumatic asphyxia", and I


                                 33
                                                                    PROF. A. USHER


                             take it that the vomiting is part of the last phase of that
                             death.  It is true to say that it is particularly liable to
                             happen in traumatic asphyxia because the airways are free,
                             which they are not if the person is being strangled, and of
                             course, compression is being exerted on the abdomen as well
                             with a tendency to force material up.  So you would expect to
                             get vomiting in cases of traumatic asphyxia.

                    Bf       And you would say it is probably part of the terminal events?
                              - A. Yes, it is just part of the act of dying.

                        (J. In some cases one inhales? - A. Yes.

                             If one inhales any vomit, if there had been no mouth to mouth
                             resuscitation presumably that would mean it was breathed in? -
                             A. Yes.

                        O. A gasp must have been made? - A. Yes.

                        4-    If there is artificial respiration does it make any
                              difference, do you think? Can it be blown in? - A. It could
                              be if the mouth had not been cleared of vomit first.   In that
                              case the kiss of life becomes, of course, the kiss of death,
                              because you are forcing the material down into the airways.
                    D        it is also fair to say it has been shown, principally by the
                              South Africans, that material in the stomach can be, after
                              death, forced up into the nasal fount and even down the
                              bronchi.

                        4 - How   does it get down after that, because that can't be
                             inhaled? Are you saying a gravity mechanism, or what? - A.
                    g        Y e s , that is what is thought to be the answer.

                        4-   So it is not entirely explained how that happens? -A.    That is
                             r i g ht.

                        4.   So the mere presence of stomach content in the lungs does not
                             necessarily mean it was inhaled before death, is what you are
                             saying? - A. That is right.

                        Cl. But in many cases it may be, of course? - A. Yes

                        4-   And inhalation is a very serious matter, is not it, because     it
                             irritates the linings? - A. Yes, that is right.

                      O. I think you prepared a report for Lord Justice Taylor, and one
                         of the questions which are dealt with in that, I think, was
                    Q    the question of eye haemorrhages and the effects of people
                         lying or standing? - A. Yes.

                        4>. Can you just summarise your conclusions on that? - A. Yes.  I
                            think it was put forward that you could differentiate between
                            people who died standing up and people who died lying down
                            because the people who died standing up did not have eye
                            haemorrhages and the people who died lying down down did, and
                H           that in my view is completely wrong.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         34
