                                             Percy Johnson-Marshall & Partners
    %
Partners                                                                                                                          6 4 The Causeway
Percy J o h n s o n -M a r s h a ll C M G M A R I BA FRIAS FRTPI R IB A D is tinction in T o w n P lanning
Bruce Hare B.Arch (H o n s) Dip Urban D esign a nd Regional Planning
                                                                                                                                  Duddingston
G len Craig B.Arch (H ons)                                                                                                        Edinburgh EH15 3PZ
                                                                                                                                  Tel Nos: 0 3 1 -6 5 2 1435
A s so cia tes
D avid H e w it t B.Sc R IB A Dip Arch                                                                                                     031-661 1 689
V i n c e n t Balfour B.Arch (H o n s) R IB A R IA S                                                                              Fax No: 031 -6 6 1 4 2 1 8
A le x M M c K e n d ry
G ordon A S te w a r t
                                                                                                                                                 396/AH/HW
                                                                                                                                  Our Ref
                   Mr. Whalley
                   Secretary to the Enquiry
                   50 Queen Anne1s Gate
                   LONDON
                                                                                                                   K cvu ^ cU /   Your Ref
                   SW1H 9AT
                                                                                                             iw.                    2nd October 1989



                                                                                              Vvalt

                                                                                                                                         *10
                   ST. JOHNSTONE FOOTBALL CLUB, MCDIARMID PARK, PERTH                                                                        1

                   Please find enclosed 1 No. copy of some of our production drawings for the above
                   stadium as requested today by your Ms. Wither.   Also enclosed is a copy of our
                   article prepared by us for publication in a technical journal, which should give
                   you some background information relevant to the project.

                   Should you require additional, or more detailed information we would be only too
                   happy to oblige in which case we would suggest that you contact the undersigned.

                   Yours faithfully,




                   Alan Hardie
                   For Percy Johnson-Marshall & Partners



                    c.c.           Mr. S. Dunbar, St. Johnstone F.C.




                    Enc




                                                            Regional Planning Environmental Assessment Urban Design
                                                                 Urban Economics Architecture Landscape Design
,>/f>
    So
ST. JOHNSTONE FOOTBALL CLUB : MCDIARMID PARK, PERTH


In 1987 St. Johnstone Football Club andPerth Ice Rink were granted Outline
Planning Permission to build a 60,000 ft. sq. superstore on the site of Muirton
Park and the adjoining ice rink site.    Asda Stores Ltd. had reached agreement
with the club and the Rink to demolish the existing buildings to make way for a
new Asda, and in return, would build a new football stadium and ice rink at
different locations in the town.   The site chosen for the stadium was farmland
immediately on the outskirts of the town on land made available by a local
former Bruce McDiarmid.   In a small town such as Perth, this should not present
any obstacles to fans travelling to the ground either by foot or by bus and
gives the opportunity for travel by car, as special provision has been made for
car parking.   Moreover, 'away' support also have the opportunity of easy access
to the stadium with the ground being sited immediately adjacent to the new city
by—pass with routes converging from all parts of Scotland.     This represents a
considerable advance on the older grounds in the country which are traditionally
located in the centre of towns.    Restricted access to and from the Stadia and
minimal (or non-existent!) parking facilities will often result in both traffic
and crowd congestion with obvious detrimental effects both to the supporters and
the towns' inhabitants.

The site itself represented a considerable challenge both from a design and a
construction point of view involving as it did undulating contours dropping into
a valley through which a culvert passed at the lowest point.    Research revealed
that a football pitch should, ideally, be orientated with the goals on a
north/south axis.    With most football being played during afternoons in winter
time, it has been found that players (in particular goalkeepers) were less
affected by low sunlight when the pitch lies north/south.      In this case, the
axis lay directly across the valley.    It was realised at an early stage that a
considerable amount of earth-moving would be required and that the economics of
the project would hinge on the most cost effective means of balancing
cut-and-fill, with the stand designs.     Consequently the design of the stadium
itself was heavily influenced by the nature of the site whereby the more obvious
design considerations such as sight lines, ingress and egress, and the rake of
the stands determined internal levels which in turn, determined external levels.
This was achieved by pre— determining a level on each of the four stands o tt which
would form a lateral gangway running the length of the stand from which egress
direct to the car park> Level’s could be made.       The gangways also fulfilled
certain aspects of the Building Regulations by providing a safe means of escape
 either to the car parks or onto the pitch.

 Another determining factor was the level of anartificial pitch        immediately
 adjacent to the west stand which St. Johnstone will use for training purposes
 and which, for obvious reasons, requires to be      laid to a level surface.
 Ultimately, computer modelling techniques were employed to establish the most
 cost-effective and practical balance of cut-to-fill.         Total earth moving
 amounted to 80,00 cu. m. cut-to-fill.     The geology of the site was generally
 Silty sand and gravel overlying soft clay or silt.    Sandstone bedrock was at a
 depth of 11-45m and formed the base for a total of 247 end bearing driven
 concrete piles, with a total length of 5,293m, and an average length of 21m.

 The stand structures are predominantly steel with the smaller stands at the
 north, south and east having 1200 x 450mm plate girder stanchions at 6.0m c/s
 with rakers at a pitch of 28°.    These stands have a number of seating planks
 running below the lateral gangways which are supported by stepped reinforced
concrete foundations.    Because of the large extent of earthmoving mentioned
previously, it was realised that a degree of settlement and heave could be
expected.    To counteract this, the ground floors were constructed of p.c.
concrete planks spanning between sleeper walls built off the ground beams.  The
seating planks were formed from L-shaped planks which sit on the raking girder
and are supported by the plank immediately below.       The L-shape was chosen
because it proved to be the most economical although a Z shape was also
considered. The roofs are formed from steel trussed rafters cantilevering out
from the stanchions and projecting beyond the lowermost seats to afford as much
protection from the elements as possible.

The accommodation within these stands incorporates only toilets, food serveries
and turnstiles.

The accommodation within the west stand is considerably greater in that
incorporated within are all changing, adminstration and social facilities.
Here the frame is steel throughout with the rakers set at 32°.  Elsewhere, the
construction echoes the smaller stands, although the seating planks are rather
larger to accommodate the steeper pitch.

The fabric throughout is Plastisol-coated profiled steel, with some of the-
sheeting run horizontally on the West Stand to break up. the visual bulk of the
cladding, this also being achieved by the use of translucent sheeting over the
turnstile areas giving natural light inside the stands.    All four stands have
fair-faced concrete block base courses.   Total steel amounts to 812 tonnes.

A primary requirement throughout the design and construction period was the need
to satisfy the stipulations of the various statutory authorities, including the
Ground Safety Team (comprising police, fire brigade and Tayside Regional
Council) the Football League and Perth & Kinross Building Control.            This
involved liaising closely with all concerned to ensure that the stringent rules
governing sports stadia would be readily met.     This is of particular importance
in the light of the fire at Bradford and the tragedies at Hillsborough (which
occurred during the construction period), and at the Heysel Stadium in Belgium,
all of which resulted in loss of life.       It has become increasingly apparent
that our existing stadia (which often date back to the last century) have not
been designed to accommodate what is considered to be modern standards of
safety.     This applies to their construction (wooden stands still exist) and to
their layout where safe ingress and egress can be restricted and modern methods
of policing prove difficult to enforce.     The problem here was that the Building
Regulations do not adequately cover Sports Stadia (resulting in several
Relaxations of the Building Regulations) and often do not 'tie-up' with the
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, which is the means by which the Ground Safety
Inspection Team determine their own requirements.         Moreover, the Guide is
intended primarily for use for the upgrading of existing Sports Grounds and
proves difficult to apply to new stadia.               Nevertheless,  considerable
co-operation between all parties over a period of almost two years found
acceptst£Le and reasonable solutions to all matters governed by the Ground Safety
Certificate.

Work commenced on site in October 1988 with completion in August 1989 in time
for the start of the '89-'90 football season.        This astonishingly short
programme was achieved by Miller Construction Ltd. using a 'design & build'
contract whereby Architects Percy Johnson-Marshall & Partners, Engineers J.A.
Kirkpatrick & Partners and Quantity Surveyors W.J.R. Christie & Partners were
'retained' by the Contractor during the construction period.       Of primary
importance was the grass to the pitch which, above all else, had to be suitable
for playing by August 1989.   Seeding commenced in May 1989 with the pitch being
full international size, measuring 115 x 75 yards.

St. Johnstone Football Club now have an all-seated, all-covered stadium with
space for 10,163 spectators inclusive of up to 500 'executive' seats and 20
disabled spaces.    Accommodation in the west stand includes two 'hospitality'
lounges at first floor level,       function suite and bar,       together with
adminsitration offices and Board Room on the ground floor, whilst the lower
ground floor has the team facilities including changing rooms, kit rooms and
laundry, treatment rooms, gymnasium and weight training rooms and the players'
relaxation lounge.   Also included at this level are separate changing rooms for
the synthetic practice pitch which are intended primarily for community use.

Car parking is provided for up to 100 supporters' coaches and 1,000 cars.

It is. a measure of St. Johnstone's ambition that they, a first division club at
present, should have the vision to provide their supporters with what is
arguably the most up-to-date stadium in Britain incorporating, as it does, all
the necessary safety features and comfort that most consider necessary to take
football into the twenty-first century.
