                                                Ms Craig
                                                MS Rex
                                                Ms Nicholson
                                                Mr Yates
                                                Mr Chilcot
                                                Mr Moriarty
                                                Mr Turney
                                                Mr Boys Smith
                                                HMClC
                                                HMCIFS
                                                Mr Mower
                                                Mr Clayton
                                                Mr Goddard
                                                Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                Mr Whalley
                                                Mr Lidington
                                                Mr Yeo




Mr Mould


           HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


    The Home Secretary saw your submissions of 15 September
and 14 September on the proposed letter to John Carlisle and
the reply to Mr E d e y . He agreed to the issue of the letter
to Mr Edey, subject to the deletion of the fifth and eigth
paragraphs of the dra f t . He decided that to mention that
consideration was being given to any necessary enforcement of
the report's recommendations by means of a statutory
instrument would beg the question of w h y , if we knew that the
recommendations were not being implemented in some places, we
were not using this pow e r . I have circulated my letter to
Mr Edey separately.

2.  In regard to the letter to Mr Carlisle, the Home Secretary
needs to know before it is sent which, if any, local
authorities  ’        -■      have not implemented the
asterisked recommendations, and w h y . If there are a number of
local authorities          who have not implemented the
recommendations he would like advice on why it is not possible
to use the statutory power. The draft letter to Mr Carlisle
will need to be amended in the light of advice on th i s . I
should be grateful if advice and a fresh draft could be with
us by 29 September jc^o                .

3 . The Home Secretary discussed publication of the letter to
Mr Carlisle with Mr Mower and Mr Lidington on 18 September.
Mr Mower advised that it would not be sensible to publish the


                                                /letter as this
                            2   .




letter as this might simply stir up journalists to write
stories on local authorities and clubs not implementing the
recommendations. He advised that the reply should simply be
used when necessary to explain what we were doing. It was
noted that Mr Carlisle would need to be told that the letter
would no longer be published, but that he would be able to
use it as he saw f i t .




Private Office                         MISS C J BANNISTER
19 September 1989                      Private Secretary
