\   h s .8 .18/hillsbl.dm


         HOME OFFICE
         Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                         273 3099
                                      Direct line 01-213
                                     Switchboard 01-213 3000



    Mr L N Bush                                        Your reference
      FIRCS, CEng, MI STRUCT.E, FIAS                     APSU/CBS -150B/LMB/LS
                                                       Our reference
                                                           n a f n wnn iia
    City Building Surveyor
    5th Floor                                          ^EP/89 35/40/2
    Kingsway House, Hatton Garden
    LIVERPOOL    L3 2AJ                                  18 August 1989




    Dear Mr Bush

    THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT

    Thank you for your letter of 9 August about the Hillsborough
    Inquiry's Interim Report.    I do realise the pressure which a
    report of this sort places on those in local authority with
    responsibilities for safety certification under the Safety of
    Sports   Grounds Act 1975.    We all appreciate the effort and
    commitment which you and others are giving to the implementation
    of the Report's recommendation as far as possible before the
    beginning of the new football season.

    Recommendation 2 of the Interim Report is, I believe, considered
    an interim measure which together with other measures recommended
    in the report is designed to maintain safety in the short term.
    For our part we would not under any circumstances recommend a
    calculation of capacity based on a density figure greater than 54
    people per 10 square metres (now reduced by 15% in line with the
    Interim Report). This is the maximum figure quoted in the Guide
    to Safety and Sports Grounds and should be used only in the way
    described in paragraph 221 of the Guide.   Any figure higher than
    this would not be commensurate with the spacing and strength
    specification set out in the Guide for crash barriers and, as a
    result, would be liable to pose an undue risk to the safety of
    spectators.

    On the question of police responsibility referred to in       the
    Interim Report, the Guide makesclear that responsibility for the
    safety   within  the ground lies with     the ground    operator.
    Paragraph 204 of the Guide makes it clear that to discharge this
    responsibility properly a special police presence inside the
    ground may be necessary.     The relevant recommendation of the
    Hillsborough Inquiry takes into account the position found to
    exist at that ground on 15 April where certain functions and
    responsibilities were regarded as having been taken over by the
\
    \

        police.  What is important here is that both the police and the
        club should have a written agreement setting out the lines of
        responsibility for each and in this way avoid the confusion of
        which you speak.

        I am copying this to both Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs
        for information.
                                              Yours sincerely
h s.8.15/hillsbl.dm




Mr B Stickley                             v^\ ^     ^   d L p ^ jt    p m
Room 503
ABELL HOUSE                                £*\ f               (y f£ -T P&CvkJ -*




                                                                      i(,   )5
HILLSBOROUGH INTERIM REPORT - LETTER FROM MR BUSH
CITY OF LIVERPOOL

I enclose a copy of a letter recently received from Mr Bush of
Liverpool City Council following up his recent telephone call.
I have rather hurriedly drafted a response to Mr Bush and I would
be grateful for any comments you may have.     You will see that
I have covered the point he makes about 54 persons per 10 square
metres but I would be grateful for any additional comment you
might have.  Similarly, I have attempted to address the somewhat
vexed question of police/club responsibility.        And perhaps
Mr Smith from F8 Division would let us have F8's comments in this
respect.

For background information Mr Bush is, I believe, regarded as a
persistent and sometimes difficult person to deal with.       The
likelihood is that we are about to embark upon a protracted
correspondence with him about the merits or otherwise of our
Green- Guide and interpretation of various recommendations of the
Taylor inquiry.

As I am about to embark on annual leave could I ask you to reply,
to Alan Brown (Room 920) rather than to me.   Telephone enquiries'
on 2765 will suffice if it will help save time.




                                          D J MOULD
                                     /f   G2 Division

15 August 1989




Enc


FEP/89 35/40/2


 Mv- f XwvOl'V,
hs.8.15/hillsbl.dm

                                         DRAFT



                                                         273 3099



Mr L N Bush                                              APSU/CBS — 150B/LMB/LS
  FIRCS, CEng, MI STRUCT.E, FIAS
City Building Surveyor                                   FEP/89 35/40/2
5th Floor
Kingsway House                                           15 August 1989
Hatton Garden
LIVERPOOL     L3 2AJ




Dear Mr Bush


THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT


Thank you        for your      letter of       9 August    about    the Hillsborough
Inquiry's        Interim Report.         I do    realise the pressure which             a
report     of    this   sort    places    on    those    in     local   authority    with
responsibilities         for    safety   certification          under the    Safety of
Sports     Grounds      Act    1975.     We     all    appreciate       the. effort and
commitment which you and others are giving to the implementation
of   the   Report's      recommendation         as    far as possible before the
beginning of the new football season.


Recommendation 2 of the Interim Report is, I believe, considered
an interim^which together with other measures recommended in the
report is designed to maintain safety in the short term.                          For our
part we would not under any circumstances recommend a calculation
of capacity based on a density figure greater than 54 people per
10 square metres           (now reduced by 15%           in line with the Interim
Report).         This   is    the   maximum     figure    quoted    in the       Guide to
Safety     and    Sports      Grounds   and    should be used only          in the way
described in paragraph 221 of the Guide.                       Any figure higher than
this   would      not   be    commensurate      with     the    spacing    and   strength
specification set out in the Guide for crash barriers and, as a
                          # «•
result, would be liable to pose an undue risk to the safety of
spectators.


On   the     question      of     police      responsibility       referred       to   in   the
Interim Report, the Guide makes clear that responsibility for the
safety        within      the     ground       lies    with     the    ground      operator.
Paragraph 204 of the Guide makes it clear that to discharge this
responsibility           properly       a    special    police    presence        inside    the
ground       may    be   necessary.           The    relevant    recommendation        of the
Hillsborough         Inquiry      takes      into    account the position           found to
exist    at that         ground    on       15 April where       certain    functions       and
responsibilities          had— dariripnlrly. befen taken          over by     the police.
What    is    important      here       is    that    both the police        and    the club
should       have    a    written       agreement       setting       out   the    lines     of
responsibility for each and in this way avoid the confusion of
which you speak.


I am copying this to both Liverpool and Everton Football Clubs
for information.


                                                           Yours sincerely




                                                           D J MOULD
                                                                            11 A U G U W \CQggj


                                                                             LIVERPOOL
            Local Authority
     BUILDIN                                                  L. N. BUSH, F.R.I.C.S., C.Eng., M .I.Struct.E., F.I.A.S.
                                                              CITY BUILDING S U R V E Y O R ,
     CONTRO
                                                              5th Floor, Kingsway House, Hatton Garden,
                                                              Liverpool L3 2AJ.

     Our ref:         APSU/CBS-150B/LNB/LS                    Telephone: 051-227 3911 Ext:         3395
                                                              Facsimile: 051-225 3886
     Your ref:                                                Direct Line: 051-225        3395


                                                              Date:
                                                                           9th August, 1989


    The Home Office,
    Queen Anne's Gate,
    London,
    SW1H 9AT

    For the Attention of Hr, Hold

    Dear Sir,

    The Hillsborough Disaster-— Interim Report

    The above report'by Lord Justice Taylor includes, at Chapter 24, a total of 43
    recommendations which he regards as the minimum necessary, for the present, to
     secure safety. That applies pressure on me, as the officer to whom the City
    Council s functions under the 1975 Act have been delegated, to amend
    accordingly, the current Safety Certificates for the Liverpool and Everton
    -clubs.                                        "/vt

    I did that yesterday in respect of recommendations numbered 2, 5, 6 and 29.
    Those recommendations numbered 18, 19 and 22 will also be implemented by me very
    soon. Of the remainder, there are many where the recommendations have been the
    practice here for some time, and some of which are not applicable to the grounds
    concerned.

    Those then remaining will be examined during the next few months, in
    consultation with the Clubs, Police, Fire Authority and Ambulance Authority.
    Heanwhile, I refer to my conversation with your Hr. Hold on the telephone this
    morning, in which I expressed the view that some of those recommendations are
    not possible to implement under the current legislation. The 1975 Act, as
    amended in 1987, restricts the Local Authority to certifying and controlling the
    reasonable safety of spectators at football grounds. A number of Taylor's
    recommendations move into the field of comfort and convenience. In my opinion
    that description must be applied to the very firm recommendation no. 2 which
    imposes a density of packing on terraces of a little under 46 persons per 10m2
    when the "Green Guide" itself specifies 54, and I know from more than 18 years'
    experience, that a density of about 58 secures reasonable safety.




                                                                              Continued ....




         When calling or telephoning please ask for^.......

NBBABE
                                                   - 2 -




     There are a number of recommendations made in the Interim Report which cloud the
     division of responsibility for safety, and will tend to cause confusion, and
     therefrom will spring the sort of neglect which caused the Hillsborough
     disaster. In that I refer to the several recommendations which imply that the
     Police have a responsibility for spectator safety, which in my Safety
     Certificates for the two local grounds, clearly rests with the Certificate
     Holder and his Stewards : the Police role, and what they are paid for by the
     Club, being to assist the Holder in that endeavour.

     I. discussed the above matters for some time with your Mr. Mold, and the
     conversation was very helpful. I would, however, urge that you should, at the
                                                                                        S.
                                                                                        w
     earliest possible date, give firm guidance on the problems raised by Taylor's
     recommendations, so as to eliminate the sort of confusion which does lead to
   (^^Lsasters like Hillsborough.

     Yours ij f a it h f u l l y ,




                                       ~                                          ^




                                           ::'r^r,P^p^y\:P 4 ^s\P ^p P ^P P P ^




NBBABE
