         West Midlands Police

         Report For
     DR STEFAN POPPER
          Coroner
South Yorkshire (West District)

 H IL L S B O R O U G H
DISASTER IN Q U IR Y
        Saturday 15 April 1989

               By
          J M JONES
   Assistant Chief Constable
     West Midlands Police

DECEASED REFERENCE NO: 93

NAME:    HAMMOND Philip
                                           DECEASED REFERENCE NUMBER:3 1


                   WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
                 A report into the death of:
NAME:                            HAMMOND, Philip
AGE: 14 years                     DATE OF BIRTH:     8 December 1974

ADDRESS:


OCCUPATION:                       Schoolboy
STATUS:                           Single
NEXT OF KIN:                      Philip HAMMOND
RELATIONSHIP:                     Father
DATE OF BIRTH:
OCCUPATION:                       Postal Executive
ADDRESS:


GENERAL PRACTITIONER:             Dr E M COTTON,


DOCTOR PRONOUNCING LIFE EXTINCT: Dr DOORE
DATE, TIME AND PLACE:             15 April 1989, between 1545 and 1600 hours
at the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield.
PATHOLOGIST:                      Dr SLATER      (1)(a) Respiratory failure due to
STATED CAUSE OF DEATH:            (b) Traumatic Pulmonary Contusion
(ii) Fractured rib and pulmonary laceration with Haemorrhage
BLOOD ALCOHOL ANALYSIS BY DR FORREST - RESULT:
                                   Less than 10 mg/100 ml
IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE:          At 0345 hours, on Sunday 16 April 1989,
Brian HAfWOND identified the body of his nephew, Philip HAWtOND to Police
Constable 1927 TAYLOR in the Temporary Mortuary at Hillsborough Stadium.


                                                                              T .2073.01
                            CIRCUMSTANCES

                    1.      At about 0920 hours on Saturday, 15 April
Pages 1 - 6                 1989, Mr Philip HAMMOND. Senior. Saw his son,
                            Philip HAMMOND, deceased, leave the family
                            home with the intention of travelling to
                            Sheffield in order to watch the F.A. Cup Semi
                            Final football match which was to be played
                            at the Hillsborough Stadium that day.

                    2   .   Philip HAMMOND was known to be in possession
                            of a ticket for the West Stand terraced area
Pages 7 - 8                 and he travelled with a friend, Mr Ian
                            SOUTHGATE. on a coach organised by Amberline
                            Coaches of Liverpool. Upon their arrival in
                            Sheffield they walked to the ground and
                            entered via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.
                            They then walked through the tunnel into Pen
                            3 where, at approximately 1330 hours they
                            took up a position about halfway down and
                            near to the fence separating Pens 3 and 4.

Pages 9 - 1 8       3.      They were there joined by
                                     who states that from 1400 hours
                            onwards the crowd in Pen 3 increased
                            gradually until by 1445 hours he was unable
                            to move.

                    4.      At 1455 hours when the teams took to the
                            pitch there was a surge from the crowd behind
                            and Ian SOUTHGATE states that Philip HAMMOND
                            was pushed forward out of his sight. He did
                V           not see him again.
                                    2.




                                   says that when the teams
                took to the pitch he was holding the hand of
                Philip HAMMOND but that the pressure from the
                crowd was pushing them gradually forwards and
                he slowly lost his grip before, at about 1502
                hours, there was a further surge in the crowd
                which pushed Philip HAMMOND forward and out
                of his view. He did not see Philip HAMMOND
                again.

                Shortly after 1505 hours, following the
                severe crushing in the West Stand terracing,
Pages 19 - 27   Police Constable 1927 Stephen TAYLOR went
                into the tunnel leading to the West Stand
                terraces. At the end of the tunnel he saw a
                boy whom he now knows to be Philip HAMMOND
                lying on the ground. The officer, with
Pages 28 - 39   assistance from Police Constable 266 Andrew
                James SHIEL. carried Philip HAMMOND and
                placed him in an ambulance which was in
                attendance in Leppings Lane.

                Attempted resuscitation was then carried out
Pages 40 - 46   by Police Constable TAYLOR, Ambulance Officer
Pages 47 - 55                and Ambulance Officer
                before the ambulance was driven to the
                Northern General Hospital by Police Constable
                SHIEL. During the journey Police Constable
                TAYLOR and Ambulance Officer       continued
                attempted resuscitation.
                                             3.




                           Upon arrival at the hospital Philip HAMMOND
                           was taken into the Casualty Department where
                           further treatment was carried out by a doctor
                           who has not, as yet, been identified. After
                           some twenty minutes the doctor stated that he
                           could not detect any pulse or signs of life
                           and Police Constable TAYLOR then took the
                           body of Phi lip HAMMOND to the plaster room
                           which was being used as a temporary mortuary
                           at the hospital.

Pages 5 6 - 6 2   9.       Dr Janet Rosemary D00RE shortly afterwards
                           examined Philip HAMMOND in the plaster room
                           and certified life extinct.

                  10 .     At 1900 hours Police Constable TAYLOR
                           escorted the body of Philip HAMMOND to the
                           gymnasium at Hillsborough Stadium where a
                           temporary mortuary had been set up.

Pages 6 3 - 6 4   11.      At 0345 hours on Sunday, 16 April 1989, Mr
                           Brian HAMMOND identified the body of his
                           nephew to Police Constable TAYLOR in the
                           gymnasium.

                  12   .   At 0500 hours Police Constable TAYLOR
                           escorted the body of Philip HAMMOND to the
                           Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
Page 65                    identification to Detective Constable ...
                      13.   On 16 April 1989, following identification by
Pages 66 - 70               Detective C o n s t a b l e | , Dr David SLATER
                            carried out an autopsy and submitted a report
                            giving cause of death.

                            BLOOD ETHANOL ANALYSIS

                      14.   Evidence is included regarding the analysis
                            of the blood sample from the deceased, where
                            the presence of ethanol was detected. The
                            witnesses proving continuity of the blood
Pages   71   -   72         sample are Detective Constable
Pages   73   -   74                        Detective Sergeant
Pages   75   -   76                        and Detective Sergeant
Pages   77   -   97                                 Dr Alexander Robert
                            FORREST carried out the analysis.

                            VISUAL EVIDENCE

                      15.   An examination of video film and photographic
Pages 98 - 99               evidence has been made by Police Inspector
                            9364 Michael LAYTON and Philip HAMMOND has
                            been identified alive in Pen 3 at 1503 hours
Photo Ref: PR1/10A          on photograph reference number PR1/1QA.
Photo Ref: PR1/15A          Photograph reference number PR1/15A also
                            shows Philip HAMMOND alive in Pen 3 at 1504
Page 5                      hours. Mr Philip HAIffflND. Senior has viewed
                            visual evidence and confirms each of these
                            identifications.
                   16.   |     h     a    s      also viewed visual
Video Ref: MAP 1         evidence and has identified himself on Video
                         Reference MAP 1 timed at 1438:44:11 hours.
                         He states that at this time Philip HAMMOND
                         would have been next to him and he has signed
Map Ref: MP1             a Mag. indicating his possible position on the
                         terrace at this time.

                         CONTINUITY CHART

                   17.   This has been prepared and is included with
                         this file to provide an overall picture of
                         the evidence.
                        LIST OF WITNESSES
                           Chronological .




NAME                                            PAGE NUMBERS

HAMMOND, Philip         Father of deceased              1   -   6
SOUTHGATE, Ian          Associate of deceased           7 - 8
                        Associate of deceased          9 - 18
TAYLOR, Stephen         Police Constable              19 - 27
SHIEL, Andrew James     Police Constable              28 - 39
                        Ambulance Officer             40 - 46
                        Ambulance Officer             47 - 55
DOORE, Janet Rosemary   Doctor                        56 - 62
HAMMOND, Brian          Uncle of deceased             63 - 64
                        Detective Constable                     65
SLATER, David           Pathologist                   66 - 70
                        Detective Constable           71 - 72
                        Detective Sergeant            73 - 74
                        Detective Sergeant            75 - 76
FORREST, Alexander      Chemical Pathologist          77 - 97
LAYTON, Michael         Police Inspector              98 - 99
                                                                         STATION

NAME:           PHILIP
                HAMMOND

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POSTAL EXECUTIVE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260489                                                            (SIGNED)



           I em a married man and I live at the above address myself and my wife

           have two Children of which Phillip was the eldest, being b o m on

           10.12.74 (10121974) in Liverpool.   Philip attended Calderstones

           Corrprehensive School in Liverpool 18.




           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) Philip went to watch the Semi

           Final Football Match at Sheffield between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest.   Philip was a Liverpool Supporter.   He went to the match with

           his friend Ian SOUTHGATE who lives at                          . Ian is

           18 years old.

           Philip left the house on Saturday at approximately 09.20 am (0920)

           intending to call for Ian and then catch an organised Supporters Coach

           frcm Wood End Ave, Speke, Liverpool. 24.

           When Philip left he was wearing black puma tracksuit bottoms, white

           Nike air wear training shoes size 8, a white sweatshirt with blue

           circles, a brown knitted jumper with a fawn motif across the front.

           He also had a watch on which was a square face with hands not digital
         HAKMQND              PHILIP                                             2


         anc a brown croccxlile type strap.

         I have received back from the Police the trousers and white top.

         Philip's other belongings are still missing.   I would like them back

         when they are located.

         Philip's family doctor is Dr COTTON,

                                                             P HAMMDND SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

           TIME:            DATE:   260489

 WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

Q ^ICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                     2
                                                                          STATION

NAME:              PHILIP
                   HAMMOND

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POSTAL EXECUTIVE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060789                                                  P HAMMDND (SIGNED)



           States:

           On 6th July 1989 (060789), I handed EC GADSBY of the West Midlands

           Police a photograph of my deceased son Phillip HAMMDND.     I would point

           out that at the time he went to the match his hair was brushed back

           at the front and he had not got a fringe.

           I would like to point out that I saw my son Phillip on the television

           on the day of the match.     It was on the BBC grandstand programme

           frented by Bob WILSON, with the match commentary by John M3TS0N.

           I saw my son at the front fence of the terrace behind the goal he was

           just on the right of a small gate where a police officer was standing

           waving at the fans to go back.    There were three persons and my son

           Phillip was the third of these, a bar of the fence was covering his

           eyes.

           In the last resort I would be willing to view that BBC video in an

           effort to identify my son.

           The time I saw my son on the televison was between 3.06 pm (1506)

           anc 4.30 pm (1630).
        HAKMDND            PHILIP                              2


                                            P HAMMDND SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     P G GADSBY DC1351
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          PHILIP
               HAMMDND

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POSTAL EXECUTIVE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 131189                                                P HAMMDND (SIGNED)



           Further to my statement dated 6 July 1989, (060789) today I have bean

           shewn various photographs & video tapes by             and Sgt KILLOCH

           of the West Midlands Police relating to the Hillsborough disaster.

           On a photograph ref no PRI/K/10 (Exhibit No     ) I am able to identify

           my son Philip as being to the right of the picture standing between a

           mar with glasses and a youth with a green & red hat on.    I have marked

           the spot by means of a dot where Philip is.

           Likewise on a photograph ref no PRI/K/15 (Exhibit No      ) Philip can

           be clearly seen in the centre of the photograph wearing a white & red

           hat next to a man with glasses.   I have placed a dot above the spot

           where Philip is.

           Although Phil ip did not have a hat on when he left the house, as a

           result of speaking to his friends who were at the match with him, I

           no* know that Philip did in fact have a hat on inside the ground.
        HAKM3ND           PHILIP


                                   P HAMMOND SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          IAN
               SOUTHGATE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- i M s statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                                1 SOUfflGAIE (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my parents. I have lived at this

           address for about 12 years.

           I ein a Liverpool supporter and   I obtained a ticket through Philip

           HAKM3ND who obtained it from Anfield.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) at about 9.15am (0915) Philip

           HAMCND called at my house which was previously arranged to go to the

           Semi-Final of the FA cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, at

           Sheffield Wednesday's ground.

.          When he called at my house we then left and got a bus into Speke

           where we were meeting the coach to Sheffield.    We went can the

           Amterline Coach.

           We got to Sheffield at about 1.00pm (1300) and parked with other

           Liverpool supporters coaches.     Philip and I then went to the ground.

           We went into the ground via the Leppings Road turnstiles, and when we

           got inside the ground we walked down the tunnel leading to pens 3

           anc 4.   We went into pen 3 and stood on the terraces about half way

           down and near to the fence which separates pens 3 and 4.

           When we got into the ground it was quite empty, this would be about
         SOLTHGATE               IAN                                                 2


         1.20pm (1330).     By 2.30pm (1430) it was quite full and by about

         2.50pm (1450) it was packed solid.

         I viBS standing with Philip and my feet were off the ground and I

         could not move one way or another.     By this time Philip had been

         pushed forward and I did not see Philip again after about 2.55pm

          (1455).     The next thing was I felt a sharp push and I was forced to

         the fence separating the two pens 3 and 4.    After the match was

         stepped and the pens cleared a bit I went looking for Philip.        I

         gave the police a description of Philip and I then went home.

                                        I. Southgate



                                                              I SCXJfflGATE SIGNED

STATEMENT t a k e n
          PLACE

            TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                         8
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: CLERK



           On Saturday, 15th April 1989 (150489), I went to watch Liverpool

           Foctball Club play Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup semi final at

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.     I was going with my friend,                We

           wer.t on an Amberline Coach.   When we got to the coach statical

           anc. I were on different coaches.    On the coach that I was on I met

           Philip HAMMDND and Ian SOUTHGATE.     I did not know Philip and Ian well.

           I played football now and again against the Boys Brigade when Ian and

           Philip were playing for the Boys Brigade.

           Whilst talking on the coach we agreed to meet inside the ground.

                 and I had tickets for the Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough

           ground.   When we arrived at the ground          and I were body searched

           anc had to give in our tickets.     We got into the Leppings Lane terrace

           at about 1.30 pm (1330), where we met Philip and Ian.      All four of us

           were on the terrace together as the stadium slowly filled up.

           By about 2.45 pm (1445), we just could not move, the terraces were

           that packed.     There was a number of surges.   When the players came out

           onto the pitch for the kick off there was a big surge and I was pushed

           forward and thereby separated from Ian and Jason.      I kept hold of

           Philip's hand.    With the surge Philip and I were moved further down

           the terrace. We were moved just over half way down the terrace.

           Hie pressure of the crowd became unbearable.     Although I tried to keep

           hold of Philip's hand he slowly slipped out of my grasp, with the

           pressure of the crowd.     With a further surge which occurred at about
                                                                             2


3.C2 pm (1502), Philip was pushed forward and disappeared from my

view.   I did not see him again.

Hie pressure was unbearable.     Icouldn't breathe because my   chest was

killing me.   I tried to make myway back up the terraceto get out.

Eventually, I got out through the tunnel      at     the back oftheterrace

when the police opened the doors.

INJURIES

I sustained bruising to my right shoulder and chest.      My ribs were

also sore and bruised.

On Monday 17th April (170489) I went into work because I was anxious

to ensure that my work colleagues knew that I was all right.      I did

not want them telephoning my parents, upsetting them.      I did not do

much work.

On Tuesday 18th April (180489) I did not go into work.       I could not

get out of bed.     I did not want to move.

On Wednesday, 19th April (190489), I went into work in the morning

but could not do anything.     I was sent home.    I went to see my General

Practitioner - Dr WEST of the Surgery, Ashfield Road, Aigburth,

Liverpool.    He spent about 5 minutes examining me and 30 minutes

talking to me.     I could not talk to my parents about what had happened

anc how I felt.    Dr WEST was however able to help me in this regard.

He did not prescribe any treatment.

Thereafter, I returned to work on Monday, 24 April (240489).

I have now recovered from my physical injuries. I was okay after a

couple of weeks.
I now feel angry about what is being said about the disaster ie that

it was caused by hooligans and drunkeness.    I do not accept that this

is true.




I am a keen supporter of Liverpool football club.    I normally watch

their home matches from the Kop when I am not working.    I have been to

a couple of matches since the tragedy.




SPECIAL DAMAGES.

1.   My coat/anorak was ripped down the left side.   It was purchased

one month before the disaster for    25.   I will check to see if I have

a receipt.

2.   Loss of earnings:   I am employed b y _____________ and lost

earnings during the week after the tragedy.     Details of my lost

earnings can be obtained frcm
Dated this Thursday of 15.6.1989 (150689).
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ACORESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: CLERK


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                             (SIOffiD)



           I live at the above address with my parents, I have lived at this

           adcress for 12 months.

           I em a Liverpool supporter and I obtained a ticket for the semi final

           of the FA cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, from Anfield

           which was to be played on the 15th April 1989 (150489) at Sheffield

           Wednesday's Football ground.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) at about 10.00am (1000) I got

           onto the Amberline coach and we set off for the game.    This was at

           Speke the main coach depot.     I met my friend             3ut he

           travelled on another coach.     I also saw Ian SOUTHGATE and Phil HAMMOND

           at the bus depot.   They were on a different coach to me and I told

           them I would meet them inside the ground.    We got to Sheffield at

           about 1.00pm (1300) and I met         off the other coach and we walked

           to the ground together.   We had to walk about half a mile to the

           ground and we got into the ground at about 1. 30pm (1330).    The ground

           was pretty empty when we got inside the ground.    We walked down the

           tunnel and went into pen 3.          and I met Ian and Phil inside the

           ground and we sat talking to them.    By 2.00pm (1400) the pen was
getting more and more packed.    By 2.30pm (1430) the crowd in this pen

got unbearable.    I was sweating and by 2.45pm (1445) you could not

move.   There was a couple of surges around this time and I had my arms

down by my side.    I managed to get my arms out and then the teams came

out onto the pitch.    When the teams came out there was a big surge and

I crabbed hold of           T-shirt and pulled him back.   I had a hold

of Phil's hand and at about 2.55pm (1455) all you could hear from the

crowd was "let us out" and 'please let us out, please Brucie help us'.

About a minute of the game starting there was one hell of a big push

from behind.    I was holding Phil's hand and with the force of the

crowd pushing Phils hand slipped from my grasp and he fell away.         I

die not see Phil after that.    When I lost my grip of Phil's hand I was

about a one third way into the stand and near to where the barrier

collapsed.     I did not see the barrier collapse but I heard the noise

of it collapsing when the barrier collapsed loads of people fell

forward.     There was people on the pitch shouting to push back.    I

pushed back and fell over something.     I looked back and there was this

mar. lying on the terrace, his face was blue, he was dead and I

couldn't help him.
When I fell over the body someone stood on my chest and my hands, I

 don't know if I blacked out for a couple of seconds but the next thing

 I remember was two lads picking me up and asking me if I was alright.

 I wiped my face and started to shout 'open the gates.' I was shouting

 with this man to open the back gates leading into the tunnel. I don't

 know if they were closed or not but people were pushing as they came

 out of the tunnel into the pen. I eventually got out through the

 tunnel.   I couldn't breathe because my chest was hurting me.      I was

 crewling out and a policeman just stood and watched me.     A man dragged

 me out and said, 'Go on mate get out there' When I got out of the
stand I just broke down and cried. Eventually I got myself pulled

tocether and I ran back into the tunnel and into the stand to look for

        Ian and Phil.   There was so much panic in the tunnel and there

was bodies lying everywhere.    I managed to get back onto the terracing

I could not see anyone of my mates.    I started to help peqple carry

the injured and dead bodies out of the tunnel and put them out of the

way.   Hie next thing was some police came and did the necessary.      Hie

people who I helped to carry were at the back of the terracing.     About

3.20pm (1520) after I had come back into the terracing I saw a young

lad being pulled onto the pitch.    I then saw a police man throwing him

back into the terracing.    I than went for a drink and this bloke was

charging 40 pence I said to him he should be giving it to us free what

we had just been through.    He replied that we were hooligans.   Two

other men heard what he said and threatened him.    He apologised and

the fans walked away.     I stood drinking my drink and watching the

police carry bodies out.     I saw one body which had the same clothes on

as        was wearing I ran over to it but it wasn't           I than saw

       and we ran towards each other and put our arms around each other.

By this time it was about 3. 45pm (1545) and we made our way back to

the coach.   At about 6.15pm (1800) we were on the coach and we set

back off for Liverpool.     I never saw Phil after I lost sight of him

anc when I went to the doctors on the following Wednesday the doctor

told me I had bruised ribs, arms and shoulder.     I also learnt that

Philip HAMMDND had been one of the lads who was killed.
                                M PRESTON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          ELACEj

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                   16
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: CLERK


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110789                                                              (SIGNED)



           On Tuesday the 11th of July 1989 (110789), I attended Alerton Police

           Station, Liverpool, where I was shown two video recordings and a

           nurtber of photographs by Inspector LAYTON and PC BROWN of the West

           Midlands Police.

           The videos and photographs were taken at Hillsborough on Saturday the

           15th of April 1989 (150489).

           On a video recording, referenced MAP 1/A, between times 1438.38.21 and

           1428.51.08, I saw iry friend,              on the screen in the bottom

           centre.    At this time, although I cannot see myself, I vrould have been

           just behind him, and Philip HAMMOND would have been next to me.

           At a time shown as 14.38.4411, I could just see myself in the bottom

           centre of the screen wearing a red and white cloth hat, just behind

                     Again at this point Philip would have been just next to me.

           I have indicated my possible position on the terrace at this time on a

           plen, reference number MPl.

                 /as wearing a red and white cloth hat and a grey 'T' shirt.

           I also viewed an album of photographs, referenced PR1/A, and I

           identified myself and my friend         on three photographs,
        PRESTON              MARK   PETER                                        2


        reference numbers PR1/A/10A, PR1/A/11A and PR1/A/17A.   At this time I

        hac lost sight of Philip but he would have been just in front of me.

        The times of the above photographs are 1503 to 1504.




STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    110789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    BROWN PC9032

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                     18
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           STEPHEN
                TAYLOR

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POL PC1927



           I em Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police presently

           stationed at Rotherham.

           At 8.30 am (0830) on Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I paraded

           on duty at Main Street Police station, Rotherham, for duties in

^       connection with the FA cup semi-final to be played at Hillsborough

           Football Ground, Sheffield between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           football clubs.

           We were transported to the ground by coach where at 10.00 am (1000 )

           I was briefed along with the rest of my serial No 39 and the

           other Officers on duty.     My serials duties prior to the match were to

           be on Halifax Road to await the arrival of the Liverpool supporters

           coeches.

           Sergeant DOYLE was in charge of the serial and responsible to

^       Inspector MEEK.

           After the briefing we made our way to Claywheels Lane to await the

           arrival of the Liverpool coaches.     From Claywheels Lane we ware then

           deployed along Halifax Road meeting the coaches which were to be

           parked there.     We were deployed in pairs, I myself being with PC2662

           SHIEL.

           We were positioned on the leftside of Halifax Road when travelling

           awsy from Sheffield opposite the Mobil Garage.

           It was our intention to search the supporters as they left the coaches

           to ensure they had no weapons or articles to cause danger or harm and
TAYLOR                  STEPHEN                                            2


thet all alcohol should be left on the coaches.

The coaches were parked facing away from the ground the first being

the furthest away.     Random searches were made of the supporters as

they left their coaches and we gradually made our way down Halifax

Road towards the ground.

As a coach arrived near to a Workingman's Club on Halifax Road it was

noticed that diesel fuel was leaking from underneath and so the driver

was informed and the Fire Service contacted to attend and make the

spilled fuel safe.     PC SHIEL and myself remained with the coach until

this was done.

PC SHEIL and myself then walked down Halifax Road to rejoin our serial

at Claywheels Lane.     As we walked down the road it could be seen that

large numbers of empty beer and lager cans had been left on the

pavements and walls by supporters who were making their way towards

the ground.   Most of the supporters who I saw walking towards the

ground were at this time good natured but very noisy.

PC SHEIL and I made our way to Claywheels Lane to be placed on stand­

by until needed.     As we joined the remainder of our serial at

Claywheels Lane we were instructed by Sgt DOYLE that we were required

to attend at the Leppings Lane end of the football ground.

We made our way to the ground and were immediately deployed in a

cordon to prevent further fans from entering the ground.

At approximately 3.10 pn (1510) I was instructed by Sgt DOYLE to

make my way into the ground to give further assistance to the Officers

already inside.    At this time I was unaware of the situation inside

the ground and fully expected to meet some type of public order

situation.

Upon entering the ground I could see a number of fans leaving the West

Stand via the tunnel.     I immediately ran into the tunnel and saw a
TAYLOR                 STEPHEN                                                3


nurrber of injured persons on the ground.    I approached a youth who I

no* know was Phillip HAMMDND 13 yrs bn 8.12.75 (08121975) of ___

                                     . He was laid on the ground and

appeared to be unconscious. I then picked him up and carried him from

the tunnel.    As I made my way from the tunnel I was joined by PC SHIEL

who assisted me in getting through the crowd who were very hostile

and abusive.

I placed the young boy in the rear of a South Yorkshire ambulance.       We

then started to attempt to revive the boy with the assistance of an

ambulance wcman.    We cleared his airways and performed heart massage

on him and were able to re-start his heart.    A pulse could then be

felt and so PC SHIEL left the ambulance to find oxygen for the boy as

their unit was already being used outside.     PC SHIEL then returned

with oxygen, which he had got from a nearby Fire Engine.    One of the

ambulance's own crew then returned and we continued to work on the

boy.     It was then decided that the boy should be taken to hospital but

the driver with the keys could not be found.     PC SHIEL then found the

driver and took the keys from him.    We then decided that we should

take the ambulance ourselves to the hospital and so PC SHIEL drove the

ambulance whilst the ambulance man and myself continued to work cant the

boy.

We then picked up a Officer from Sheffield who knew the location of

the Hospital and made our way to the Casualty Dept of the Northern

General.

On arrival at the hospital we took the boy Philip HAMMOND into the

Casualty Dept where I assisted the hospital staff.    After about 20

minutes the doctor decided that we could do no more for him as we

could not gain any pulse or signs of life.     I then took the body to

the plaster room which was being used as a temporary mortuary.
TAYLOR                 STEPHEN                                              4


As I left the plaster rocm I was met by one of the Liverpool

supporters a man approximately 40 years of age who said that his two

daughters had been killed and that he believed that one of than was

inside the plaster rocm.    He asked if I could find out if she was

there.   He described his daughter to me and what she was wearing.      I

checked inside the plaster room and saw a young teenage girl who

fitted the description.    I informed the man of what the girl was

wearing and also shewed him a watch belonging to the girl.     From the

description I gave him and from the watch he was certain that it was

his daughter and asked to be allowed to see her.    I told him that at

that moment it was not advisable and asked him to wait a short while.

He was obviously very mad at me for not letting him in at that instant

but I felt that due to the state of his daughter's body and the fact

that other bodies were also present that any identification should not

be done there and then.     I informed a Police Inspector who was present

at the time of what had happened and he asked a Police woman to look

after the man.     I then returned to the Casualty Department to give

further assistance to the Hospital staff.

At approximately 5.30 pm (1730) I returned to Hillsborough football

ground where I rejoined my serial.

At 7.00 pm (1900) I returned to the Northern General Hospital with

PC SHIEL and attended at the mortuary where we labelled eleven bodies

prior to their removal to the gymnasium at Hillsborough.     The body of

the young boy Philip HAMMDND who I had dealt with earlier being one of

the eleven.   I then returned to Hillsborough with the bodies.

At 3.45 am (0345) on Sunday 16th April, 1989 (160489) I saw a Mr

Brian HAMMDND of                                    the uncle of the

deceased Philip HAMMDND.    Mr HAMMDND identified the body to me and

details for the form GEN 18 Sudden Death report were then obtained.
TAYLOR               STEPHEN                                          ->


At 5.00 am (0500) that same date I escorted the body of Philip

HAKMDND to the Medico Legal Centre at Sheffield where the body was

handed over to the reception team.   I then returned to Main Street

Police Station Rotherham to go off duty at 6.00 am (0600).

I felt that the mood of the Liverpool supporters prior to the match

was generally good at the location where I was on duty (Halifax Road).

They had obviously been drinking on their way to Sheffield and also

once they had arrived.

I em unable to conmsnt on the action of the stewards as I did not

attend at the ground prior to the incident taking place.

Recarding radio transmissions, I was totally unaware of what had taken

piece until the time I entered the tunnel under the West Stand.
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           STEPHEN
                TAYLOR

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL PC1927


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 030589                                                  S TAYLOR (SIGNED)

I
           I am a Police Constable with the South Yorkshire Police presently

           stationed at Rotherham.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I was on duty at Hillsborough

           Football ground Sheffield, South Yorkshire as a member of serial 39.

           After briefing at the Football Ground I attend along with the rest of

           my serial on Halifax Road, Sheffield, our duties were to meet the

           Liverpool Supporters as they left their coaches and direct them to

           the ground.    We were instructed to search them and ensure that they

           left any banners or bottles and cans either on the coaches or disposed

^          of them prior to entering the ground.

           At approximately 3.00pm (1500) all coaches had arrived on Halifax

           Road and together with PC 2662 SHIEL we made our way towards

           Claywheels Lane.   On our way down Halifax Road we could see that the

           sices of the road and pavement were littered with empty beer and

           lacer cans.

           At 3.05pm (1505) that same date our serial number 39 was deployed

           along with others to the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough Football

           Ground.   On arrival at the ground at 3.10pm (1510) we were intially
TAYLOR                STEPHEN                                               2


deployed outside forming a cordon keeping Liverpool Supporters away

frcm the gates. After a few minutes we were directed by our serial

sergeant Sgt DOYLE to enter the ground and assist other officers at

this time.   We had no idea of what was happening other than what

appeared to be crowd trouble.

Upcn entering the ground I could see a number of fans leaving the

West Stand via the tunnel.      I ran into the tunnel and saw a number of

injured persons on the ground inside the tunnel at the end

immediately before the terracing I approached a youth who was laid

unattended on the ground who I now to be Philip HAMMM) 13 yrs

b o m 8.12.1975 (08121975) of

He appeared to be unconscious and so I carried him frcm the tunnel

and was then met and assisted by PC2662 SHIEL.     The youth as I have

said appeared unconscious and had bruising above his right eye.      We

forced our way through the supporters who were milling about in the

tumel and at the rear of the stand and placed him in the rear of the

ambulance where together with an ambulance woman we attempted to

revive him. We cleared his airways and performed heart massage and

were able to restart the heart.     A pulse could be felt in his neck.

Oxygen was then fetched to the ambulance as its unit was being used

outside frcm a fire engine.     Another member of the ambulance crew

returned and we continued to work on Philip HAMMDND . After a few

mirutes we decided that he should be taken to hospital and so PC2662

SHIEL went to find the ambulance driver.     The driver was working on

another injured person and so PC2662 SHIEL took the vehicle keys and

drove to the General Hospial. On arrival we took Phillip HAMMM) into

the casualty dept where I assisted the hospital staff.     After

approximately 20 minutes the doctor decided that we could do no more

for him and we stopped working on him.      I then conveyed his body to
TAYLOR                STEPHEN                                              3


the plaster room which was at this time being used as a mortuary.      I

then handed the body to the Police Officers at the plaster room.     I

then returned to the casualty department and assisted the staff with

other injured persons.    I then returned to the ground at approximately

5.30pm (1730).

At 7.00pm (1900) that same date I returned to the Northern General

Hospital in company with PC2662 SHIEL and there attended at the

hospital mortuary where we labelled 11 bodies prior to their removal

to Hillsborough Football Ground.    I then travelled to Hillsborough

with the body of the deceased Philip HAMMDND.

Upon arrival at Hillsborough I conpleted the form GEN 18 (Sudden

death report)    as far as possible at that time and awaited arrival of

the relatives of the deceased for formal identification.

At 3.45am (0345) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) I saw the

deceased's Uncle Brian HAMMOND of                                 in the

gymnasium at Hillsborough Football Ground when he identified to me the

bocy as being that of Phillip HAMM3ND 13 yrs b o m 8.12.75 (08121975)

of                                          The details of the form

GEN 18 were then conpleted.

At 5.00am (0500) that same date I attended at the Medico Legal Centre,

Sheffield with the body of Phillip HAMMOND where I handed the body

over to the reception team at the Medico Legal Centre at 5.30am

(0530) that same date.
        TAYLOR            STEPHEN


                                         S TAYLOR SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   030589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

    NAME:         ANDREW   JAMES
                  SHIEL

ADDRESS:


Affi / DATE OF BIRTH:

    OCCUPATION:   POL PC2662


    Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
    by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
    it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
    prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
    to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATED: 250689                                              A J SHIEL (SIGNED)



            I em a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, stationed at

            Rotherham.

            At 8 am (0800), Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I paraded at Main

            Street Police Station to commence duty in connection with the

            Hillsborough Football Match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

            Football Clubs.

            Transport was provided to the ground and I was there assigned to

            Serial 39 which was deployed to Halifax Road to await the arrival of

            the Liverpool coaches and the supporters.    The Officers in charge of
A           the Serial were Inspector MEEK and Sergeant DOYLE.

            At 10 am (1000) we were briefed regarding the Policing of the football

            event by various Senior Officers in the North Stand of the ground.

            After this briefing, Inspector MEEK gave a shorter account of Serial

            39 and 40's duties for the day.   We then made our way to Claywheels

            Lane to await the arrival of the first Liverpool coach.    Frcm

            Clsywheels Lane we were re-deployed to Halifax Road.    There we were

            deployed in pairs, myself working with PC 1927 TAYLOR in the area

            opposite the Mobil garage on Halifax Road.    It was the intention to
SHIEL                  ANDREW   JAMES                                      2


ensure that the football supporters had no articles which could be

used as a weapon or cause danger, be taken into the ground and that

any alcohol be left on the coaches.

the coaches were parked on Halifax Road facing away frcm the ground,

the first being parked the furthest away.    As the coaches were being

parked at my location random searches were made of the alighting

supporters.   As further coaches arrived, we made our way dcwn Halifax

Road, keeping with the last coach to arrive.    On the arrival of one

coach near to the Working Men's Club on Halifax Road, it was noticed

that fuel was leaking frcm the vehicle and therefore the fire bridge

were requested.   Myself and PC TAYLOR remained with the coach until

the fire bridge had arrived and made the coach safe.

We then walked down Halifax Road towards Claywheels Lane and as we did

so I noticed large numbers of alcohol cans, empty glasses on the

pavement and the wall tops.     Hie supporters I had seen I did notice

thet a large number of them had been drinking and were in very high

spirits.

As we reached Claywheels Lane we again joined Serial 39, the intention

to walk onto the Police garage, but due to a radio message frcm ground

control I was instructed with other Officers by Sergeant DOYLE that we

were required to attend at the Leppings Lane stand of the ground,

although I was not aware of the reason.     We attended at that location

irmediately where we joined a number of other Officers outside the

grcund.

I then entered the ground via the West Stand entrance together with PC

TAYLOR where I saw a large number of fans leaving the West Stand

Terrace by the central tunnel joining other fans who were milling

around in that area.    A number of people were laid on the ground

obviously injured, being tendered to by Police Officers and fans
SHIEL                ANDREW    JAMES                                       3


alike.   Some of the fans were abusive towards myself and other

Officers, whilst others were distressed and upset.

I followed PC TAYLOR into the central tunnel where he picked up a

young boy aged approximately 14 years who appeared seriously injured.

PC TAYLOR made his way back out of the tunnel but due to the mass of

people I had to assist him in clearing a way through onto Leppings

Lane where he was placed in the rear of a South Yorkshire ambulance

where attempts were made to revive the boy with the assistance

of an ambulance woman.    It was necessary for the boy to have oxygen

and I fetched a oxygen revival kit frcm the Fire Service personnel

located nearby.   Hie oxygen supplied with the equipment in the

ambulance was already in use inside the stadium.     The ambulance wcman

was then relieved by an ambulance man who was in fact a member of the

crew assigned to that vehicle. Due to the seriousness of the boy's

injuries, it was necessary for me to convey the boy to the Northern

General Hospital due to the fact that the driver was engaged in

resuscitation of other fans.    PC TAYLOR and the ambulance crew

merrber remained in the rear attempting to revive the boy.   With the

aic of another Officer, who was aware of the location of the Hospital,

we transported the boy to the Accident and Emergency Department,

where the boy was admitted.

I then returned to the ground with the ambulance man whilst PC TAYLOR

retrained with the boy.   I attended immediately at the Leppings Lane

ene of the ground where I saw the ambulance driver. On his

instructions, three more casualties were placed in the rear of the

ambulance which I conveyed to the Northern General Hospital whilst the

ambulance crew administered first aid in the rear.     On this journey

and subsequent ones, I had a Police motorcycle escort to and frcm the

hospital.   I made a total of three journeys to and frcm the hospital,
SHIEL                   ANDREW   JAMES                                        4


conveying approximately seven people from the Leppings Lane end of the

ground. Frcm the second journey onwards, the route to and frcm the

Hospital was manned by Police Officers at all the junctions in order

to allow a free passage to the location, ensuring the quickest

travelling time.

During the time I was driving the ambulance I was aware of a large

nutrber of fans standing in the roadway of Leppings Lane and walking

away frcm the ground.    They were oblivious to any traffic and even

though the emergency blue lights were illuminated and the sirens were

on, the fans did not appear to show any concern for their own safety

or the urgency at which the ambulance was being used for.     They were

reluctant to move off the road way until the last possible moment,

resulting in me having to slow down in order to avoid them.

Once I was relieved of this duty, I attended in the area of the West

Stend where I was with other Officers instructed to form a cordon near

to the perimeter of the stadium in order to prevent the fans and

public from seeing or interfering with the deceased.   Whilst stood

there the fans shouted abuse and threats towards ourselves and other

Officers nearby.   Once the deceased fans had been moved I attended at

the North Stand where I rejoined my Serial and PC TAYLOR who had

returned from the hospital.

After a short briefing by Senior Officers, I returned to the Northern

General Hospital where I attended at the Mortuary where I labelled

eleven of the deceased with the details available at the hospital.        I

returned to Hillsborough Football Stadium with the body of Arthur

HOFROCKS, 42 years, b o m 19011948 of ______________________________

by ambulance.   He was placed in the gymnasium area which had been

utilised as a mortuary area prior to identification by the

brother of the deceased Malcolm HORROCKS,
r
               SHIEL               ANDREW   JAMES                                     5


                                       On completion of the identification the

               deceased was conveyed by ambulance to the Medico legal Centre,

               Sheffield, where he was handed to the reception staff at the centre.

               At 1.30 am (0130), Sunday 16 April 1989 (160489), I paraded off duty

               at Main Street Police Station.

               I cannot describe the persons whom I conveyed by ambulance to the

               Northern General Hospital and I am unable to recollect to whom the

               person, Arthur HORROCKS was handed at the Medico Legal Centre.



                                                            A J SHIEL PC2662 SIGNED
    #
        STATEMENT TAKEN
                  FLACE:

                  TIME:           DATE:

        WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

        OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                          32
                                                                           STATION

NAME:          ANDREW     JAMES
                SHIEL

ADDRESS:       S YORKSHIRE POLICE,
                ROTHERHAM PSTN, MAIN ST, ROTHERHAM.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:       \
OCCUPATION:        POL PC266


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040789                                                S. J. SHIEL (SIGNED)



           At 0800 hrs Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489) I paraded at my regular

           Station to commence duty in connection with the Hillsborough football

           send, final between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool.    I was assigned to

           Serial 39, the Supervisory Officers being Inspector Meek & Sgt

           Doyle.     I was working with a PC1927 Taylor.



           Our basic duty was to await the arrival of coaches and check the

           supporters in Halifax Rd.        During the course of our duty, Idonot

           recollect the time but it        was somewhere in the region of 1430hrs, PC

           Taylor and myself were delayed with a coach that was leaking fuel, our

           own serial had carried on with the other coaches as they arrived.



           We remained with that coach until the Fire Brigade arrived and took

           over.     PC Taylor and myself then made our way down Halifax Rd towards

           Cleywheels Ln, as we did so I noticed large numbers of alcohol cans

           empty glasses on the pavement and the wall tops.     The supporters I had

           seen, I noticed that a large number of them had been drinking and were

           in high spirits.
SHIEL                 ANDREW   JAMES                                       2




At Claywheels Ln we again joined serial 39   and as a result of a radio

message I along with other officers were instructed to attend Leppings

Ln stand of the ground.   I was not aware of the reason and again I do

not recollect the time but it was in the region of 1500 hrs.    PC

Taylor and myself entered the ground via Gate C and made our way

towards the West stand.   There were an awful lot of fans coming frcm

the direction of the tunnel, and also a lot of fans in the concourse

area.   I saw that there were a lot of people 'obviously distressed and

pecpie in various positions on the ground being attended to.



I vas still totally unaware what was going on.   I continued to walk

towards the tunnel, PC Taylor was just ahead of me and arrived at the

tunnel before me, just as I approached the tunnel I saw that   PC

Taylor was carrying a small boy of approximately 14 yrs.   This youth

has since been identified as Philip Hammond 13 yrs,

                      Deceased).



It was quite apparent that this young boy was seriously injured due to

the mass of people in this area I assisted PC Taylor to carry the

youth and to try to make a free passageway to walk into Leppings Ln

where we then placed him into the rear of a S Yorkshire Ambulance,

here attempts were made to revive the youth by PC Taylor and an

ambulance woman who had come to assist us from another ambulance, as

the crew of the one we were in were not available.    It was necessary

to administer oxygen to this youth, so I left the ambulance and

obtained an oxygen revival kit frcm nearby Fire Service personnel.     A

shcrt time later the ambulaneewoman,   I am not able to identify her at

all was relieved by the actual crew member of the ambulance we were in.
SHIEL                   ANDREW    JAMES                                       3




Due to the seriousness of the youth's condition it was necessary that

he received hospital treatment.       The driver of this ambulance was

encaged in resuscitating another fan and therefore I took upon myself

to drive the ambulance myself whilst the other half of the ambulance

crew remained in the rear of the ambulance with PC Taylor.       I was not

awere of the location of the Northern General Hospital and therefore

picked up another Officer near to Penistone Rd and the Spion Rep end,

I have no idea who this Officer was.       On arrival at the Northern

General Hospital we transported the youth to the Accident and

EJmergency department, where he was admitted.      PC Taylor remained with

the youth and I returned to the ground with the ambulance man.          I

cannot identify him either and the officer that had assisted with the

directions.     I returned to the Leppings Ln end of the ground I have no

recollection of time whatsoever I completely lost track of it

altogether. I joined the driver of the ambulance I was in at the

entrance to Gate C, almost inmediately three more casualties were

placed in the rear of the ambulance.       I do not know the exact location

these casualties were brought frcm or who by and I cannot honestly say

whether or not they were all male or a mixture of female casualties.



When all three casualties were on board I again drove the ambulance to

the Northern General Hospital, whilst the crew administered first aid

in the rear of the ambulance.       The crew were belonging to that

particular ambulance only the driver did not accompany us on the first

occasion.     These three casualties were also admitted to the accident

and emergency department.        After this all three of us returned to the

sane location and again three more casualties were placed in the rear

of my ambulance, again my only participation here was driving the
SHIEL                  ANDREW   JAMES                                     4


ambulance.    I made the trip back to the Northern General with the same

crew manbers and the same procedure was carried out in relation to the

casualties and again all three of us returned to the ground.    I then

left the ambulance with the crew manbers.    I saw that Officers were

forming a cordon near to the perimeter of the stadium between Gate A

and the canal in order to prevent the fans and the public frcm seeing

or interferring with any deceased person.   Whilst forming part of this

cordon we suffered verbal abuse frcm the fans and threats towards

ourselves and other officers.



Once the area had been cleared of deceased persons, I recollect

scitseone, but I don't know who saying that we were to go to the North

Stand.   I followed the instruction it was here that I rejoined my

serial and I saw that PC Taylor had returned frcm the hospital.      I

still have no recollection of any time.



Whilst in the North Stand there was a short briefing frcm Senior

Officers.    After this briefing PC Taylor and myself had a word with

Insp Meek & Sgt Doyle re the youth Philip Harrmond at the Northern

General Hospital.    We were then told by than to go to the gymnasium to

inform whoever was there what we had done that afternoon in relation

to any bodies.



On arrival at the gymnasium we saw a DI Charles who was frcm Rotherham

CID, as we knew him personally we went to speak to him.    I spoke to

him and told him that there was a youth at the hospital.   As a result

of this conversation we were instructed to attend the hospital,     we

were told by DI Charles that there were other bodies at the hospital

and that he was aware of a Casualty Bureau in existence.
SHIEL                 ANDREW   JAMES                                       5




We equipped ourselves with labels and made our way to the Accident and

Emergency department of the Northern General Hospital, to deal with

Philip Hammond and other bodies present.    On arrival at the said

department we were met by a Policewoman Sgt and a Policewoman, they

were dealing with Casualty Bureau forms and I assumed they were

trained as such.   I cannot identify the officers at all.



All four of us were directed to the mortuary where we joined the

mortuary staff.    I think there were about four or five staff present.

As it appeared to me the Policewoman Sergeant had a record of people

in the form of a Casualty Bureau book who had been brought to the

hospital frcm the Hillsborough ground.     The system that we undertook

then was to take a body from the fridge each individual body had what

I believe to be a white hospital record card on their chest, with

personal belongings if any. As I recall seme of the bodies were

clothed.   The white card contained a number which started with the

letters NG which I interpreted as Northern General followed by a

nunber, this was married up with the details contained in the Casualty

Bureau book, as it did in everyone of the 11 bodies that we dealt

with.   As each one was married up with corresponding details myself

anc PC Taylor worked together checking the details on the white

cards he would hand me a label, I would then write the NG Number on

 the label and tie it to the large toe of the deceased.     As each body

 was labelled they were then put into an ambulance and as far as I am

 awere I was under the impression that a Police Officer would accompany

 the body back to the gymnasium at Hillsborough.    We conducted the same

 system for all the eleven bodies including that of Philip Hammond.
SHIEL                 ANDREW   JAMES                                       6


The two remaining bodies was that of Hammond and one I now know as

Arthur Horrocks.   In view of the fact that PC Taylor had been with

Hanrmond throughout he accompanied him to the gymnasium and I in turn

treveiled with Horrocks.   On arrival at the gymnasium there were a

nunber of bodies all lined up on the floor, as the body was laid down

it weis given the next consecutive number this being 92, being

allocated to Horrocks and Hammond being 93.    I completed a Form Gen

18, which is Sudden Death report as far as possible.      I also put the

No 92 on the same label as the NG Humber so that they would correspond

and I also put that same No on         the   sudden death report.

I then went to another part    of      the   gymnasium to wait until suchtime

that we were required for any identification of our bodies.



Later, possibly early hours of         the   morning, I do not recall thetime,

but I may well have written it         on the Gen 18, I   was introduced to a

Malcolm Horrocks of                                , who identified the

bocy of Arthur Horrocks to me as that of his brother, his home address

being



I completed the Gen 18 with the personal details of the deceased and

the brother.   I then accompanied the body which was transported by

ambulance to the Medico Legal Centre, here the body was handed over to

the staff and I in turn identified the body to a DC Weigold of West

Bar Pstn, again I have no recollection of time.



At 0130 16.5.89 (160589) I paraded off duty at my cwn parade station.



I v-ould like to add that I am confident that I labelled eleven bodies

at the mortuary of the Northern General Hospital, one of these eleven
          SHIEL                 ANDREW   JAMES                                    7


          was a female.   As far as I am aware each body was accompanied by a

          Police Officer back to the gymnasium, I am not aware of any body being

          unaccompanied during this procedure of transportation.



          The only consecutive police number I entered on a label was the one

          appertaining to my own body Horrocks, as far as I am aware the others

         would have been done by the Officers assigned to individual bodies.




                                                            A. J. SHIEL SIGNED

S-lATEMENT t a k e n
           FLACE:

            TIME:            DATE:    040789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:      GERALDINE E EVANS POL W PC1540

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        GERALDINE E EVANS
                                                                       STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: AMBO OFFICER LONGLEY



           1.     I am employed as a qualified ambulancewcman for SYMAS.

           2.     My date of birth is

           3.     On 15th April (150489) I was on duty from 0900 to 1730.

                  On the previous two days I had been on duty from 0800

                  to 1630.   On 15th April (150489) I was on duty with

                                   ~1 in vehicle with the call sign Sierra 407.

                                    weis driving and we were on out patient

                  duty on the way back to Longley Station, where we are

                  based, at about 1510.    Control called us and told us to

                  go to Hillsborough Leppings Lane end.    We were told to

                  try to contact police control at the ground.

                  We approached Leppings Lane from the North.     It had only

                  taken us about three minutes to get there.     There were

                  several police officers on horses and several on foot

                  around the ground.    I believe that we were the first

                  ambulance to arrive in this area.

                  I asked sane police officers whether we were needed and

                  they seemed surprised and were not aware that ambulances

                  had been requested.    We were directed into the service

                  road where a barrier of four or five movable metal

                  barriers were removed to let us in.

                  We stepped by the side of C gate.     I got out of the

                  ambulance through the rear doors. C gate was very
slightly open and I could see some movement behind it.

Suddenly C gate burst open and a group of people came

towards me carrying a young man with a chest injury.

He was put into the ambulance.     Three other people

(who were not injured) got in with him.     They may all

have been relatives and I certainly understood that one

of them was his brother.     A girl also got onto the

ambulance with an arm injury.     I turned to go to close

the doors and saw three people lying on the roadway at

the rear of the ambulance.     I do not know how they got

there.    They were not breathing and I told 1

             to take our two casualties off the vehicle

because the other three clearly required more urgent

attention.    As I was getting off the ambulance two

other ambulances pulled up behind us.                   got

off one of them and ran up to ask how he could help.

I told him he would have to take one of the three

casualties which were lying on the ground.

and his partner placed one of the three on a stretcher

and I ran round to the rear of their ambulance to open

the doors for them.     By this time there were people

everywhere and when I got to the rear of

ambulance there was already a person lying on the cot

in the ambulance with a policeman in attendance.

This patient was not breathing.     I cleared the patient's

airway with the assistance of the policeman by

manipulating the patient. I then saw a fireman coming

across with resuscitation equipment which I started to

use.     I then left the fireman and the policeman giving
M3FFATT                JANE                                                3


          oxygen to this patient.

8.        I returned to my own vehicle to find that             had

          cleared the original casualties (which had clearly not

          been serious) from the ambulance.    There was now,

          however, a teenager in one cot who was having severe

          breathing difficulties and was semi-conscious and

          there was a child of about 10 or 11 years old in the

          other cot.    There were also two policemen on board.

          The two patients who had been lying on the ground

          were no longer there.

9.        I gave the older casualty oxygen and we put him onto

          his side.    I told the policeman to monitor him and then

          turned to the other patient whom I tried to resuscitate

          using a Brook airway.

10.       I stayed in the rear of the ambulance whilst we drove to

          the Northern General Hospital.     I assume that we drove

          along the service road to get to Penistone Road.

 11.      When we got to Northern General we arrived at the casualty

          entrance where they were clearly expecting ambulances.

          Staff came out to meet us and there was one ambulance crew

          stood by who assisted.     They took our patients in and then

          brought our cots back.     We cleaned the cots and loaded them

          back onto the ambulance.

 12.              radioed green at Northern General and he told me that

          we had been instructed to take a medical team down to

           Hillsborough from Northern General.    We waited for less than

           five minutes for the medical team and we also took back one

           of the policemen who had previously accompanied us to the

           hospital.    There were two or three members in the medical




                                                                               42
      team and they had 6 or 8 orange stacking boxes of equipment

      with them.

13.   We drove back to the ground and arrived at the Penistone

      Road entrance.   We reversed into the yard and the doctors

      jumped out.   I handed them sane of the boxes and then took

      two boxes myself and got out of the ambulance.     By the time

      I had got out the doctors had gone and I did not know where

      they were but I was directed by a steward towards the

      gymnasium.    I went to the gymnasium and put the two boxes

      down in the middle of the gym floor.    There seemed to be

      about 30 dead and injured in the gymnasium at this time.

      I was then told, possibly by          |, that our ambulance was

      wanted on the pitch.     I went back to the ambulance and there

      was a steward in front of the ambulance with             Before

      we drove onto the pitch I gave Mr HIGGINS sane boxes which

      had been left in the ambulance and asked him to take these

      to the gym.   We drove onto the pitch to a position where

      there were two people attending a patient. These two people

      were clearly either doctors or ambulancemen and I presumed

      that they had cone frcm the crowd.     They had intubated the

      patient and were using a bag and mask.     They were also doing

      cardiac massage.    I formed the impression that the steward

      had wanted our ambulance onto the pitch specifically to

      collect this patient.    We took our trolley off the ambulance

      and loaded the patient, together with two policemen and the

      two doctors/ambulancemen.    The bag and mask was then

      connected to an oxygen supply so that the patient was

      receiving pure oxygen.

14.          drove to Northern General with a police escort.       Hie
