30-2.JS
                                                 cc: Mr Ghilcot
                                                    Mr Boys.Smith
From;        J L
             F8
             Ext. 3314
             9 February 1990




Mr Hammond
Mr Addison                                   9
Mrs Reisz
Mrs Catto
Mr Cane
Miss Goose
Mr Cogbill




TAYLOR REPORT:     POLICE ISSUES



Mr Chilcot has asked me to co-ordinate the Police Department's
response to the final Taylor Report. As a first move I have
prepared the attached draft letter for Mr Boys Smith's
signature to go to Mr Anderton in his capacity as Chairman of



to |
forward
February.


2. 'Mr Hammond, Miss Goose, and Mr Coctblll will note that
                            .4-> 4-4
with regard to the reconunendations  / *7 A
                                     (70-73)nn\ for some new
offences and penalties ■
              enalties the  draft is no more than a holding



concern is with recommendation 53 about charging.     Mrs Reisz
may wish to look at recommendation 48 about arrest procedures
although I have not thought it necessary to draw particular
attention to this in the draft. Mrs Catto1s main interest is
in recommendation 52 for training senior officers. Mr Cane I
have assumed would have the main interest in recommendations
54-58 dealing with communications and, in particular, a
dedicated command channel.   However, if this matter would be
more properly handled by someone else perhaps he could let me
know.


3.   For ease of reference I attach a copy of the Taylor final
recommendations and one of the schedule placed in the Library
of the House setting out the Government's response to them.


4.   I have built into the draft letter to Mr Anderton an
indication that we shall be wanting to monitor the police
response:   the draft suggests a meeting, perhaps around
Easter, when Mr Boys Smith and I and those of you who wish
might meet with ACPO and review progress.


5.   If it is more convenient for you to make any comments on
the draft by telephone to me this will, of course, suffice.




                         J. L, GODDARD

                         J L GODDARD
