CHAPTER 5


Other matters of concern to the victims’ families


1.    As an important part of my scrutiny I visited Liverpool in early October to
      meet the families of victims of the disaster and listen to the matters which
      concerned them. I held an open session to which I invited all the families of
      those who died, and I was pleased that many were able to attend. I then held
      sixteen private meetings with families who had asked for them. I had two
      other meetings with family members later, at the scrutiny office in London.

2.    Many of the relatives of victims whom I saw during these meetings raised
      questions to do with the video and medical evidence about the disaster, which
      I have discussed in Chapters 2 and 3 of this report. But both in my
      discussions with them and in writing victims’ families have made other
      allegations as well. To summarise them briefly, they are

              there were inconsistencies between the way in which the police
              summarised the facts about each individual death at the ‘mini­
              inquests’ and evidence about what actually happened to that person;

              the Coroner was biased;

              Liverpool supporters were treated unfavourably and in a hostile
              manner when they gave evidence at the inquest;

               South Yorkshire Police have failed to give families documents to
               which they are entitled;

               victims were confirmed as being dead on the basis of cursory
               examination;

               the West Midlands Police investigation team was biased in favour of
               South Yorkshire Police;

               South Yorkshire Police have never apologised for the disaster.

3.     I consider these points in this Chapter.


Inconsistencies in the evidence about individual deaths

4.     One of the most common complaints which families had was that they had
       not been able to find out precisely when and where their relations died, in
       some cases because the evidence was very sparse and in others because it
was said that the evidence was conflicting, or did not support the summary
given about their relative at the mini-inquest. I fully understand the families’
anxiety to know all the facts as far as possible. But it is only right to point
out that the West Midlands Police were faced with a massive task in
collecting the evidence, seeking to identify individual deceased from
photographic evidence, and reconciling, in so far as it was possible, the
inevitable conflicts of evidence.

Inspector Layton of the West Midlands Police described how they had set
about this task on the first day of the mini-inquest (18th April 1990,
transcript pages 37-47). He said

        “Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have attempted to
       identify each person’s position at the ground, where possible, before
       and after their deaths. The search fo r such information has been
        exhaustive, but the degree o f success in achieving an accurate picture
       fo r each individual does vary greatly. In some cases the information
        obtained has been very limited and in some instances it has not been
       possible to confirm with any degree o f certainty some o f the
        identifications made. ”

Mr Layton then described the photographic source material. There were 71
hours of video, from police, club and BBC. There were about 600 colour
still photographs taken by the police for normal intelligence gathering
purposes and a further 1800 photographs from Press, freelance agencies and
the public. Much of the photographic material is timed (i.e. the time at
which it was taken, down to the minute or the second, appears on the print).

West Midlands Police investigators showed this material to over 300 South
Yorkshire Police Officers, 10 officers from other forces, 21 members of the
South Yorkshire Fire Service, 19 members of SYMAS, and 169 spectators
and other civilian witnesses who said that they had had some involvement
with people who had died.

Initially, the police had been reluctant to involve the families in the
identification process, because of the distressing nature of the photographic
material. However, following consultation with the Social Services and the
families themselves the policy was changed. Eighty families wished to see
the evidence and take part in the identification, and were able to do so.

Altogether West Midlands Police interviewed over 600 people, with each
interview lasting a minimum of 2 hours.

The possible misidentification of pictures and other evidence about those
who died was a problem. Inspector Layton told the Inquest:

        “I should point out that on a small number o f occasions it has
        subsequently transpired that both police and civilian witnesses have
       made mistaken identifications. Although I would again stress they
       were made at the time with the genuine belief that they were correct. ”

West Midlands Police created a file, known as a ‘body file’, for each of the
people who died. These files contain the following material:

       i)     a single-page summary report, prepared by the West Midlands
       Police, setting out the name of the person, where he or she died, and
       other formal details;

       ii)    an analysis or summary of the witnesses, tracing the
       movements of the deceased from the time they left home on the day
       of the match right up to the autopsy, also containing details of visual
       evidence and the blood ethanol analysis;

       iii)   statements of witnesses, referred to in the analysis. In many
       cases these statements dealt with other matters and contain only a
       short passage about the person who is the subject of the file;

       iv)    visual evidence (photographs and video stills) taken from the
       sources I have mentioned, together with plans identifying so far as
       possible where the deceased was last seen alive, and where he or she
       was found apparently dead, together with supporting photographs;
       and

       v)    A continuity chart, showing what happened to the individual
       hour by hour during the day.

A police officer presented a summary of the evidence, based on this
material, at the mini-inquest on each of the victims. The summaries would
often include excerpts from the witnesses statements. The summaries were
prepared in advance and sent to the solicitors for the families so that they
could be checked for errors and corrected if need be, though the supporting
material was not then made available.

The Coroner made it clear that if from time to time it became apparent that
corrections had to be made, they would be made at a later stage. This
happened in some instances.

Before the main Inquest began the Coroner told the lawyers for the families
that he would consider questions they had about the facts which had come
out at the mini-inquests sympathetically, so that the Inquest dealt properly
with inaccuracies or omissions in the evidence about what had happened to
individuals. He invited the solicitors for the Hillsborough Steering Group,
who represented the families, to submit the questions they wished to raise
(transcript of business meeting, 30 October 1990, p .13).
15.   There followed considerable correspondence between the solicitors and the
      Coroner, lasting from November 1990 until the main inquest began in
      March 1991. Some of the questions the families’ lawyers had about the
      precise facts of particular deaths were dealt with in correspondence or not
      persisted in. In other cases the Coroner agreed to call witnesses requested
      by the families to deal further with the questions where and when their
      relatives had died. Paul Taylor - whom I mentioned in the last Chapter - is
      an example of such a witness. He gave evidence about Victoria Hicks.

16.   In other cases it would seem the Coroner considered that the problem could
       be taken no further. It seems to me that he did his best to resolve the
       queries that were being put to him.

17.   The Divisional Court upheld the Coroner’s decision to conduct the mini­
       inquests in the way he did. Equally in my opinion, even if there were
       inconsistencies in the evidence and discrepancies between the summary and
       the supporting evidence, that cannot affect the Coroner’s decision about the
       3.15 cut-off time or the verdicts of accidental deaths.

18.   I did my best to point this out to those families who raised these points when
       I met them. But I appreciated that this was a matter of great concern to
       them and said I would do my best to resolve the inconsistencies or
       discrepancies which they pointed out to me (although I very much doubt
       whether this was within my terms of reference).

19.   Some of the relatives I spoke to did tell me the nature of the inconsistency or
      discrepancy which concerned them, for example in the cases of Kevin
      Williams and Philip Hammond. Other people told me that they could not
      specify the problem at that stage, either because they had not received copies
      of the body file from the police or had not had it long enough to deal with
      the points. I urged those families who had not yet sought copies of the body
      files to do so without delay.

20.   I am afraid that I have not been able to resolve relatives’ concerns about
       conflicts of evidence in every case. It seems to me that that is inevitable
       given the nature of the problem. What is clear, however, is that no
       further inquiry involving examination of the witnesses could be of any help.
       No one is likely now to have a recollection beyond what was written in their
       statements at the time and if they did, it would be likely to be suspect after
       eight and a half years.

21.    However I deal as best I can with individual cases in Appendix 9.


Bias and conflict of interest on the part of the Coroner

22.   The Divisional Court was specifically asked to consider whether the Coroner
      was biased or had a conflict of interest. It found that he did not and I have
      seen no reason to disagree with that assessment. A criticism that the
      Coroner visited the ground with the jury is not correct.


Hostile treatment of Liverpool supporters at the Inquests.

23.   The allegation has been made to me during my scrutiny - but without any
      particular examples being cited - that Liverpool supporters who gave
      evidence at the Inquest were given a difficult time. I have read most of the
      supporters’ evidence.

24.   I can find only two possible examples of cross-examination which might fall
       into this category. In one case Counsel tended to ask repetitive questions
       and was stopped by the Coroner. The second case is of a witness who said
      that he and two friends had been drinking and pushed their way from the
      back of pen 3 (in his statement he used the word ‘forced’) to the front and
      through the gate onto the pitch, ignoring appeals not to push and regardless
       of the plight of others. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that the
       cross-examination was less than sympathetic.

25.   In view of the criticisms that have been made of the Coroner on this score I
       should record that on 30 April 1991 Miss Steele, the solicitor acting for the
       Hillsborough Steering Committee wrote to him thanking him on behalf of
       the Committee and their clients for his kindness. She said “the care and
       sensitivity and in particular the arrangements made for the families at the
       individual Inquests was very much appreciated both by them and us” . She
       also said that the families’ lawyers concerned appreciated his unfailing
       courtesy, consideration and ready response to problems that they raised.


Police failure to let families have documents

26.   One of the complaints which families have made particularly strongly to me
       is that they have been unable to obtain copies of relevant documents from
      the South Yorkshire Police. It may help if I set out the background to this
      complaint.

27.    South Yorkshire Police have an extensive archive of material about the
       Hillsborough disaster. There is a substantial storeroom full of investigation
       files, statements, photographs, videotapes and computer records. They have
       given me and my team unrestricted access to their archive for work on this
       scrutiny. It contains two types of material. First, there are the ‘body files’, of
       which there is one for each individual who died in the disaster.

28.    I have described the content of these files in paragraph 12 of this Chapter. The
        police keep these on behalf of the (current) Coroner for South Yorkshire, and
        access to them is at his discretion. There is a right of access to some of the
material in them under Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984, which so far as
relevant reads

        ‘A coroner shall, on application and on payment o f the prescribed fee
       (if any), supply to any person who, in the opinion o f the coroner, is a
       properly interested person a copy o f any report o f a post-mortem
       examination ...o r special examination, or o f any notes o f evidence, or
       o f any document put in evidence at an inquest ...

       A coroner may, on application and without charge, permit any ...
       properly interested person to inspect such report, notes o f evidence, or
       document

The approach which the South Yorkshire Police have told me they adopt, with
the consent of the Coroner, to requests from relatives for material from the
body files is to send copies of all of it to them, uncut and without charge, so
long as it is not material which they have sent to the relative before.

The rest of the material in the archive is not covered by the Coroners Rules
and access to it is at the discretion of the police. It includes all the statements
taken both during the investigation by West Midlands Police and by South
Yorkshire Police themselves (including, in the case of amended ‘recollections’
and statements by South Yorkshire police officers, both the original and final
versions) and other material such as videotapes, photographs, and the West
Midlands Police report of their investigation to the Director of Public
Prosecutions. Some of the statements and photographs, and stills from the
videotapes, are included in the body files.

South Yorkshire Police told me that they send relatives copies (free of charge)
of material falling into this second group which they say they would like to
see. There are however some exceptions to this. The most important ones are
that they do not send out copies of statements which are not contained in, or
referred to, in the body files unless the person who made the statement agrees
that it should be released (or has since died) and that they will only send
photographs or video stills showing a dead body to someone who is a relation
of that person. This means that they will sometimes trim the print which they
send to relatives of a photograph which contains a picture of more than one
dead body. I think this is a reasonable step for them to take, since sending out
a picture uncut would mean that a picture of other bodies shown on it would
go to somebody who was not a relative of those people.

Some of the families I met said that they could not be sure that the police had
supplied them with all the information from the body files. Others assumed
that they had not done so. I was anxious from the outset of my scrutiny that
families who wished to do so should be able to see the material in these files,
and from what I have seen of the way the South Yorkshire Police have dealt
with families’ requests I would surprised if these criticisms were true.
33.   Nevertheless I invited those families who said they had not received all the
      material in their relative’s file, or that they might not have had it all, to let me
      know what they had so that I could check and see what was missing. Two
      families did so. I checked the relevant files and I am satisfied that nothing of
      significance was omitted.

34.   Quite apart from any of this, witness statements by people who gave evidence
      at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry were made available at that time to the legal
      representatives of the parties, including the families. Transcripts of the
      evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the main Inquest are in the public
      domain and have been available to the families at all material times.


Confirmation of Death

35.   Some of the families whom I met said that they did not think that their
      relatives were necessarily dead when they were examined at the ground by
      doctors who confirmed to the police that they were so. They said that the
      doctors’ examination was cursory and that mistakes might have been made.

36.   This very serious criticism was in particular made of a Dr Bull, who
      examined 20 people and stated that they were dead between approximately
      3.50 p.m. and 4.20 p.m. (Dr Bull’s statement gives a time of 4.15, but this
      seems to be wrong because the timing of his last examination was 4.20
      according to the police officer who had been placed in charge of the body
      concerned). Relatives have told me that proper examinations could not
      have been conducted in this time.

37.   No expert medical evidence has been tendered to me to support this
      criticism. Nevertheless I thought it right to interview Dr Bull. He told me
      that the times in his statement were an approximation based upon what the
      police told him. He did not look at his watch.

38.   He and a Dr Redgrave divided a certain group of casualties between them.
      These were all people whom the police, or ambulance staff, or other doctors
      had thought were dead and who had been placed in rows in a particular part
      of the Hillsborough gymnasium, which was being used as a casualty clearing
      station and temporary mortuary. Dr Bull said he looked for a pulse in the
      neck of each person and listened for heart and breath sounds. He had not
      brought a stethoscope with him, but he shared Dr Redgrave’s. This was
      possible because they were working in close proximity to each other.

39.    He also examined each person’s pupils for reaction to light. He did not have
       a torch, which he would normally use but in each case he closed the
       person’s eyelids and then opened them and looked for a reaction. The
       gymnasium had bright overhead lighting and he considered this was as good
       as looking with a torch. He felt under no pressure of time. The police had
       asked him to check and make sure of death. He said he had no doubt that he
       had done so correctly. In some cases when using the stethoscope to listen to
       heart sounds he could hear footsteps reverberating through the body, so he
       had to make sure, after these ceased, that there was no heart sound.

40.    Dr Bull did not complete any paperwork as he would have done in a normal
       case of certification of death, but told the police officer who was allocated
       responsibility for each body that the person was dead. At that stage the
       identity of most of the bodies was unknown. His recollection was that he
       looked at one line of bodies, that Dr Redgrave examined the adjacent line,
       and that having done so he checked Dr Redgrave’s cases and vice-versa. He
       did not leave the ground until 5.45 p.m.

41.    Dr Bull was at the match as a spectator and had gone onto the pitch to help
       when he saw that things were going wrong. He had administered first aid to
       a number of people before being asked by the police to go into the
       gymnasium. He had no connections with the police or with Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Club as some relatives have claimed to me.

42.    I have discussed what he told me with a senior Accident and Emergency
       consultant. I did not do this because I was in any doubt about what Dr Bull
       had said but because of the very grave nature of what was being alleged
       about him and the other doctors who unexpectedly had to carry out this
       difficult and demanding task on the day. The consultant confirmed to me
       that the procedures Dr Bull adopted were proper and reliable and I see no
       reason whatever to doubt that this was so.


West Midlands Police biased in favour of the South Yorkshire Police

43.    Chapter 4 deals with allegations that the West Midlands Police tried to
       distort evidence or bully witnesses in favour of the South Yorkshire Police.
       Even if there were signs, which in my view there are not, that individual
       officers exerted undue pressure in those cases, it does not support the
       contention that the West Midlands Police as a whole favoured the South
       Yorkshire Police.

44.    The other suggestions that were made to me on this score were wholly
       unsubstantiated. I see no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as
       to the impartiality of the West Midlands investigation which I cited in
       Chapter 4.


 No apology by the police

 45.    One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police
        had never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have
        discussed this with Mr Wells, who took office as Chief Constable in mid-
        1990. He drew my attention to a press release by his predecessor, Mr Peter
      Wright, issued on 4 August 1989, the publication day of Lord Taylor’s
      interim report. Mr Wright said

             7 accept the findings and the conclusions o f the Inquiry in so fa r as
             they relate to South Yorkshire Police. The fact that we are held to
             have contributed to the terrible tragedy o f Hillsborough is a matter o f
             profound sadness to all members o f the Force, and both personally
             and on their behalf I once again extend my heartfelt regret to those
             who have lost loved ones or suffered injury ’.

46.   Mr Wells said that he often uses the occasion of public speeches to express
      his and the Force’s regret. He gave me some examples (and there are many
      others).

47.   In a press release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:

              “I f there seems to be any sense o f relief in South Yorkshire Police
             today it should not be mistaken fo r celebration. I have the
             profoundest sense o f sorrow fo r the 95 deaths that occurred, any
              sense o f relief that we do feel is diminished by the desolation o f the
             families who lost loved ones. We have come to the end o f another
             phase o f the long, slow process o f understanding and healing. ”

48.   In a television interview on the same day there was the following exchange:

              Trevor Hicks: “I was gladdened when I heard his announcement
              earlier where fo r the first time publicly I have heard the Chief
              Constable publicly apologising and expressing regret to the families
                 tt




      The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf of
      the Force that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:

              “I would not have said it if it wasn’t true ... as I say, as a parent
              with all the feelings that I can muster, to M r Hicks and everybody
              else who has lost loved ones here, we are, not just the Chief
              Constable but all o f the officers involved are terribly sorry. It is an
              inexpressible grief to have to bear and I know words don't count fo r
              much but they are sincerely meant. ”

49.   In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:

              “I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could. I can only
              say sorry so much, but by God, we are sorry. ”

50.    In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:
             ‘The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure o f the
             police to order the closure o f the tunnel leading to the terracing as a
              “blunder o f the first magnitude”. South Yorkshire Police has
             consistently and unequivocally accepted the truth o f this finding. I
             repeat it now. How can anyone fairly describe this acceptance o f
             responsibility as evasion?

             Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord Justice
             Taylor concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the
             disaster - the layout o f the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion
             arising at the turnstiles, inadequate signing - were some . . . . I repeat
             that blame apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor has been accepted by
             South Yorkshire Police. ’

51.   Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ‘Hillsborough’ Mr
      Wells issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:

              “I am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families fo r
             the police’s part in the tragedy and I repeat that every time I have the
             opportunity. We were found wanting and have faced up to our
             responsibility fo r our role, but we were not the only ones who played
             a part in it and it is time fo r others, including the fans, to do the
             same and fo r the families to try to start building bridges. ”

52.   At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s
      Interim Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had
      been four main errors:

      i)     failing to delay the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at
              Leppings Lane;

      ii).   not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens
             were full by 2.50 p.m;

      iii)   not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was
              opened and not blocking off the tunnel - this was the critical mistake;
              and

      iv)    not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not
              reacting sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.

53.   But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor
      (see Chapter 1, paras 47 and 48) and that the police did not bear the sole
      responsibility for the disaster although he accepted that they took the largest
      share. This is in accordance with Lord Taylor’s findings and is reflected in
      the apportionment of liability reached in the settlement of civil proceedings.
I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police have
never apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.
