             HOME OFFICE
             Operational Policing Policy Unit
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171 273 3612 Fax 0171 273 2703


ProfPScraton                                                   Your reference:
Centre Director
Centre for Studies in Crime &                                  Our reference:     PW/97 110/2180/4
Social Justice
Edge Hill University College                                   Date:              2 July 1997
Ormskirk
Lancs L39 4QP



Dear Professor Scraton

I am writing further to your telephone conversation with my colleague Julia Dolby earlier today
about the forthcoming independent scrutiny into the Hillsborough disaster.

As you know, the scrutiny was announced in the House on 30 June by the Home Secretary. It
will be carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith whose terms of reference are:

         To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
         Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

         a) To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
         b) To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the purpose of
            discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
         c) To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary
            matters;

         And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
         such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
         Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
         their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should
         be taken in the public interest.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been asked to examine all the written and other evidence that
has been submitted. He will also consider any further material that interested parties wish to
submit to him; naturally, the exact proceedings of the scrutiny are matters for Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to decide. He will then advise the Home Secretary whether any evidence not
previously available is of such significance to justify a further full public inquiry, and the
Home Secretary has undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
gives him. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will also identify for the Attorney-General, the Director
of Public Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence that
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.

f:\oppH\coraplnts\corrcsp\mjw-01IS.doc
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith expects to start proceedings in September, and hopes to produce his
report by the end of the year. The Government hopes that this independent scrutiny will
finally bring to an end the uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.

I hope that the above information is helpful.

Yours sincerely



Mr M Ward




f:\apjju\coin jjtats\cormp\mjw-01l5.doc
