New evidence deposited in Liverpool

[It is not clear what is being referred to here.]

LJ Stuart-Smith found no new material evidence in his scrutiny. We are placing in the
House of Commons Library as much of the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as
possible.

Much of the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result
of the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. We are placing in the Library copies of material
which is not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish. It will
take some time to complete this work.

We are also in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


A Commons debate

Will you make time available for a debate?

I understand the strength of feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate these
issues. I know from an exchange between Ann Taylor (The President of the Council)
and Vernon Coaker that, although she is sympathetic to the request, it is unlikely that
Government time can be found in the near future.


Changes in inquest procedures

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the
findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report
provided the fullest possible examination of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.


What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
The altering of police evidence

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number of statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events of 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


Reform of police disciplinary procedures

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

I can well understand the frustration which is felt when an officer appears, in effect, to
escape disciplinary action by taking medical retirement. As I indicated in my
statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system.

I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its
recommendations closely. I will announce my response shortly.



 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Why is Hillsborough different to the sinking of the Derbyshire where the Deputy
Prime Minister has announced the re-opening of the inquiry?

Under the Merchant Shipping Act 1995, the Secretary of State is required to reopen a
formal inquiry if new and important evidence which could not be produced at the
original inquiry has been discovered. The Deputy Prime Minister announced the re­
opening of the formal inquiry into the sinking of the Derbyshire following a survey of
the wreck which provided 'new and important evidence’ about how the ship was lost.
It is now for the formal inquiry to come to a conclusion about why she foundered.

At Hillsborough, the disaster was the subject of an immediate and thorough public
inquiry by Lord Taylor which clearly identified the causes of the disaster. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny established that the evidence submitted to him did not add
anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the earlier Taylor
Inquiry.


What changes to the civil law on compensation are proposed?

Under present law a person who suffers a recognisable psychiatric illness as a result of
another’s death, injury or imperilment cannot recover damages for negligence unless
they satisfy three main requirments:

       that he or she had a close tie of love and affection with the person;

       that he or she was close to the accident in time and space; and

       that he or she directly perceived the accident rather than for example hearing
       about it from a third person.

Some of the relatives of those who died at Hillsborough saw the disaster unfold on
television. They were close to the disaster but did not perceive it with their unaided
senses and were unable to claim for their consequential psychiatric illness.

The Law Commission’s report 'Liability for Psychiatric Illness’ has proposed
removing some of the restrictions under the present law. The requirement for a close
tie to the person concerned would be retained, but restrictions based on closeness to
the accident and direct perception of it would be removed.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : INDEX OF BRIEFING

Chronology of events

GENERAL ISSUES

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

Will you make time available for a debate?

Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
comes to light?


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?


THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

What about the new evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

Why not order a fresh inquest?



 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy
of the emergency care provided to the victims?

What does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the inquests?

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

Inquests and disasters general

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the time of
the Hillsborough disaster?


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing
statements about the disaster?


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered before
being submitted as evidence?


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

Why haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

Is the Home Secretary aware o f complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?




:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishment?

Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?


BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 A pril 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 A pril 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 A pril 1989: West Midlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - min-inquests to identify each of the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991. PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.



:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FO R THE STATEMENT

GENERAL

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Yes. It was important that there should be an independent and thorough examination
of material which the families and others had brought to our attention, so that it could
be determined conclusively whether earlier proceedings should be re-opened.

I hope that everyone, including the families when they have had the chance to read the
report in full, will accept that these matters have been fully investigated and that there
is no further action which it is appropriate to take.


Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive
report sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his
conclusions, with which I agree.

It is, of course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there
can be no justification for calling it a whitewash.


Why was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire given the report before it was
published?

The Chief Constable is mentioned in the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny as the disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore
one of the parties to whom the report is directed.

It was entirely proper that the Chief Constable should be given the opportunity to
consider the report once it was submitted by LJ Stuart-Smith.


Will you make time available for a debate?

I understand the strength of feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate these
issues. I know from an exchange between Ann Taylor (The President of the Council)
and Vernon Coaker that, although she is sympathetic to the request, it is unlikely that
Government time can be found in the near future.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

The decision to establish a fresh inquiry into an incident such as Hillsborough or
Bloody Sunday cannot be taken lightly. It is only justified when there are grounds for
believing that the conclusions reached originally may be in doubt.

The Prime Minister made it clear that the weight of material now available about
Bloody Sunday is such that the events require re-examination.



Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration of the
causes of the disaster or the consideration of criminal or other proceedings. He was
also able to recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he has been able to carry out a thorough scrutiny of all the evidence
which was submitted by the families and others.



Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been aired publicly before.

What the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was
new, but also whether it was credible and of such significance that it would justify a
new inquiry, or some other action. This is what LJ Stuart-Smith has now reported on.


Why were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

West Midlands Police submitted a full report on their investigation of the
Hillsborough disaster to the DPP. The DPP announced in September 1990 that no-one
would be prosecuted.

The DPP took advice from two experienced Queen’s Counsel [one being the present
Lord Williams] and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to bring charges
against either Ch. Supt. Duckenfield or Supt Murray.

This was a decision for the DPP on the evidence available. LJ Stuart-Smith has found
no grounds to recommend that the DPP reconsiders this decision.


Will the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?


:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. It would be inappropriate for me to
speculate.

If pressed

If there is a private prosecution, the CPS could consider whether to intervene. The
options available to the CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it; or to
take it over and discontinue it.

If the CPS decided not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.


What form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the
evidence from the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police
records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many of the families
of the victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He
also had meetings with a number of other people who contacted him or who he felt
could help him with his scrutiny.

A list of those whom LJ Stuart-Smith met or received representations from is set out
in Appendix 1 of his report.


Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from
the start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he
made off-the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.


Why was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected judge from the Court of Appeal whose
experience has been invaluable in assessing the evidence presented. He has produced
a very comprehensive and detailed report and I am very grateful to him for looking at
these issues so carefully.


Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further
evidence comes to light?



 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
It is very difficult to imagine what material new evidence could emerge after the
exhaustive inquiries which have already taken place and the length of time which has
elapsed.

I cannot rule out the possibility that new evidence will come to light, in which case I
will consider it, but I am strongly of the view that we have investigated the material
events at Hillsborough as far as it is possible to do so.

LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered
which added anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor
Inquiry and the Inquests.


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He has concluded that
there is no new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry,
the Coroner or the other authorities investigating the disaster.

He has established that the 'm issing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is
taken from copies of the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes
were made available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal
representatives at the Inquest.

What about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft of two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s
Control Room on the day of the disaster, was investigated by the West Midlands
Police. They are still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures
from the club’s CCTV cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not
contain any significant material.

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?

LJ Stuart Smith has considered the evidence of the technician (Mr Houldsworth)
responsible for the club and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police
officers at the Inquest.

He has concluded that there is no evidence of the police blaming a faulty camera for
their failure to establish overcrowding.

In his report, LJ Stuart-Smith states 'The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s
evidence is new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to
submission 5. [That is to say that Mr Houldsworth could see from monitoring the
police cameras that the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of extra
spectators through Gate C would create a dangerous situation.] For the reasons I have
given I am unable to accept that his recollection of events is now accurate. Even if it


:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
was correct, it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply
have been the evidence of one more person who thought that the central pens were full
at 14.52.’




THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

What about the new evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in Appendix
5). His evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to that
(C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 21). Mr Edwards also gave a statement at the time
(Chapter 3, paragraph 34). His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith add little of substance to his previous account (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 40).
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that Mr Edwards’ criticisms of the ambulance
service are misplaced (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 100).

Why not order a fresh inquest?

That is a matter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to
hold a fresh inquest and to quash the original verdict. LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis
to impugn the accidental death verdict or for the Attorney-General to exercise his
powers.

Counsel for the Family Support Group stated '... it is accepted, eight years and a half
years after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests
to be convened.’ It was argued, though, that the Courts should be invited to quash the
verdict of accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect of quashing the verdict
without substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an
open verdict and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record
any other suggested conclusion. In practice, he says, there were two alternative
verdicts - unlawful killing or accidental death.

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function of a coroner’s inquest to determine questions of blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person of any civil remedy which otherwise
might be available. (As the Taylor report made clear, the main cause of the disaster
was the failure of control by the South Yorkshire Police.)


Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use of the cut-off point. It was never
suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm or that the


 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
medical evidence was to this effect. (C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 12 ). The jury heard
evidence about people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or who
regained consciousness after resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and
recovered (C h a p t e r 3 p a r a g r a p h s 5 8 , 5 9 a n d 6 0 ). Evidence that some people died
after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome of the inquest.

As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional
Court in 1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

The use of the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration of how the
victims died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all
those who died had suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause of
death. The use of the cut-off point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered
reasonable.


Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose of an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when
and where he or she came to their death. The response of the emergency services to
the disaster was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that
report.

The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively. In addition to oral written evidence
from many supporters and police officers, and many written statements, Taylor took
oral evidence from: four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy chief ambulance
officer from South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) who was in
charge at the ground; two other SYMAS officers who were at the ground; two senior
ambulance officers from headquarters control; five fire brigade officers; and five
doctors ( C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h s 79 - 84).

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence of lack of care on the part of
the emergency or medical services and that a further investigation of this aspect of the
disaster would be of little purpose.


What does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the
inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr
Stefan Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any
substance to criticisms about the conduct of the Inquest or to suggestions of bias on
the part of the Coroner.




Inquests and disasters


:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the
findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report
provided the fullest possible examination of the causes of the Hillsborough disaster.


What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect of a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families of those who died would have been spared some additional distress.




INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into
changing statements about the disaster?

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West
Midlands Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He
interviewed three witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable)
and Paul Taylor but concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to
affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number of statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events of 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority of cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada
drama “Hillsborough”?

LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each of the ten questions in appendix 10 of his report,
either by direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main
conclusion of the Taylor Inquiry about the failure of police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL



:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
Will the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

I made it clear when I announced the scrutiny that I would publish as much of the
evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.

Much of the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result
of the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. I am placing in the Library copies of material which
is not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish.

We are still in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


Why haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number of families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence of the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases
in appendix 9 of his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts of
evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I have decided
that it would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the
families concerned direct and not include them in the published report. I am sure that
the House will appreciate my reasons for doing so. If the families wish to make public
the material in appendix 9, that is, of course, a matter for them.


Is the Home Secretary aware of complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?

LJ Stuart-Smith addressed this complaint as part of his scrutiny. He invited any of the
families who felt that material had been withheld from them to contact him so that he
could investigate. Two families did so, but the Judge confirmed in both cases that
nothing of significance had been omitted by the police.

LJ Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he was given unrestricted access to the records
held by South Yorkshire Police.


WIDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system.



 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its
recommendations closely. I will announce my response shortly.


Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

There is the potential for the disciplinary process to be brought into disrepute by the
inappropriate use of medical retirement. I am considering the recommendations of the
Home Affairs Select Committee for tightening the discipline rules and I will respond
shortly.

The existing police pensions regulations provide for retirement to be held over until
discipline proceedings have been concluded, but where there is no prospect of an
officer recovering his health to face discipline proceedings it is right that he be
allowed to go.


Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
BACKGROUND


The Taylor Inquiry

• The terms of reference for the Inquiry were:

   To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
   1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
   sports events.

• 174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours of film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

  Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day of the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects of the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  Wednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up of supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring of
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number of causes of the disaster were identified:

   - The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
   - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
   - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
   - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
   - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
   - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
   - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

• The report was critical of the actions of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath of the disaster.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
• In the view of South Yorkshire Police, all of the ten “unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada programme were addressed at the time of the inquiry, with specific
  recommendations being made in respect of eight of them.

• In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
  considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could
  be safely used in the short term. A large number of those recommendations were to
  be carried out with immediate effect.

  Final Report

• The final report of the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range of
  measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

• The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment
  of all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect of
  the top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal of
  spikes and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

• Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number of
  spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
  Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
  be reviewed.

• The report recommended a written statement of intent be agreed between the club
  and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
  with particular reference to the filling of each pen.

• There were a number of recommendations relating specifically to the role of the
  police and the responsibilities of senior officers.

• The co-ordination of the emergency services and the provision of first aid, medical
  facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations of the final
  report.

• The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
  Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
  towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
  going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.    Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.    Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.    Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it
should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.       Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical
help?

10.     Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90049# 1
