From:        Paul Pugh                        cc: Juliet Wheldon
             Head of Operational Policing         Rick Evans
             Policy Unit                          Peter Edmundson
             Room 539                             Matthew Pyne
             Queen Anne’s Gate                    Sarah Clifford
             © 0171-273-3141
             3 February 1998

                                       f|2.
                                                      < ^ A -6 w ^ te* .w .   I Uk ^   ^
Tim Middleton


HILLSBOROUGH


I attach a first rough draft of a submission on Hillsborough. Comments welcome
please by close on T h u r s d a y , including an ABCU contribution covering the judge’s
general conclusions about the conduct of inquests after inquiries. Does the Home
Secretary need to clear with the Lord Chancellor what he might say on this point?

2.      The draft lacks the draft oral statement because I have not yet written it. I am
out of the office tomorrow, but back on Thursday.




                                       PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0555pddoc
From: Paul Pugh                    cc: Mr Michael *                     Mr R Evans
            Head of Operational         Mr O’Brien *                    Mr Edmundson
            Policing Policy Unit        MrHowarth *                     Mr Butler
            Room 529                    Lord Williams                   Ms Clifford
            Queen Anne’s Gate           MrOmand *                       Mr Warner *
            S 0171-273-3141             Mr Boys Smith                   Mr Owen *
            3 February 1998             Ms Wheldon
                                                                  ("with copies of the report)
                                        Mr Middleton


Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue


Publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and your response to that report.


Timing


2.         Pressing. We are looking at publication in the week beginning 16 February.
You need before then to confirm that the Attorney General and the DPP are content.


Summary


3.        The report is unequivocal that, in the Judge’s opinion, there is no basis for a
further public inquiry, a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest, or
reconsideration of previous decisions in relation to criminal or disciplinary
proceedings.


4.        There are two issues which give rise to questions about how matters have
been handled previously: the circumstances in which alterations were made to some
police officers’ statements; and technical evidence about the state of the terraces.
But in neither case does the Judge consider there are grounds for further
investigations or proceedings.



f:\oppu\houUongsub\pp0554pddoc
5.        My advice is that you should accept the main conclusions of the Judge’s
report, although there are some points on which you may want to take a slightly
different view to his.            We should as far as possible draw a line under the
Hillsborough disaster. It would be doing the families a disservice to hold out the
hope of further inquiries or investigation - although some of them will not see matters
like that. They will see this report as yet another betrayal, and we can expect them
to be very critical of the report, the judge, the scrutiny process and you.


Recommendation


6.         A draft letter for you to send to the Attorney is attached. A first outline of an
oral statement is also attached: a steer from you on whether you are happy with this
outline would be useful.


Consideration


7.       When you announced the scrutiny on 30 June, you said that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith would have two tasks:


          (i)        to advise you whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                     significance to justify a further public inquiry.


          (ii)       to identify for the Attorney General, the DPP and the Chief Constable
                     (as disciplinary authority) any evidence that might be relevant to their
                     decisions that had not previously been considered.


8.       Chapter 7 of the report sets out the judge’s conclusions on these issues. He
has come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis on which there should be a
further public inquiry, nor any basis for a renewed application to quash the inquest
verdict, nor any material which should be put before the DPP or disciplinary




f:\oppu\houUongsub\pp0554pddoc
authorities which might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already
taken.


9.         He has considered in great detail the allegations about video evidence and
about medical evidence, which were the two main issues on which claims for a new
inquiry or investigation rested. In relation to video evidence, he concludes that all
the material now available was available at the time; that there was no concealment
of evidence; and that it is simply wrong to suggest, as lawyers acting for the Family
Support Group have done, that the police deliberately and falsely blamed their
failure to see the overcrowding on a defective camera.


10.        The allegations about medical evidence have all been aimed at the decision
by the coroner not to enquire in detail into the treatment of victims until after 3.15pm.
The judge concludes that the arguments about this 3.15pm cut off point show a
complete misunderstanding of the coroner’s reasons for determining that point in the
first place, and that none of the evidence now offered - the great majority of which
was available to the inquest - provides any reason to question that decision.


11.        The judge’s evidence and reasoning are set out in great detail in the report,
and I can see no basis on which his conclusions could be faulted. On these central
points, therefore, there seems no question that his findings should be
accepted. The same applies, I think to most of the other issues which he has
examined, including claims for an inquiry into the rescue operation after the disaster,
allegations that West Midlands police putting improper pressure on some witnesses,
broader allegations of bias by West Midlands police or the coroner, inconsistencies
in evidence put forward by the police at various points, and the suggestion that
South Yorkshire police have never accepted responsibility or apologised for the
disaster.


12.        There are two issues, however, which I think we need to consider particularly
carefully, because there might be an argument that you should take a different view




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pddoc
from the conclusion arrived at by the judge. There is a third, general conclusion
which also calls for a response from you. The three issues are:


           (i)         the circumstances in which alterations were made to South Yorkshire
                       police officers’ statements.


           (ii)        expert technical evidence about the state of the ground.


           (iii)       the judge’s conclusions about whether it is right to have an inquest
                       after a major inquiry.


Police statements


13.        Part 2 of Chapter 4 of the report sets out the details of the way in which the
original self-written statements by several hundred South Yorkshire police officers
came to be amended before they were submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. Officers
were originally asked to prepare such statements for the purposes of the force
collecting and presenting its case to the inquiry.             In the middle of this process,
however, it was decided that the statements would be used by the West Midlands
police as part of their fact-finding on behalf of the inquiry. Statements which were
originally commissioned for one purpose, therefore, came to be used for another.


14.        The officers’ statements were submitted as a matter of routine to the solicitors
acting for the South Yorkshire police. In excess of 400 statements were submitted,
of which over 250 attracted no comment at all from the solicitors, 60 had comments
which consisted of pointing out some minor mistake or ambiguity, and about 100
involved amendments of some significance. The purpose of this exercise was to
exclude any evidence which might be regarded simply as opinion, comment or
hearsay, or to remove abusive language.                In Appendix 7 the judge looks at ten
amended statements in detail, and he concludes that in at least some cases it would
have been better if the amendments had not been made or that they inadvertently
removed matters of fact.



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pi doc
15.        The Taylor Inquiry team were aware of this process. The judge’s conclusion
is that the inquiry were in no way inhibited or impeded by the amendments, nor was
anything excluded which might have had any influence on the verdict at the inquest;
and he does not consider that there is anything in this process which might amount
to misconduct or malpractice.


16.        It is certainly right that this process did not save South Yorkshire police from
the stinging criticisms of Lord Taylor. I do not think that you should dissent from the
judge’s main conclusion on this issue. Although in theory it would be possible, if the
Chief Constable and the DPP agreed, to have a further police investigation as to
whether any of this process amounted to criminal or disciplinary conduct, the
outcome would be a foregone conclusion and would achieve nothing. But I think
you might want to express a view that it was an error of judgement at the time to
attempt to tinker with statements assembled for one purpose in order to fit them for
another purpose, and that it would have been better to have allowed the statements
to go forward in their original form so that the inquiry could form its own views about
all the points contained in the statements, whether or not they were a matter of
opinion or fact.


Evidence about the state of the ground


17.        Chapter 6 deals with evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
themselves containing an expert technical opinion about the state of the ground.
That opinion was not available to the inquiry or the inquests because it was
produced for the purpose of anticipated civil proceedings and for resolving between
the police, the club and the local authority their respective liabilities for compensation
payments to victims. The conclusions of that expert opinion about the inadequate
height of the crush barriers and about the capacity of the terrace suggest that
Taylor, if he had been aware of this opinion, might have criticised the club and the
local authority in more stringent terms than he did.          It would suggest a greater
degree of liability on those parties. The judge is clear, however, that this would not



fi\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pidoc
have altered Taylor’s central conclusions that the primary cause of the disaster was
a failure of police control.


18.         It is just conceivable that, if substantiated, the technical opinion might suggest
evidence of criminal negligence on the part of those responsible for maintaining and
licensing the terraces, but this is extremely unlikely. I have spoken to those in the
CPS who will be advising the DPP, and their view is that there is insufficient here to
merit further investigation.


An inquest after a disaster


19.         The judge does not accept any of the criticisms of the coroner in this case but
he comes to the firm conclusion that it is unsatisfactory to have an inquest where
there has been a major disaster and an inquiry chaired by a judge, which will
inevitably have covered much the same ground. Much of the concerns expressed
by the Hillsborough families over the years have arisen because of their sense that
the inquest was unsatisfactory and in some sense exonerated those who were to
blame. It would probably have been better if the inquests had never taken place,
because Taylor’s inquiry conclusions would then have stood as the last word on the
disaster. It is possible that much of the subsequent agonising would have been
avoided.


20         A Home Office Working Group report on disasters and inquests published in
March 1997, recommended that after a major disaster, where there has been an
inquiry, the role of a coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of the
inquest when the public inquiry is established and limiting the circumstances in
which the inquest can be resumed.             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith firmly backs that
recommendation. [ABCU advice].




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd. doc
Handling


21.        If you agree with this analysis, publication of the report would, as far as
possible draw a line under speculation about fresh evidence or new inquiries. That
will come as a great disappointment to the family support group, but there is no way
to avoid that. The judge recognises that himself in paragraph 4 chapter 7 of his
report where he says:


           “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
           especially since they had had their hopes raised that something more could
           be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had
           to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in
           the light o f the evidence which had previously been considered.”


22.        However painful it may be for the families, we have to draw a line somwhere,
and I think this is the right point.       It will be important, however, to avoid any
impression that closing the book in some way suggests that those responsible for
the disaster have been exonerated or escaped blame. We need to emphasise that
this report very firmly endorses Taylor’s conclusions about responsibility for the
disaster. You need also to emphasise that the police have accepted responsibility,
which the report brings out at the end of chapter 6, and that financial compensation
(for what that is worth) has been paid.


23.        That will not overcome the frustration that no individual has personally been
held to account, which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith acknowledges in paragraph 3 of
chapter 7. In that connection we need to highlight the importance of putting right the
shortcomings in the police disciplinary arrangements, as proposed by the Home
Affairs Committee. We will also need to emphasise the far reaching changes to the
safety and security of football grounds and to the policing of football, which resulted
from the disaster. And there will need to be some recognition, as set out above, that
there are shortcomings in the inquest system, which Ministers are looking at.



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pddoc
Openness


24.        When you set up the scrutiny you emphasised the importance of openness
and said that you would do your best to ensure that the evidence considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith would be published.           We are currently preparing, with the
Secretary to the scrutiny, a schedule of all the material which was considered, so
that we can decide exactly which material can be placed in the Library of the House.


25.        The judge also sets out in Appendix 1 to his report the people who gave
evidence.           He proposes that the transcripts of their evidence and their written
submissions should be made public.


26.        He refers in paragraph 5 of Appendix 1 to written evidence of other witnesses,
most of which he is content to make public, but some of which is in the form of
reports about one of the victims, Kevin Williams. The judge does not consider that
that should be published as it relates solely to the death of that individual. That
seems right. It also raises a general point about other material, including Appendix 9
of the report. It must be right that material relevant to the general causes of the
disaster and related matters should in principle be made public; the same should
apply to material concerning individual victims where that has been put forward by
the families or others as central to their case about the general issues. But I think
that material which is specifically about individual victims and their treatment should
be provided only to their families directly and privately, rather than made more
generally available. For that reason, I do not think that Appendix 9 of the report
should be published in its present form. It contains details of 14 individual cases,
attempting to answer those specific points which their families have raised with the
judge. I know that in preparing his report the judge considered whether it was more
appropriate for the relevant sections of Appendix 9 to be sent privately to the
families and for the published text simply to indicate that that had been done. He
concluded that the balance was in favour of publishing in full. My view is that the
balance lies the other way,and that we should arrange for relevant passages from



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pidoc
Appendix 9 to be sent directly to the families, with the published version of that
Appendix stating simply that it contains details of individual cases which have been
provided directly to those concerned. In that one respect, we would be less open
than the judge proposes.


27.        In other respects, I think we should be more open.              That concerns in
particular material provided by those listed in paragraph 6 of Appendix 1. The judge
regards these people as having provided assistance, rather than evidence, and does
not propose to put records of those discussions or other written material arising from
them into the public domain. I think this is a distinction which it would be difficult to
explain in public;                and as the list includes the coroner, Dr Popper, the chief
constable, and other key figures involved with the inquiry or the inquest, it would
appear as if material was being deliberately concealed. I therefore favour as far as
possible putting their “evidence” into the public domain too.


Arrangements fo r publication


28.        We are aiming for publication some time in the week beginning 16 February.
That gives just enough time to sort out the logistics of publication. It also avoids
publication before Liverpool play Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough on 14
February.


29.        You have agreed that you should publish the report by laying it before
Parliament and making an oral statement, as you did when you announced the
scrutiny.         As you did then, it would be right also for you to see the families
immediately before you make your statement and be prepared to meet them
afterwards - although a hostile reception is inevitable.


30.        Although it will prolong the process, I think you should be prepared to offer a
debate on the report.                When you announced the scrutiny, Dr Brian Mawhinney
asked for an undertaking that the House could debate the matter further when Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith had concluded his investigation. You undertook to discuss that



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pddoc
with the Leader of the House. In response to a later intervention by Dennis Skinner
about compensation, you said that “the issue could be raised in the debate that I
promised to discuss with my Right Honourable Friend the Leader of the House in
response to the Shadow Home Secretary”. In the light of those comments, and
because of the detail and length of the report, I can see some value in offering a
debate rather than having to deal with inevitable attempts for adjournment debates
and/or PNQs.


31.        I attach at Annex A a first version of an outline oral statement. It is very
rough, but gives some indication of the ground which I think we ought to cover.


Next steps


32.        If you accept the general advice in this submission, the next steps are to write
to the Attorney General and the DPP, securing their agreement to the line which you
propose to take. I do not anticipate any difficulty with this, since the conclusion
essentially is that they should take no further action. A draft is attached.


33.        When we have a definite date, arrangements can be made for a meeting with
the families. We will also need to prepare a detailed media handling plan.




                                        PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pddoc
                  DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



The Right Hon John Morris QC MP
Attorney General



HILLSBOROUGH


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is
any new evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office
was provided with a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now to
agree our response to his conclusions.


A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially
he had two tasks.


            (i)        to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                        significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and


            (ii)       to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
                        constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be
                        relevant to your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been
                        considered.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear. He considers that there is no
basis for establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. Nor is there
any basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. Nor does he
consider there is any material which might require re-consideration of previous
decisions in relation to criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full
and detailed.                 Having considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his
conclusions are right.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd. doc
When I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the
judge’s report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he
considered as possible. Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to
his report. Most of the remaining material which he has considered I propose to
place in the Library of the House when the report is published. There may be issues
about certain documents which we shall need to consider before publication,
particularly documents which relate to decision-making about criminal matters.


When the report is published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and
the reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public
inquiry. It is important that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw
a line under speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that
both your and the Director’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility
that, should anything new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I
should give as firm an indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you
agree, I consider that I should say on publication of the report that you and the
Director have considered its conclusions, and on the basis of the material which it
contains, the Director consider that there is no basis which would justify fresh
criminal investigations, and that you consider that any application to the High Court
for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding. I would be
grateful for your confirmation that that is correct.


There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your
views.         The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers
submitted to the inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail,
setting out exactly how and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material
effect on the outcome of the proceedings.              There are bound to be questions,
however, about whether anything in this process might amount to misconduct of a
criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that it would not.
It would in theory be possible to instigate a further police investigation to confirm this
conclusively, but I think the outcome would be a foregone conclusion, and I do not




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pddoc
consider that such an investigation should be instigated. I would be grateful for your
•confirmation that-you-agree,      ia &wjI



The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire
police about the state of the ground. He suggests that the condition of the terraces
and the over-estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that
information had been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have
attributed a greater proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. I
would be grateful for your view on whether you think there is anything here which
might conceivably support allegations of negligence of a criminal nature.


Publication of the report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here.
I will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have
escaped blame - the Taylor inquiry was clear about that I will want to emphasise
also that we are putting right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system
which in part enables the officers in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want
nearer the time to clear with you the text of my statement, but I would be grateful for
your urgent agreement in principle to what I propose.


My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the
week beginning 16 February.


I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the President of Counci, the Director of
Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
