                                                                         iv X>Vu^
             HILLSBOROUGH             STEERING               COMMITTEE

                    c/o Castle Chambers, CookjStreet, LiverpoolL2 9S0{
                      *.Tel,
                           :051255 0628 Jo*: 051236 0047 <DX 14100




Mr Wballey                                                       5 February   1990
The Secretary to the Inquiry                                     EMS.PM
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H   9 AT




Dear Mr Whalley,

Hillsborough    15 April   1989

At the request of the Members of our Group following difficulties
which were being occasioned due to the change of policy over the
supply of copy statements made to the West Midlands Police by
particular clients to their Solicitors I first took the matter up
with Mr Mervyn Jones.

He explained to me that the change of policy was due to the fact
that they were now acting under the direction of the DPP rather
than under the direction of Lord Justice Taylor.

Having considered the matter further there are real problems
- as far as the stress to clients is concerned and therefore
it was agreed that I should write directly to the Home Office/DPP.

Before doing so as a matter of courtesy I let Mr Mervyn Jones
know what I was doing and why.

He replied to me on the 25 January and I know has copied that
reply to you.

I enclose herewith a copy of my form of letter to the DPP which
I have also copied to H M Coroner at Sheffield and to Mr Mervyn
Jones .

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,




Miss E M Steel


/E n e l .
t




               HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING              COMMITTEE

                                 c/o Castle Chambers, Coof^Strut, LiverpoolL2 9S9f
                                   Tel: 051 2550628 Jo*: 0512360047 (DX14100




    The Director of Public                Pr osecutions                       5 February,   1990
    4-12 Queen Anne's Gate                                                    EMS.PM
    LONDON
    SH1H   9AZ




    Dear Sir,

    H i l l s b o r o u gh   15 April   1989

    I write on behalf of the H il ls bo r ou g h Steering Committee who are
    in turn co-or d in at in g the Hill sb or ou gh Group of Solicitors
    instructed by those injured and bereaved as a result of the
    incidents at Sheffield W ed n es d ay Football Club Stadium at
    H i l l s b o r o u g h on the 15 April 1989.

    The matter has been under investigation by the West Midlands
    Police under their Ass is ta nt Chief Constable Mr J Mervyn Jones
    who was initially w o rk in g to Lord Justice Taylor in respect of
    the Inquiry and s u bs eq ue nt ly to H M Coroner at Sheffield.

    We appreciate that fo ll ow in g the publication of the interim
    report the matter was ref erred to your office for consi de ra ti on
    of any possible criminal charges and that whereas the West      Midlands
    Police continued with the investigation they were now work in g to
    your directions.

    Whilst matters were under the control of Lord Justice Taylor
    we made a request that copies of statements made by individuals
    at the ground (the m aj or i ty of whom had themselves suffered
    injury - physical or p sy ch o lo g ic a l - or were the relatives of.,those
    who had died should be s up pl ie d to the Solicitors acting for those
    individuals.

    That request was granted and it has saved a very c on si derable amount
    of trauma for the i ndividuals concerned.

    Over recent months the po li cy has, however, been reversed and
    such statements are no longer being given to the Solicitors on
    request.         I u nderstand that this is at your direction and that
    the West Midlands Police have been instructed not to provide copies
    of the statements until the investigation is complete and you
    aut h o r i s e such statements to be provided.

    This change of policy is c a us in g difficulties for those handling
    claims on behalf of the i njured and bereaved and considerable
    trauma on the part of the individual Plaintiffs.

                                                 /Cont'd
       HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING                 COMMITTEE

                    c/o Castle Chambers, CoofiStreet, LiverpoolL2 9S9{
                      Tel: 0512550628 Jo*: 051236 0047 D X 14100
                          Continuation No.                1.


The Director of Public Prosections                                5 February   1990
                                                                  EMS.PM




As you may know the test actions on liability have been stayed
on terms as an agreement has been reached with the Insurers for
the South Yorkshire Police that they will meet all claims within
certain s pe cified categories which cover approx im at el y 90% of
the totality of the claims although with no admission of liability.

In order to process such claims the Insurers very reasonably
require details of precisely where the individual was in Pen 3
or 4 and a medi c a l report dealing with the injuries sustained.

He have been ar ra ng in g medical a pp oi ntments with a team of
Clinical P s yc hologists for clients of the Group from last
November onwards and at that stage the Solicitor has to update
and clarify with the client precisely what happened.              In many
cases clients were very shocked and initial statements to their
S olicitors were in broad terms rather than with the detail which
was necessary.            The re-opening of the events of the 15 April is
causing c o n s i d e r a b l e distress to clients which is minimised in
those cases where copies of the statements they made to the West
Midlands Police have already been supplied (prior to the reference
to y o u r s e l v e s ).

We would be grateful, in the circumstances, if the ban on
supplying copy statements could be reconsidered.        We
appreciate that the Inquiry is "open ended" and not confined
to possible criminal charges against any one or more parties
to the civil action and extends effect i v e l y to every individual
who was at the ground.

However, in p r a ctical terms unless in a p a rticular case it is
likely that the individual will have further questions to answer
it would be e x t remely helpful if statements could be released
to be used for the purpose of the s ettlement of their civil
claim.

In addition - a l t hough in this respect the matter must still
be covered by the Coroner as well as       by   y ourselves - inthe case
of those who died     the same questions   are being asked bythe
Insurers ie where     was the individual   at   the particular time.

The West M i d lands    Police were preparing for the Coroner files
in each indiv i d u a l case which traced the movements of everyone
who died form the time they entered the Stadium until they
were i dentified and death confirmed.

The inform a t i o n in those files would b e e x t r e m e l y helpful to
answer the points made and to enable those claims to be settled

                                           / C o n t 'd
*




             HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING               COMMITTEE

                          c/o Castle ChamBers, CookjStreit, LiverpoolL2 9S9f
                            Tel: 0512550628 J o 051236 0047 <DX 14100
                             Continuation No.               2



    The    Director of Public      Pr osuections                        5 February   1990
                                                                        E M S .PM




    expeditiously.

    Again we would be glad if you w ould consider authorising the
    r elease of that information (subject in that case to the further
    a u t h o r i s a t i o n of H M Coroner).

    I look forward to hearing from you and trust you appreciate
    the reason for this letter.

    Yours    sincerely,




    Miss    E M Steel
