                                    r^ « 0 u ** .          rtr
NOTES OF DISCUSSIONS WITH THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT:           17
OCTOBER


      Present:    Lord Justice Taylor        Mr   P   F Owen
                  Mr Johnson                 Mr   D   A MacDonald
                  Professor Maunder          Mr   N   Kinghan
                  Mr Whalley                 Mr   P   A Lee
                  Mr Sweet


Introduction


1.    Mr Owen gave an outline of the Government1s purpose in Part
I of the Football Spectators Bill.       The concept had arisen from
the suggestion in the final Popplewell report that the idea of
membership schemes should be considered.       The Government had not
initially been keen on such a scheme, preferring a more
conventional approach based on CCTV, segregation, and effective
police arrangements.     While these measures had brought about some
improvement in the problem of football hooliganism, Ministers had
not thought that sufficient attack had been made on the link
between football and hooliganism.       They had therefore sought
better means of identifying spectators and controlling access to
grounds.     Their preference had been for a voluntary scheme but
fears that this would result merely in an inadequate partial
scheme had led Ministers early in 1988 to propose a comprehensive
scheme covering all clubs.     The FA and the FL had indicated their
preference for a statutory scheme if there had to be one.           This
had led on to the working party under the Minister of Sport,
which had reported in December 1988, and the Bill as introduced.


2.   The Bill provided for a Football Management Authority (FMA)
to draw up the details of a scheme, for approval by the Secretary
of State.     The central principles of such a scheme would be that
it would be comprehensive in its coverage, with few exemptions if
any (except for the disabled and accompanied children under the
age of 10), with only limited forms of temporary membership, and
a membership card, which would be machine readable, bearing a
photo.     The proposition had attracted enormous political
controversy, and in the immediate aftermath of the Hillsborough
disaster there had been pressure for the withdrawal of the Bill.
Hence Ministers' undertaking that there would be two debates in
Parliament on Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report before any
scheme was introduced.    The aim was to have the newscheme    in
place in August 1990, but it would not    be introduced until the
technology was demonstrably sound.


Alternative to the Football Membership    Scheme


3.   DOE Ministers had never considered radically different
strategies.    They had evolved the concept of a comprehensive
scheme having rejected as ineffective gradualist, voluntary or
partial schemes.    Consideration had certainly been given (by the
Chairman of the Football Association among others) to banning
away supporters and setting up mechanisms for identifying them.
The problem was of long standing by comparison with some of our
European partners.


4.   In discussion on the relationship between the FMA and clubs.
DOE officials said that    Ministers accepted that professional
football remained a commercial activity whose private rights
should be curtailed to the minimum necessary.      The FMA would have
discretion over the maintenance of lists of banned supporters,
but in many cases this would merely rationalise what was already
happening.     The criteria for exclusion from membership would be
quite clear.    The FMA would in any case have to rely upon
information provided by the clubs.     In consideration of a right
of recourse against a ban, no need had been seen for reference to
a formal tribunal (and the Council on Tribunals had agreed with
this view).     The police view was that any ban to be effective
would need to last at least three months.


5.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the record of the operation
of the exclusion order process.     The DOE officials, in reply,
indicated that this was mainly a question for the Home Office but
that exclusion orders while having some effect on hooliganism,
had not stamped it out completely.     Reasons seemed to lie in the
relatively few cases of identification and conviction and in the
approach taken by magistrates courts.     The intention had been to
bolster the strength of the exclusion order process by means of
the disqualification periods in clause 7.
Membership Cards


6.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the format of the
electrically readable membership cards with their photographs.
DOE officials said that the scheme was not expected to be 100%
successful, and those with valid cards without photographs could
be expected to get through.   But the value of the scheme lay in
its deterrent effect.   Realistically, it was expected that some
fans would regard evasion of the admission requirement as a
challenge.   DOE Ministers believed, however, that progressively
attitudes would change, once a pattern of refused entries and
convictions began to develop in the case of identified offenders.


7.   When the membership card was scanned, three colours would
show up green for entry, amber (where the card would be retained,
the spectator admitted, and any problems subsequently sorted out
when he retrieved his card) and red, which meant that the card
was included on a list of banned cards.    In those circumstances,
the person proffering the card ought to be stopped.     Since this
might produce congestion at the turnstiles, the police had
expressed worries about red card failures.     In the ultimate event
of the system failing through technical fault, the police would
retain the discretion to let fans into the ground.     With all
these limitations, Ministers nevertheless believe that the scheme
would enable the worst soccer offenders to be sifted from the
majority, that there would be a deterrent value, and that the
worst offenders would be removed from circulation for reasonable
periods.


8.   On the technological development, the original list of ten
potential tenderers was now down to six.     No brief had yet been
drawn up for a potential developer.    DOE officials expected that
invitations to tender would be sent out in November, with testing
in August 1990, with the hope that the scheme would be effective
by the end of the 1990/91 season.     No decisions had yet been made
on the type of technology, or on any pilot schemes.     Clubs would
need to be compensated for any field tests since they would lose
money on days when pilot projects were running.     Subject to
commercial considerations, the choice of a tenderer would not be
difficult.   The technology was not expected to be complicated.     A
referral file would be transferred on to diskettes, which would
be updated each week and sent to clubs by Datapost.   It would
probably nevertheless take some 12 months to get the scheme
working properly, not least to develop linkages into the databank
to ensure that courts' decisions became known to the FMA and
individual clubs.   Modifications would also be needed at grounds
(for example by the installation of extra turnstiles) but it had
to be remembered that card schemes were now operating at Luton,
Derby, Oxford, Reading and Tottenham.


9.    Clubs would be able to exploit the commercial advantages of
cards.   They might, for example, be able to put their own club
colours on the membership card.   So long as the central
requirements were met, the Government was content to leave this
to clubs.


10.   The scheme was not to apply in Scotland, but could always be
extended north of the border subsequently.   There were any case
differences between English and Scottish law on drink, and breach
of the peace provisions.   Welsh clubs were part of the English
Football League so the scheme would extend to them, but the
precise extent of its applicability had yet to be decided in
Wales.


11.   Lord Justice Taylor wondered whether a strategy to control
hooligans might needlessly embrace all football spectators,
imposing onerous obligations on them, at great expense.    It could
be argued that the approach was inconsistent with that in Part II
of the Bill, which involved individual offenders reporting at
specified times.    DOE believe that, while this was primarily a
Home Office matter, the difference lay in the small number of
international matches, the extra burden laid on the police of
mass reporting, the problems created by mid-week evening matches,
and the requirement for a scheme if English clubs were to be
readmitted to European competitions.    A further difficulty with a
domestic scheme based upon Part II of the Bill was that it
depended upon a conviction, whereas the Government were looking
for a wider discretionary procedure.     It had to be borne in mind
that whereas some hooligans would attend police stations others
would not, and that if real inroads were to be made in to the
hooligan sub-culture, sanctions for non-attendance would have to
be firmly enforced.     In the case of the mass of domestic
supporters, that would impose a substantial burden on the police.


12.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about relevant offences in
schedule 1.     DOE said that these were principally football
related offences:     domestic violence, for example, had not been
included.


13.   On costs, no Government assistance would be forthcoming and
football would be expected to finance the scheme.        There might be
some temporary help in the short term, but if any charges were
necessary the clubs would have to bear them:     if they could not
do so, they would have to close.     While football encompassed a
wide range of size and financial viability, football nevertheless
had a corporate existence, expressed for example in the Football
Trust.    There should be no direct cost, provided a contractor was
able to generate his own revenue, for example through commercial
exploitation of the mailing list.     It was however recognised that
clubs might suffer if gates were reduced because of the financial
burden.     The costs would be the same for all clubs:     GEC
estimated that their card, at the luxury end of the market, would
cost about £9 over three years, for a robust and reliable product
which could not be easily passed back in the crowd.        The Minister
of Sport took the view that with bulk deliveries cards could
probably be charged at cost price.


14.   On the Data Protection Act, the registrar had recommended
inclusion of an opt out box to enable the individual to withhold
his name.


15.   Lord Justice Taylor asked if the occasionally supporter
would be a casualty of the scheme.     DOE thought he probably
would, unless temporary membership schemes were introduced.
Ministers took the view that temporary membership would however
undermine the scheme.     In any case big teams had support
throughout the country, so some system enabling application forms
to be applied for through Post Offices was likely to be
introduced.    Membership seemed unlikely to provide a means of
segregating rival groups.    This would remain a responsibility for
the police, even for all ticket matches.     Segregation would
impose too much strain on the technology of the scheme:        and if
it worked, segregation would not be necessary. The scheme was           a
national one, but linkage with a particular club affiliation was
not ruled out.


Enforcement of Safety Procedures


16.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the overlap between the
Football Licensing Authority (FLA) in clause 8 of the Bill and
the certificate system under the 1975 Act.     DOE officials
explained that the FLA could have been a watchdog for the
certification process, bearing in mind worries that the local
authorities might not be performing as well as they ought to.           It
had nevertheless to be said that the FLA proposal had been bolted
on to the Bill in a great hurry.    It would function as a quango.



17.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about the DOE's views on the
suggestion that the HSE would be an appropriate body to enforce
better and more consistent standards on the local authorities.
DOE officials replied that the HSE had indeed been considered for
such a role, but had been ruled out on the grounds that it
operated on particular kinds of circumstances, and that in
practice the FLA would be particularly well placed since it was a
body targeted towards football.    Nevertheless, this was an issue
on which DOE recognised the need not to anticipate conclusions in
the Final Report.


18.   Lord Justice Taylor asked about limitation of the 1975 Act
to football grounds and major international stadia so that it did
not, for example, apply to Rugby League.    DOE agreed there was an
argument for extending the licensing role for other sports, and
that the linkage between the 1975 Act and FLA scheme needed close
attention.    DOE believed that the Bill already achieved a
cohesion in relation to football.     Given the explicit reference
in clause 13 (1) of the Bill.     They said, however, that there was
no reason on grounds either of policy or practicality why that
clause should not also apply to other sports.     On the suggestion
(favoured by Norman Bush) that the present arrangements should be
left to experts such as local authority surveyors, DOE favoured a
mixed team of experts to bring out the best operational
efficiency and enable local knowledge to be brought together.        On
the operation of clause 13, FLA members would visit    football
grounds and would be encouraged to consult those operating Safety
Certificates, both clubs and local authorities.     The powers in
clause 13 (2) gave them an important sanction over local
authorities.     The FLA could appoint inspectors (schedule 2,
paragraph 18).     DOE officials were satisfied that the proposal
struck the right balance between local discretion and effective
stimulus of better local authority performance with steady
progress towards uniformity of standards.



All-seater Stadia


19.   Lord Justice Taylor asked whether he was right to think that
it was Government policy to move towards all-seater stadia.


20.   DOE said that, notwithstanding statements in the immediate
aftermath of Hillsborough suggesting that the disaster would not
have happened if the stadium had been all-seater, there was
nevertheless a wide recognition that the proportion of seating
was an important factor.     Hence the inclusion of clause 11 (1) in
the Bill.     There was no master plan for the'timescale and
capacity by which this goal was to be achieved, although the aim
would be to concentrate on the big clubs and work down through
the League.     It was certainly recognised that if left to the
discretion of the clubs it was unlikely that much progress would
be made.    In a case where a small club suddenly drew a large club
at home in a cup match, when safety factors would be critical,
matches could always be played at different grounds or with
reduced capacities.     For the bigger clubs, international
pressures were likely to induce change.
