                                                                 NECHELLS STATION

NAME:            NADERASSEN CARPOOSAMY
                 CURPEN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:      DOCTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


HATED: 270489                                               N C CURPEN (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) together with four friends I

           attended the F A cup semi final football match at Hillsborough,

           Sheffield, to watch a football match between Liverpool FC and

           Nottingham Forrest FC.

           I went to the match to support Liverpool FC, the tickets for the

           match were obtained from Anfield through the season ticket

           holder scheme. The ticket I think is valued at #14 and I was seated in

           the North Stand.

           The people who I travelled to the game with are:-

           1.                                                     a medical

                representative for

           2. Doctor Arthur CRAWFORD a GP in Huyton St Helens.

           3. Doctor Ian ROBERTS, a GP in Haydeck.

           4. Ian CRAWFORD the son of Dr CRAWFORD, as above.

           We travelled to the game by car.   It was               ar. We stopped

           en route the ground and had lunch at one of the motorway service

           stations and we arrived in Sheffield for about 1.30 pm (1330) .

           We parked about a mile from the ground, I do not know the location as
A p p e n d i*
   en                 n a d e r a ss en carpo o sam y



it was ray first time in Sheffield.

Having parked the car we walked the                remainder of the way     andarrived

at the ground at about 2 pn (1400).                There were slight delayson the

motorway due to road works.       I do not recall seeing any persons

consuming alcohol en route to the match.

There was no requirement for Police                directions or escort     to the

ground as            knew the ground                and the area.   I did   notsee any

trouble between the point of arrival and entrance to the ground.

There were not very many people about.

On arrival at the ground I entered via the turnstiles on the

Penistone Road. There were no queues on the turnstiles and the people

I was with were searched by Police on entry.

On reaching the seating area we were told by a steward where to go.

There was no difficulty in finding the entry point and we had no

difficulty in entering the ground.

I did not see any gates open other than the turnstiles, nor did I see

any unauthorised entry into the ground.             I handed the ticket in as I

entered.    I did not witness any consumption of alcohol inside the

ground.

 I was not involved in any crush whilst attending the football match.

 It would have been about 3.10 pm (1510) when I saw the crowd standing

 on the terraces on the West Stand surging forward.            The movement

 stermed from the rear of the crowd towards the front. I don't know

 what caused the movement.

 I did not receive any injuries myself frcm the football match.               The

 next thing I saw was that people in the terracing were being lifted

 into the seating area of the West Stand, by supporters above them.

 People were also climbing over the fences to the front of the

 terracing onto the pitch area.
fij* B P E N               n a d e r a s s e n c a r fo o sa m y



    It appeared to be at this t l » that the terracing was too o v e r c r o p

   and people were escaping the crush.                A number of people were being

   carried away on stretchers from the pitch area.

   As a result my two collegues and myself went down to the rear of the

   North Stand to see if we could assist with anything.                   1W.S would be
   about 3.30 pn (1530).

   On arrival at the rear of the North stand we spoke to a Police

   Officer and having told him we were Doctors we were told to go

  downstairs, which we did.        Here «e s^ k e to an officer with a radio

  and again told hijn that we were Dpctors.                   this officer showed us into

  the gjmnasium, which was being used for a makeshift casualty centre.

  Dr CRAWFORD went towards the playing area whilst Dr ROBERTS and
  myself ranaind at the gymnasium.

  inside the gjmnasium, I saw two dead bodies on the floor. I felt for
  a pulse on these two people and there was not one.

 Lying on the ground at the same point was another nan aged about

 thirty, he was conscious and appeared to be in shock.                    I got him up

 and sat him do™.          more bodies were then brought into the area.

 I checked them again and confirmed that                  they were dead.

 At this stage I heard another person was in pain.                   This nan was

 behind a partition which was inside the gymnasium.                   He ccmplained to
me of injuries to his legs.

This man was with a friend and I asked him to rip the mans trousers

so I could examine hi™, which he did.                 I   saw that the leg was blue
from the top of his left leg to his toes.

There was no medical equipment available and so I just told him to
take deep breaths.

Next to him was another man who had been brought in, he had crush

injuries to his chest and he was 'blue' through lack of oxygen.                     He
    EN                NADERASSEN CARPOOSAMY


was pointing out that his chest was injured.    I saw that his chest

was blue.   There was nothing that I could do except talk to him,

until help arrived.
During this time more bodies were being brought in on the other side

of the partition.
I went back over and saw that there were another three or four more

bodies who were dead.
I returned to the man with the chest injury, whilst I was talking

to him firemen came in carrying oxygen.       I took one and gave it the

man with the chest injuries and left him in the care of the fireman.

 I then went to see another man who was lying on the ground who was

 in pain.   This man had injuries to his left shoulder but otherwise

 he was alright.
 It was about this time that a team of paramedics arrived frcsn

 Sheffield Hospital and they started to administer first aid to the

 casulties.
 At about 4 pm (1600) I was approached by an Inspector who asked me

 together with three other Doctors to confirm the deaths of persons

 present in the gymnasium.
 We took a section of the bodies each and certified their deaths.      A

 Police officer was with each body and he took the details from me of

 the time of certification and my name and address.

 I can't remember how many people I certified as dead but it was at

  least eight.
  I do not have any details of the dead people, their details are with

  the Police.    I remember that the first body certified as dead was at

  4 pm (1600).
  We stayed until about 4.40 pn (1640) the same date. My own personal

  observations are that medical assistance should have been requested
       on the loud speaker system immediately casulties were noticed. Up to

       the time that I entered the gymnasium no request had been made on the

       public speaker system.

       There was no first aid equipment available inside the gymnasium.     It

       is my opinion that at such stadiums as Hillsborough where large

       attendences are frequent, a rocm should be set aside equipped to deal

       with emergencies.

       The last thing I would like to say is that now having examined a map

       of the ground I am not sure as to which gate we entered.     It may have

       been the Leppings Lane turnstile.    The person who would know for

       definite would be




                                           NADERASSEN CARPOOSAMY CURPEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                  9 •]
                                                                                  O
                                                                        STATION
NAME:           NADERASSEN CARPOOSAMY
                CURPEN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     DOCTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
qy me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                 N Qurpen (SI(3®D)



        Further to my statement which I made on 27th April 1989, (270489) I

        would like to include that I did in fact pronounce life extinct on

        nine bodies.     After referring to police notes made, I can say that

        the bodies I pronounced life extinct on were:-

        B36 Kevin TYRELL

        B43 Graham Sean WRIGHT

        B51 Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS

        B53 Stuart Paul William THOMAS

        B54 Anthony Peter KELLY

        B56 David William MATHER

        B57 Martin Kevin TRAYNOR

        B58 Paul CLARKE      and

        B65 William Roy PEMBERTON

        I would say that I pronounced life extinct between 4 pm (1600) and

        4.10 pm (1610) on all the above bodies.    On each occasion, a police

        officer was with the body and made my records for me.    All the bodies

        were in the gymnasium at the football ground.
                PEN            NADERASSEN CARPOOSAMY


                                                       N Curpen SIGNED
     .PATEMENT TAKEN
               PLACE:

               TIME:         DATE:

     WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

     OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




II
 I
                                                                          STATION

NAME:          ANDREW   JOLYON
               BYRNE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:    CONSULTANT ANAESTHETIST


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                A J BYRNE (SIGNED)



           I sm a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery and a Fellow of the

           College of Anaesthetists.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended Sheffield Wednesday

           Football Ground in company with Dr Diane GRIFFITHS, Dr Caroline ALTOFT

           anc Mr Anthony SMITH.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 2.20pm (1420) and parked the car just

           off Herries Road by the Northern General Hospital. Traffic was

           congested but nothing unexpected.

           We walked to the South Stand and were seated in row 'S', numbers 36-

           40, which is near to the Leppings Lane end, arriving in our seats at

           2 .50pm (1450).

           Having sat down, I looked around and noticed that the pens behind the

           goel at Leppings Lane appeared full.   By that I mean that when people

           pushed from the rear there was a rippling effect down the terracing.

           I also noticed that the wings of the terrace were relatively clear.

           I didn't see anything else untoward, until the game started.

           After a few moments, I noticed that people were climbing over the

           perimeter fencing behind the goal at the lappings Lane end.    More and.
BYFNE                ANDREW   JOLYON                                     2


more began to climb over and I then saw a Police Officer run onto

the pitch and speak to the referee.

As a result of this the game was stopped and the referee ushered the

pleyers from the pitch.

There was no announcement over the tannery system as to why.

There were more and more coming over the fencing and I saw several

Policemen pushing them back and I thought it must be either a pitch

invasion or opposing fans in the wrong end.

I then noticed someone lying on the pitch and this person was being

given external cardiac massage (CPR). Shortly after this I saw an

ambulance ccme onto the pitch and fans were running to collect

advertising hoardings and put people on them and stretcher them away.

By this time there was a large number of people on the pitch, seme

lying down, others milling around and a line of Policemen were across

the width of the pitch.

It was approximately 10 - 15 minutes after the game had been stopped

that I realised there was a major incident taking place and

myself and the other two Doctors made our way down to the pitch with

the help of a steward.

We got onto the pitch and split up.

I vent to a male who was being given C.P.R. by someone and I asked for

equipment and was handed a portable resuscitator.   To all intensive

purposes this man was dead but I decided to continue with treatment.

We continued for at least five minutes and a fan came to us and

asked if the man was all right and stated he was his cousin.     I can

only remember he was late teens, early twenties.

After attempting (CPR) someone came with a stretcher and I said that

he was dead, and after assisting to place him in an ambulance, I

approached a Police Officer and asked for something useful to do as by
BYFNE                  ANDREW   JOLYON                                   j



this time I could see that all bodies were being treated with (CPR).

I was taken to the gymnasium and was shown to the point where the

injured were.   There was absolutely no equipment available and

therefore my treatment and diagnosis of injuries was extremely limited.

I cirected a number of seriously injured people to be taken to

hospital and assisted the less seriously injured.

I was then approached by a senior Police Officer, and asked to start

certifying the dead people as there may be some still alive and also

to clear space.
There was a Police Officer allocated to each body and they were

instructed to put the time of death being certified on paper alongside

the name of the deceased.

They were also instructed to note the name of the doctor as there were

a number of doctors in the gymnasium.

The bodies were laid out as best as possible in three or four rows.     I

was accompanied by a Senior Police Officer and I carried out a formal

examination of each body.
 I pronounced life extinct and the senior Police Officer instructed the

Officer with each body as to the number and time.

 I have been shewn a list of names and body numbers and to the best of

my knowledge and recollection the following names and body numbers are

 the bodies I examined and pronounced life extinct.

 I have used the term CPR during this statement and this is an

 abbreviation of Cardio Pulmonary Resuscitation;

  B6    Ian David WHEELAN.

  B7    James Robert HENNESSY.

 B12    Roy HAMILTON

 B12    Colin WAFER

 B23    Peter BURKETT
BYFNE                  ANDREW   JGLYON                                  4



B34     Jonathan CWENS

B44     Carl Darren HEWITT

B45     Nicholas JOYNES

B46     Carl BROJN

B47     David William BIRTLE

355     Michael Nicholas HEWITT

B59     Gordon Rodney HORN

B6C     Christopher James TRAYNOR

B69     Gerald Martin BARON

B7C     Alan McGLONE

B72     Michael David KELLY



After completing the examinations I noticed that a large number of

doctors had arrived with equipment. I spoke to a senior Police

Officer and after leaving my personal details, was allcwed to leave.

I net Dr Caroline ALTOFT in the gymnasium and we eventually found the

other two of our party back at the car.

We then returned home.

I have listed a number of things that I feel very strongly about in

the supporters' questionnaire that I have also completed, and feel

these should be brought to the attention of Lord Justice TAYLOR.
        BYFNE            ANDREW    JOLYON                      5


                                            A J BYRNE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:     120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                   56
2 5 / 0 9 *97 1 1 : 4 6      01 51 2 3 6 1 9 3 6             H F S G               -->01712424221                     Pg . 01




                                                                                                                         \*^i)
                  For the Attention of |                     ~
                   koxi Chief Justic T r io r's Hilisboraugn Disaster Inquiry,
                  Furnival House,
                   Pumival Gate,
                   Sheffield.


                   Fran:
                   Dr. Matthew Janes Bull,M.B., CH-B., F-R.C-R-,




                    Tel


                    Department of Radiola^,
                    Royal Hallanshire Hospital,
                    Sheffield.
                    S10 2ffl


                     Tel
                     ffiaaaiflL m a p of events at mnsaoRgjai ecotbau.: a m p cm i s m mkil, i g w

                     t an a Senior Registrar in Diagnostic Radiology in Sheffield. On the 15th April, ‘1969*

                     of the Kop, in the Nottin^ian Forest end-
                     When the match was stopped and spectators f*on the l^p p ir^ I ^ e e n d ^        .
                     pitch, a ll I saw in itia lly were people who were Imping. A             t “
                     S S y lying m the ^x>uad. However, after what oust have Seen pttsO ly 10 nunutes,
                     f S s e X t the situation was obviously rrore serixus and trade w **/
                     the pitch.
                    / i t sDoroximately 3-15 pjn-         I went to the Leppings Lsne end of the pitch. There were
                    ' L n fto d ie s round the ® al       with a lar^s nuaber of spectators and poU ce.^ggy a snail
                    V                           «          * * 8 a l t e r e d to * « £
                       „office cn the pitch I set         about examining as msny of the bodies tnat

                          nane I- do not knew.

                     j                                                                                   =ss-
                                                   or aw neans of suction. Several of the people whem I s» j had vanLt
                      ■S t t S T S d l^ S i                    m w M clearly t e » benefited fi™ suctim .
                       k               •    j-i/» t fw-i th at external cardiac nsssage <**3 other resuscitafcive
                      f * <***              t f l f S                    was subsequently transferred to m aifiulHioe
                     )5 techniques had been                            C     I * 3 t with osuld ro t te resuscitated.
                     .5 and taken to the hospital, lrc other pecp±e wnon x ««x
25/B9 '9 7 11:47    01 51 2 3 6 1 9 3 6        H F S G               -->01712424221                    Pg. 02



                                                       -   2-

            There were a great many people standing arcuxi, acne of t o « r e
            This sanewhat hanpered the ability to assess any patients ^to would have benefited
            frcm innediate resuscitation. Tte overall s i t u a t e ^ obviously vesy o a ^ se d at
            th is point. The cnly ptysicim that I was a-ane f ^ this
            Sheffield Wednesday Club cbctor. After approximately 20-30 minutes v*m ithadtecom e
            apparent that the r e s i n s I»opl* * ^ t^ppinss I^ne end
             thzee which had been resuscitated had been sent to hospital, I want dam
          i end of the football pitch (tte Kcp end). I was accorpanied ty Dr.               and too
          I nurses M Liverpool- Betweoi the fajr of us we tinen a tte ste d resuscitatim cn 4
          I more people on the pitch. None of these attaipts
           I great many people were being carried cn advertising hoardings off the p i t ^ Several
          I patients to tty knowledge had been transferred by a j^ in c e to the local
             S e re was s t i l l no cwy^n available or any other aids for resuscitation, as fa r as
              I was aware.
            WhEH i t became apparent that there were no farther people
            Kop end, a police officer then requested that we gj into the Sheffield Wednesday ©nnasum
            which ha3 been converted into a temporary mortuary.
            In tte mortuary there were lines of people lying cn the floor. Together with a :
            G*P., Dr. Redgrave, I then examined as many cf these people^s I onuld. All tte peop
            that I exanined within the gyrmasiun &ere in ny opiroai already dead. I examned
            approximately 20 people within the ©imasiun. No resuscitative a t t ^ t e were n«te
            within the trpnaeiun. In each case I certified the person to be dead aid notified
             tba attending policeman that in my opinion the patient was dead and gave the policeman
             try name.
             When we were satisfied that we ted examined all the people cn the Hoar
                                                                                  I wilted for
                    S L c t i a * tm n tte police. No fW ttr d u tto             of a* m l a t
             approximate 5.45 p-m- I left the Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.

             The points which I feel are important are as follows:
              i There were no r a i u via the public address system for medical aid nursing s***
              to                    ^     TO miruMs rn t I           tm . the otter md of a » srord
              that tte situation was so grave.'
              2.    AS far as I was aware, there were no aids for resuscitatim, such as oxygai, am^ys,
              or sucticn device to clear vomit    tnm the neuth.
              3. Assesaient of patients cn the field, sane of whan ney have hem dale to beresuscitated
              was tempered by a large nuttoer of people, many of them very agitated.
              I tope th is is of scne van*. I f further information is required I shall cf ocuree
              he w illing to provide i t .




               Matthew James Bull, M-B., Ch-B.
               gv*i iru of the Rqyal College of Radiologists




                   IS
