          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007



D R Fraser Esq                                                  Your reference:
Silverman Livermore Solicitors
11-13 Victoria Street                                           Our reference:
LIVERPOOL L2
                                                                Date:       S'     November 1997




I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence
relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. I understand that you represented
many of the families of those who died in the disaster, on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering
Committee, at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and at the Inquests. I am writing to ask for your
assistance.

2.      It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether
there is any significant new evidence about the disaster which was not previously available to
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities.
If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome
of any of the proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of
the year. I attach my terms of reference.


 Video evidence

3.     The information which I have is that two videotape recordings from the police monitors
were exhibited to the Taylor Inquiry, with the West Midlands police references TB1 and TB2
(Documents 109 & 110). The Taylor Inquiry also had as an exhibit a schedule of their
contents. TB1 ran from 11.59 to 15.04 and TB2 from 11.59 to 15.34.

4.     My understanding is that all the exhibits which had been prepared for the Taylor Inquiry
were made available to the legal representatives at the Inquests. The material required for each
day was placed in a side room at the hearings. The rest of it was kept at the local police station,
where any legal representative who required access could have it.

5.      Much of this Taylor material was not used at the Inquests, including the two videotapes
TB1 and TB2. The Inquest jury saw (inquest reference C278) a ‘compilation’ which the West
Midlands police had put together for the Taylor Inquiry from footage made available by the
police, the media, and Sheffield Wednesday. The ‘compilation’ included little of TB1 or TB2
as there was much more striking video coverage of events from the other sources. None of the
footage from TB2 after 15.04 was shown on it.

6.      I should be grateful if you would confirm that this accords with your recollection of
the position. Did you view videotapes TB1 and TB2 at the time of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or
the Inquests?

7.    Videotape TB2 contained shots taken by camera 5 (the one mounted on the
scoreboard, near the police control box) between 14.18 and 14.23. This showed spectators in
pen 2 of the Leppings Lane terrace, possibly following some misbehaviour. The camera
zooms and pans. The shots show very little of the adjacent pen 3, where most of the deaths
occurred.

8.     TB2 also contained shots from camera 5 of the Leppings Lane pens from 15.02
showing spectators climbing over the fence from pens 3 and 4, with scenes on the pitch
adjacent to the fence. Most of this sequence is in time-lapse and parts of it are distorted to
some degree by whitening and ‘flaring’. The Coroner showed this to his jury on 15 March
1991, after they had asked whether there was any video evidence of the terraces.

9.      The impression I have is that the police officers who were in the control box on the
day had an excellent view of the Leppings Lane terrace through the windows of their box and
they were looking through these rather than at their monitor screens. Was it ever your
understanding that these officers were saying that they could not see that pens 3 and 4 on the
Leppings Lane terrace were overcrowded because camera 5 was not working to its full
potential (as evidenced perhaps by the whitening and flaring on the tape)?


The aftermath

10.     During my scrutiny it has been submitted to me that the jury at the Inquest were
unaware that not all those who died did so before 3.15, and that not everybody who was crushed
and lost consciousness died.

11.    It appears to me that this must have been apparent to them from the following matters, if
none other:

        a        on 19 November 1990 (p. 16), in the course of his ruling on the 3.15 cut off
                 point, the Coroner said:

                 “that does not mean to say that some o f them did not in fact respire for a matter
                 o f time or even have a heartbeat [after 3.15], but the damage was done”]

        b        it was clear from the mini-inquests on Lee Nicol and Adam Spearitt that they
                 were alive when they reached hospital and died a considerable time later. In the
                 case of Philip Hammond, the summary at the mini-inquest states that he died in
                 hospital, although Dr Slater doubted this;

        c        in the course of Mr King’s submissions on day 1 of the main Inquest on the 3.15
                 cut-off he referred to two cases where recovery had taken place, notwithstanding



G: | HILLSBOR | M AIN\FRASER. 1 4 3
                  crushing and unconsciousness - a case referred to by Dr Glyn Philips (p8), and
                  a case referred to in the statement of Mr Saxton, a St John’s Ambulanceman
                  (who did not give oral evidence - p9);

         d       a number of witnesses at the Taylor Inquiry gave evidence of losing
                  consciousness, passing out, being resuscitated etc. These included Bradley,
                  Hennessey, Golding, and Clarke;

         e       similar evidence was given by witnesses at the Inquest, for example by Garrett,
                  Crawford, Langley, (Eddie) Spearitt and Ball; and

         f       Mr Wardrope gave evidence at the mini-inquests that of the 87 patients admitted
                 to hospital 17 were taken to the Cardiac Intensive Care Unit; and that there were
                 in addition 4 patients who were dead on arrival and 13 patients in all who died.
                 It would seem apparent that 8 of those taken to the intensive care unit must
                 have survived.

12.      I would be grateful for your comments on these points and particularly on whether you
as solicitor for the families were fully aware that not all those who died did so before 3.15 p.m.
and that not all those who were crushed and lost consciousness died.


Privilege

13.     I have asked that the families waive privilege and they have done so. In fact I do not
anticipate that the information I seek is privileged and I certainly do not want to know of any
advice you may have given your clients.
                                                       %




                                            (\A               \ f —"t,

LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G: | HILLSBOR | MAIN\ FRASER. 1 4 3
