                                                                            ^            Y   w
           CC WVcss N c c k e l s e A .
                                                     QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
               Iflr-C V scV ccrt-
               Mr *            Sr*jM* .
                tyr T v c ^ n ^ A •
                Itjr-                                           2 October 1989
                W r • feolfc-crv .
                tty • w \ o v j v -
                mr- M o ^ e r-.
                WNr- K)WaU«m.
                l'0r-C-*S«ViJ^ f PRR.
                 < V \r-L
                        *-• *

        <JsJc t\ V Vi/vAVV
                     z                    T
                                          I V c iU iV I
        Thank you for your letter of 20 September about the costs of the
inquiries by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium tragedy.

        When I said earlier in the year that the additional costs of these
inquiries should not fall on the West Midlands police authority, I added that
it would take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the West
Midlands police should be reimbursed.

        Following meetings with representatives of both police authorities
concerned - West Midlands and South Yorkshire - Lord Ferrers informed the
South Yorkshire police authority in June that, in view of the exceptional and
unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough tragedy, the Government was
prepared to give South Yorkshire a special payment from central funds to help
them with the additional costs of the work carried out on their behalf by the
West Midlands police.     Following this offer of special help, the South
Yorkshire police authority sought clarification from us about the scope of our
assistance. This has been given and was followed by a meeting between Home
Office officials and representatives of both authorities on 14 September.

         I am pleased to say that after that meeting the Clerk to the South
Yorkshire Police Authority wrote confirming that his authority was prepared
to accept our offer of special assistance, and arrangements are being made to
put this in hand speedily. The West Midlands police authority can, therefore,
now look to South Yorkshire for reimbursement of their additional costs in the
near future.




                                                                       J            .




Dave Nellist, Esq., MP.
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA
