     From- Mark Kieran                                     cc      Private Secretaries
           Parliamentary Section                                   Directors           £
           Room 864                                                Mr Granatt       cd

           Queen Anne’s Gate                                       Mr Warner
                                                                   Mr Owen
            0171-273 3705 (fax 3429)
            (E-mail: KIERAN Mark

            17 July 1997

                                                  ^   | rUvi_L                           LiUxX^                         >S JV * £ 0 ^ / ' f

                                                                 s >3   S fa zf^ L .     L               , Jr       A k 'U o L s ix K ^ L       .

                                                      £q~-A V j O -        p? .                                          A ~ r * .< *
    All Heads of Units and IND Directorates
                                                      ti                , J '^ c ftJ O u . ^ U L ^ C                         JtfVj        <K
                                   _5  £^-c.                                                           # 4 v w i» ^ L j      ^   jL-j   <— cA
    REQUEST FOR BRIEFING:
    DEBATE ON THE MOTION FOR THE SUMMER ADJOURNMENT ON
    WEDNESDAY 30 JULY 1997         o-
•                                                                                                               i   t

    The House o f Commons debate on the Motion for the Summer Adjournment will take place                                ^
    on Wednesday 30 July and will run from approximately 9.30am to 12.30pm.                                                      *



    This debate is an occasion for backbenchers to raise subjects of current interest. The Leader
    o f the House (The Rt. Hon. Ann Taylor, MP) will reply to the debate and, as on previous
    occasions, we have now been asked to provide briefing for her use in winding-up.

    Briefing must be limited only to those issues which may be raised during the debate;
    issues which, for example, are currently high profile, controversial, or of concern to a
    particular MP.

    The Lord President’s office have requested that contributions be kept as short as possible - a
    maximum o f one side o f A4 per subject which should include a background note and a line to
    take. Each piece o f briefing should also include the name and telephone number o f an official
    who will be standing by throughout the debate, in case any additional briefing is required.

    As our briefing package needs to be with the Lord President’s office by close o f play on
    Monday 2 8 ,1 would be grateful if all contributions (including nil returns) could reach me
    by 3.00pm on Friday 2 5 .1 will then arrange for them to be cleared by Ministers and
    forwarded to the Lord President.

    Briefing should ordinarily be sent ‘Immediate by Hand’ but fax and email may be used if
    necessary. Please alert me by phone if you intend to use fax or email.




    MARK KIERAN
    Legislation Clerk



    G:\ 1DEBATES\HOLIDAY\SUMMER97\COMMISS.DOC
 MEMORANDUM


 From: Peter Edmundson, Operational                  cc:      Paul Pugh
 Policing Policy Unit, Home Office
         Room 527                                   Your Ref:
                                                    File Ref:
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            Tel     0171 273 2621


 Date: 24 July 1997

 To:        Mark Kieman


 BRIEFING FO R THE SUMM ER ADJOURNM ENT DEBATE - 30 JULY

 I attach a line to take and background briefing on Hillsborough.




PETER EDMUNDSON




Document3
 BRIEFING FOR SUMMER ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - 30.7.97

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER; INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY OF
NEW EVIDENCE

Line to take

An independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is underway to determine
whether any new and significant evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster exists
which was not available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry, the inquests or to the prosecuting or
disciplinary authorities. The Home Secretary has undertaken to make public the report
o f the independent scrutiny and as much o f the documentary evidence considered by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible.

Background note

The Home Secretary announced in the House on 30 June that Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith is to conduct an independent scrutiny into the Hillsborough disaster. The terms
o f reference are:

     "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
    Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;
        (a) to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
        (b) to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney Generalfor the
            purpose o f discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
        (c) to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
            disciplinary matters;
    and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f
    such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State for the Home
    Department o f afurther public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to
    their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be
    relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
    which should be taken in the public interest. ”

The Home Secretary has given a commitment to publish Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report, expected at the end o f the year. He will also, as far as possible, make public
documentary evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has written to each o f the bereaved families inviting them to
bring to his attention any fresh evidence they may have. He has similarly written to
other interested parties who may have fresh evidence. Written evidence and
representations have been invited by 1 September 1997. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
intends to conduct all interviews with witnesses in private. He has also indicated he
will meet the families and their representatives in Liverpool where he will listen to
representations.

Contact point for additional briefing: Matthew Pyne (tel 273 2433)
