XN Q U I R Y   INTO         THE     HILLSBOROUGH
                                                    m
          STADIUM                 DISASTER




                         Before


                  LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                    MR. B. JOHNSON
       (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                            and

                   PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                      (ASSESSORS)




                            At

                    The Town H a l l ,

                      Sheffield,

                            on

               Wednesday,   7th June,    1989




               TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                  (Afternoon Session)



        From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                     (Afternoon Session)

                                           Page
P.S. SMITH Recalled

     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         70

S.F. FRY Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                74
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         78

P.C. GRUNNILL Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips               79
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         87
     By Lord Justice Taylor                 87

E.J. WILSON Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                88
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner           93
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis       94
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         95

W.C. CRAWFORD Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips               96
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner          107
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson         111
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Muller          114
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis      116
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow         118
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward        127

P. BRANSTON Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins               128
                     SIXTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS
                        WEDNESDAY,    7th JUNE,      1989

                           ( AFTERNOON S E S S I O N )

              P OLICE    SERGEA NT   P.S.   SMITH,       re-c al le d

                  Cross-examined       by MR.    WOODWARD:

Mr. Smith, your e x p er ie n ce of horse work in c rowds                    is
considerable?   A.       7% years now, sir.

And it does not only relate            to   football matches.                 A.     No,
sir.

It relates     to all manner of crowds.              A.        Yes,      sir.

All of whom in one way or another have had an i n te nt io n
to do something.   A.   That's right, sir.

And your c o n c l u d i n g o b s e r v a ti o n in rela ti on to the crow ds
on this day that you had never ever p r e vi o us l y been c on fr o nt e d
by a crowd of s up po r t e r s so unruly and so u nw il l in g to listen
to reason.       A.        Not at a football match, no, sir.

I want to ask you about the crowd that day.   This s ta rted
as a festival;  it was a carnival;   it was a day out;   it
was going to be a happy event.  A.  Yes, sir.

And the early part of the day s u g g es t ed that that was what
was going to happen.   A.   Yes, sir.

Would you agree that the last thing that one should achieve
is an o pp re s s i v e Police p re se n ce ? A. That's right, sir.

A low p rofi le and a low quant it y          has to be observed.
A.   Yes, sir.

B e ca us e the e ffect is ---?         A.    If you have c o n f r o n t a t i o n
you get no c o - o p e r a t i o n and we c annot police a football
ground w ithout the .co-operation of the fans, so the poli ci ng
is always low p rofile to e n co ur ag e c o - o p e r a t i o n between
Police Officer and fan.

The crowd at Le pp in gs Lane intent on maki ng its way through
the t ur n s t i l e s was a crowd which you e x pe ct ed to be dealing
with ao far as you were c on c er n ed from the road side rather
than the t u r n st il e side?     A.   Yes.

And in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s is that how you began              your p ol i ci n g
that day?    A.        It is indeed, sir.

And m atters p r o g r e s s e d well and a cc o rd i ng to your exp ec ta ti on .
A.    E xa ct ly as I thought it would go.             I had no p ro b le m
at all.

Of course,     the n a r r ow e st part there     is the p e r i m et e r         gate.
                                                               P. S. SMITH

A.     It is indeed,          sir.

Beyond it on the t u r ns ti le side there                     is room.
A.   More room.

You have been asked by Mr. Hytner and by others about
horses going into small areas with n um bers of people
there.   A.   Yes, sir.

If there had been any l i k e li h oo d of danger to your h or se me n
or any like li ho od of them not being able to be e f fe ct iv e
in that small area, would you have drea mp t of s en di ng them
in?   A.    No, sir.     I only did so beca us e I felt they
could do the job.

So of course the area is r es tr i ct e d but given the s i tu at io n
that then o btained what you were sett in g a bout seemed
feasible.    A.   Yes, sir.

N oth ing in your e xp er i e n c e to c o n t r a - i n d i c a t e         it?
A.    No, sir.

N o t w i t h s t a n d i n g the num bers of people           and n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g
their mood at the time.                  A.   No.

It should      have worked.            A.      Yes,      sir.

But it did not.            A.        No,    sir.

You have po li ce d a number of o cc as i on s when s ub st a nt i al
crowds have had to be rest r ai n ed from going where they
wanted to go.      A.  Yes, sir.

In the past has that been achie ve d                     by using men and
horses.   A.   It has indeed, sir.

W i th ou t them being        overcome.            A.     Yes,      sir.

Did   you police, for example,                a m atch at Tranmere                 -v- Crewe?
A.     I did, sir.

When was that?           A.      That was          four weeks after this event.

Of course,      they aredifferent crow ds                of s up porters.              A.      Yes,
sir.

And a d i f f er en t   venue.         A.     Yes,      sir.

But on that o cc as i o n did the e x p e c t a t i o n of c o n s i d e r a b l e
n umber s of people to go into the ground get f r us tr at ed ?
A.    They d idn't get frustrated, no, sir.

Were there some 4,000 or so that were locked out?
A.      Yes.      The a nt ic i p a t e d gate that day at this p a r t ic u la r
match was 15,000.              This is at a grbtnd which has an average
a tt en d a n c e of a p p r o x i m a t e l y 3,000, and at k i c k - o f f time,
which was 3 o'olock, there were still 4,000 peop le outside
the g r o u n d .trying to get in.                There was space in the ground
                                                                     P. S. SMITH

for them.        The p ro b l e m was that all the t ur ns t il e s with
the e x c ep ti on of two - two single t ur ns t il e s - had been
closed.       The last of those people got into the ground
at 4 o'clock, which was just as the second half was kick in g-
off, but ijithat hour that it took to get them into the
ground they formed into two orde rl y queues;            there was no
pushing, no shoving, no t ro uble at all, and there were
only three horses to police those people.

Some 4,000      or so people were p r ev en te d               from g e tt in g in on
the time.        A.   Yes, sir.

And they, despite         their    frustrations,           behaved.         A.     Yes,
very orderly.

It must have been very f r us tr at in g for many of them.
A.      Well, it was frustrating.       They e xp re ss ed their
f r us tr at io n about paying the full a dm is si on price when
they would only see half the game but other than that
there was no sign of disorde r from them.

In 1989 at Lep pi ng s Lane on the S em i- F in a l you spoke of
sending your men into the c rowd to orga ni se the crowd.
A.   Yes, sir.

And that seemed       to be working.               A.          It w orked   for a while,
yes, sir.

And then it was overcome.               A.         Yes,    sir.

At that time did you see any necessity, before those O ff i ce r s
had failed in their endeavour, to take any other steps?
A.       No, sir.       When they were i ni ti a ll y sent in to do the
job of s orting the people Q u t i n t o an orderly queue at the
t u rn s t i l e s what they e n d e a v o ur e d to do started to work
and at that point I saw no point in sending any further
horses in.          The two men were doing an a d mi ra bl e job and
had the s i t u at io n under control.

If you had felt that the sit u at i on was likely to get out
of c ontrol is that s o me th in g you w ould have raised with -----
A.    Yes, I would indeed, sir.

-- other Officers.           A.        Yes.

With   Mr.    Hand-Davis,    for    e x am pl e?          A.         Yes, sir.

Did you see any n e c es si ty      to do that?                 A.      Not at that
stage, no, sir.

B e cause those O f f i ce rs were f r us tr at ed in their endeavour,                    the
crowd got denser.          A.   It did indeed, yes, sir.

A line of horses was then put out a ga in st the t ur ns t il e
gate, a gainst the per i me t er gates.   A. Yes, sir, just
ou ts id e of the p er i m e t e r gates.

We have      heard that   there    then was p r od uc ed              some space between
                                                         P. S. SMITH

the backjcf the crowd at the t u r n st i le s and the p er im e te r
gates.    A.   Yes, sir.

Any i n d iv id ua l with a d es ti nation,        with a goal to go to,
will be intent on going forwards.                   A.   Yes, sir.

But was there a ny th i n g p re ss in g      those people       forwards
at the rear of the crowd?           A.         No, sir.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Mr. Woodward, do forgive me.
This is ground which has been well c ov ered by a number of
w i t ne ss es inc lu d in g this one and I think I have got that
point.

     MR. WOODWARD:   Sir, forgive me if I appear                       to labour
the point - if I do labour the point.

Behind those people was there space,- the gate and the
horses?    A.      Yes, there was a gap of about 8-10 ft.
between the people and the gate which at that time was
shut and i mm ed i a t e l y outside the gate were the horses.

When the gates had been closed and the horses were in
position, was there any reason why those outs id e on the
Le pp in gs Lane side should have c on t in u ed to press forward
apart from c ho ic e?   A.   No, sir, there was n o wh er e for
them to go.

It has been s u g g es te d to you that the gates should have
been closed a long time before.         A.   It has indeed,
sir.

What d i f f i c u l t i e s do you see in that?        A.   I don't see
the point of c losing the gate, sir.                  The average football
fan as we were c o n f r o n t e d    with that day, if you had closed
the gate on him, he would have c li mbed over it;                 he would
have pushed it to open it.               It would have s erved no
purpose.         What we did to try and stop people going through
that gateway was to block             the e n tr an ce with horses, which are
more e f f e ct iv e than the wroijght-iron gates.            The w r o u g h t - i r o n
gate would not have stayed shut for very long.

If Mr.    Proctor is right, that c l os in g of the gates was about
2.40.      A.   I would say about that time, sir.

Some time before Gate C was opened.  A.   I d on't know.
I did not see Gate C opened but I do know now when it
was opened.

That was at 2.48?           A.      Yes,   sir.

Some 8 m inutes      or so.       A.       Yes,   sir.

D uri ng those 8 m in u t e s would it be fair to say there was
no p r e s su re until the line of the p er i me t er gate and the
horses was b roken upon the c ro wd at the rear of the t u r ns t il e ?
A.     No.      No p r e s s u r e on them at all.
hit
                                     74

                                                        S. F. FRY



                 POLICE CONSTABLE STEPHEN FRANK FRY Called

                          Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

      Q. Is your full name Stephen Frank Fry? - A. That is
         correct.

      Q. You are also from Merseyside?       - A. That is correct.

      Q. You came over with the Sergeant who has just given
         evidence and I think seven other Constables? - A. Yes.

      Q. Your initial duties were patrolling in Halifax Road? - A.
         Yes, we patrolled the Halifax Road area awaiting the
         arrival of the special train with Liverpool fans.

      Q. I think you were with a Constable Radford? - A. Yes,        sir.

      Q. Did there come a time when you were called by radio to
         return to Leppings Lane turnstiles as the situation was
         becoming difficult to manage? - A. That was after the
         escort of the train fans.

      Q. Yes.   What sort of time was this? - A. It would have
         been about, or shortly after, quarter past two.   That is
         the last time I recall looking at my watch.

      Q. When you got down to Leppings Lane what was the situation
         that faced you? - A. I moved up towards the perimeter
         fencing.    I could see into the entrances for the terrace
         area.    It was quite congested.   There were two mounted
         Officers inside that area.

      Q. That is Grunnill and Stanbridge?        - A. Yes.

      Q.    What were they trying to do as far as you could tell? -
           A. I could see  they were endeavouring to make some sort
           of order of the crowd inside that area.

      Q.    What about the perimeter gate?  At that stage was there
           any line or any attempts to control people at the
           perimeter gate when you arrived? - A. There appeared to
           be some attempts by mounted Officers already there to
           control the flow into the area immediately in front of
           the turnstiles.

      Q. Was it succeeding at that stage? - A. There was some
         effect, sir.

      Q. What did you do? - A. I moved into the gateway, the
         perimeter gateway immediately next to the corrugated iron
         barrier leading into the terrace section.
                              75

                                            S. F. FRY


Q.   The middle? - A. Just there,   sir.

Q.   Just to the right, as it were, of the middle? - A. To the
     right of that barrier, yes, sir.

Q. What did you try to do? - A. I positioned   myself there
   with a view to stem the flow into the compound, into the
   inner area, to give my colleagues inside a chance to sort
   themselves out.

Q. At this stage were the perimeter gates still open? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Did you try to persuade people to back off? - A. The
   people who immediately came under pressure on my right
   hand side, I was facing that way.

Q. That is out into Leppings Lane? - A. Out into Leppings
   Lane.   I appealed to them to wait to give us a chance to
   clear the congestion at the turnstiles.

Q.   Did those attempts have any effect? - A. A very minimal
     effect.   Some people did agree to step to one side, but
     by and large the crush was such that   they were pushed
     back against me in a short time.

Q.   Did you see other mounted Officers doing much the same   as
     yourself? - A. There were other Officers close to me
     doing the same, yes.

Q. Still at this stage the perimeter gates remained opened?
   - A. The perimeter gates.   I could see in front of me
   that efforts were being made to close the gates closest
   to the river, but there were no foot Officers close to me
   so there was only myself to lock those gates at the time.

Q. Did the use of the horses in the way you have described
   creating an easing of the pressure on the crowd in the
   turnstile area? - A. There was an easing of the pressure
   on the inside, although those people at the back did
   still continue to push towards the turnstiles.

Q. I think there came a time when your horse was forced out
   of position? - A. Unfortunately yes, sir.

Q. And people went through? - A. Yes.

Q. After that was there   another cordon formed? - A. Yes,
   shortly after that I   joined a nose to tail cordon a bit
   further out.   I was   at the position closest to the sweet
   shop and the back of   my horse was up against the sweet
   shop front.
3 ’
                                 76

                                                   S. F. FRY


      Q. By this time were the foot Officers on the perimeter
         gates? - A. Making efforts to secure the gates, yes, sir.

      Q. Did this have any effect, this cordon of horses and
         shutting the gates by foot Officers? - A. Yes, as soon as
         the cordon had been formed there was a decrease of the
         people on the inside of the cordon and we came under
         pressure on the outside of the cordon in much the same
         way as I had when I took up position in the gateway.

      Q. Were you still calling to people not...    - A. All the
         time.

      Q. What effect was that having, if any? - A. Again, a
         minimal effect.   Even those close to me who could hear
         me clearly were forced against me by people further out.

      Q. Did people get through the cordon? - A. There were odd
         ones getting past me, either under the horse's head or,
         indeed, squeezing its hindquarters into the shop doorway.

      Q. But that was only odd ones? - A. Just odd ones, yes.

      Q. Did you see what effect all this was having upon the
         crowd inside the turnstile area? - A. I did not have a
         clear view of the inside of that particular turnstile
         area from the sweet shop.

      Q. Did a gap develop on your left? - A. Yes, it was quite
         clear to see there had been some relief of the pressure
         inside.

      Q. At some time shortly after that were you aware that the
         crowd had dissipated, or was beginning to dissipate
         inside the turnstile area? - A. I looked inside the
         turnstile area on many occasions and there was a slow
         relief of the pressure.

      Q. Did you see any of the concertina gates open at any
         stage?- A. No.   In the position I was I could not see
         any of those gates.

      Q. Did there come a time when the crowd out    in Leppings
         Lane, that is, the Leppings Lane side of    the line, went
         through? - A. I was aware there was some    break in our
         horse cordon a little further along from    me but I could
         not say where.

      Q. After that once the cordon was broken, did it re-form
         or... -A. I think efforts were made to re-form it.
         There was also in conjunction with that a release of the
         pressure inside the turnstile area.    I could see that
         quite definitely the area had cleared.
tf   »




                                      77
                                                       S. F. FRY


         Q.   You now know because the gates were opened, but      you did
              not then appreciate that? - A. Yes.

         Q.   What is your experience, Hr. Fry, with   policing football
              crowds? - A. As a mounted Officer nine   and a half years.

         Q. That means, I imagine, you are fairly familiar with
            dealing with Liverpool football crowds? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Have you been to Hillsborough before? - A. On one
              previous occasion in 1988 with Sergeant Smith.

         Q.   The one mentioned by Sergeant Smith.    How would you
              compare the crowd of Liverpool supporters to that with
              which you were familiar? - A. On this 1989 occasion?

         Q. Yes. - A. Initially when I was patrolling in Halifax Road
            they were no different than I would expect on such a day,
            but by the time I had moved into the area immediately
            round the turnstiles it was becoming a sort of determined
            effort made by them to get in at any cost it seemed to
            me.   They were beginning to lose their reason, I think.

                    HR. COLLINS:   Thank you.




                      Cross-Examined by HR. WOODWARD
V
                               78



                                                 S.E. FRY


                     Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD;

    Q. That extended, Officer, even to beating the horses? - A.
       Yes sir, indeed, I could feel him flinching under the
       horse and I did see people striking him in the face.

    Q. You saw individuals trying to beat the horse, hitting him
       on the face and head? - A. Yes sir.

             MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.

             MR. COLLINS:  Sir, before we call the next witness
       may I say that we have discovered unfortunately that two
       of the Officers, that is Scott and Woodward who were due to
       be called, are at the moment on annual leave.  I am not
       sure when they will be able to return.  I understand
       Mr. Scott won't be back till the 26th of June and Mr. Woodward
       until the 12th.

             We can either defer calling them, if they are felt to
       be essential, or perhaps we can put in their statements and
       you can treat their statements as their evidence again
       giving such weight as you think proper, but perhaps sir
       we can discuss that between us and decide at the end of the
       day.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, I would be content to do
       that unless any other Counsel thinks that some oral evidence
       from them is essential.

             MR. HYTNER:  I wonder if I might say at this stage,
       sir, because I was going to say it at some stage because
       of the way the evidence has gone today.

             Some of the public, of course some of whom are my
       clients, don't entirely follow the procedure which obviously
       is understandable because they are not lawyers, and could
       I make it clear to them through you, sir, and I am sure
       you would want this done, that where evidence is given which
       we regard as repetitive and going over the same ground, the
       fact that we don't cross-examine does not mean that we accept
       what they are saying and the fact of course that we sir are,
       I particularly and others ask no questions does not mean that
       we are docilely accepting the truth of what they are saying,
       and in relation to these two statements of course, my
       observations are the same.  They go over the same ground.
       I have no objection to them being put in because if they
       were called I probably would not have cross-examined them
       for the reasons I have given.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Mr. Hytner.
        *

    0                                  79

x                                                   F.N. GRUNNILL


                    MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, in relation to those statements
              I am not sure whether my views are being asked for but
              may we discuss that?

                    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I was not asking for them at
              the moment.  I was simply suggesting that I for my part
              would be prepared to adopt the course Mr. Collins has
              suggested unless any individual Counsel thinks that the
              witness should be brought to be cross-examined on a parti­
              cular issue.

                    MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you sir.


                            POLICE CONSTABLE GRUNNILL Called

                                Examined by MR. PHILLIPS:

            Q. You are Police Constable Grunnill.     Is that right? - A. Yes
               sir.

            Q. You are with the Merseyside mounted Police? - A. Yes sir.

            Q. How long have you been a mounted Officer? - A. 30 years, sir.

            Q. You have had experience, have you, in all sorts of crowd
               situations as a mounted Officer? - A. Yes sir.

            Q. You have presumably acted as such at football matches at
               Anfield and other places in Liverpool? - A. Yes sir.

            Q. Have you been across to Sheffield before? - A. Yes, a few
               years ago sir, I can't remember exactly.

            Q. You have of course also acted as mounted Officer on occasions
               when there have been very heavy crowds? - A. Yes sir.

            Q. I want to   ask you about this particular occasion.  Y«au were
               on duty at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Is that
               right? - A. Yes sir.

            Q. With your Sergeant,   Sergeant Smith and Constable   Stanbridge?
               - A. Yes sir.

            Q. And I think there were other Officers from the South Yorkshire
               Force? - A. That is right sir.

            Q. You were there at the turnstile end of the Leppings Lane
               ground the whole of  the time, were you not? - A. That is
               right, sir.
            Q. Until about 2 o'clock or just after 2 o'clock how were things
               for you? - A. Quite orderly.

            Q. Were they   any different from   what you would have expected
               from your   long previous experience? — A. No.
     V
n°
OV                                       80

                                                  F.N. GRUNNILL


         Q. When did things start to change? - A. It started, the crowd
            started to build up at about 20-past-2 and I was on the
            inside in what you call the compound area, is it?

         Q. On the inner side of the perimeter gates do you mean? - A.
            Yes, that is right.  I went and stood my horse just in front
            of the blue barrier because I noticed that though we expected
            all the fans and supporters to come up Leppings Lane, they
            were coming over the bridge and through that side and trying
            to come on to the crowd this way, therefore causing a bottle­
            neck as they were pushing or starting to move in. When I
            moved alongside in front of that gate and I was asking the
            people or shouting to the people to move round and just come
            in, it did help.

         Q. Did you notice the speed with which people were going through
            the turnstiles into the ground? - A. That was noticeable.
            I am used to Anfield and Goodison and the slowness was what
            amazed me.  In my opinion it was slower than Anfield when
            they take money.

         Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: And this was at a stage before
                 the build-up? - A. Oh yes. It was apparent that they were
                 going in slow from the start sir. There was also a point
                 that they were being searched which tended to slow it down
                 as well because not everybody was being searched, but if
                 a crowd are going up or a group of men are going up, or
                 a group of boys or youths are going up and somebody is pulled
                 to one side to be searched, then their friends go with them
                 and this starts to create a bottle-neck around your gate.

         q   .          MR. PHILLIPS: Which particular turnstiles did you
                 have in view when you observed this? - A. When I was stood
                 in line the people were going up I could see looking through
                 all the turnstiles that it was slow.  You could see them
                 being searched and you can see that building.

         Q. Apart from the searching could you see any other cause for
            this apparent slowness? - A. No, not really except for just
            going through the turnstile.

         Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: You have some searching at Anfield?
                 - A. Yes sir we do have some searching.

         Q. So what was the difference? - A. A lot of searching at Anfield
            is done on the inside sir.

         Q.      Once they are through the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

         q   .          MR. PHILLIPS: Well is it the case then that there is
                 no searching done on the outside before they get to the
                 turnstiles at Anfield? - A. Oh yes, there is selective
                 searching there and then it is a joint activity between the
                 men outside on foot and the Police Constables inside.
                                81
                                            F.N. GRUNNILL


Q. Are you saying that the selection of people for searching
   at Sheffield, that more people were being selected to be
   searched than would have been the case at Anfield? - A. Well
   I could not say that sir, no.

Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLORs  What we are trying to get at is
        whether there is anything significantly different about the
        searching at Hillsborough as against Anfield which you thought
        could contribute to the slowness, or was that not in your
        view the reason for the slowness? - A. It did help sir later
        on because when the crowd was building up around the gates
        and you are still searching, you are people pulling out of
        the queue, their friends join them, but as for searching at
        Anfield there is a different atmosphere because where I work
        at Anfield I work on the Kop which is the home ground and
        there is not the same degree of searching done on the home
        end of the ground as there is on away.   Now when you get to
        Sheffield and you are doing this ground then everybody is
        an away supporter.

q   .        MR. PHILLIPS:  So is    it fair to say that at Anfield
        at the away end there was    just as much searching as there
        was at Hillsborough? - A.    I would not know sir because I
        have never worked there.     I have done 20 years on the Kop,
        sir.

Q. How did things progress from that point onwards? - A. Well
   it started to build up. They started to spread out around
   the gates, so the idea was then on my past experience and
   from working, together with Constable Stanbridge we decided
   to take our horses in and make our way between the gates.
    As you look at it I took the gate that is nearest to the
   fence.

Q. Nearest to the sweet shop do you mean on the corner? - A. No,
   no, I never went out of the compound where the Usher has got
   the stick.  I spent all my time in there and I was working
   up towards my gate. My colleague took the other side nearest
   and we made our way in between the gates, the idea being that
   if you put the horse between the gates then you will funnel
   them, the supporters will go between you and the horse and
   the horse will take some of the pressure and they will head
   for the gates.

Q. Did that happen? - A. That did happen, yes.

Q. For how long did that happen? - A. It only happened for
   about five minutes.

Q. What happened after that? - A. There was a surge from behind.
   At the time when we had gone in we had the assistance of
   the supporters because the supporters recognised myself and
   Constable Stanbridge because both of us have done that long
   that some of them recognised us. When we were talking to
   them and saying:  "Hold, hold" we got, I know on my side
                        82

                                  F.N. GRUNNILL


that I got three men to hold back and the pressure, we just
got those in front to ease off.   The thing is if you talk
to a crowd and you have got the co-operation, you police
by consent with the crowd and these people were there and at
that time before the surge they were with us. There was
no trouble.




                        /Q. Now at that time
                            83

                                                 F.N. GRUNNILL



Q. Now, at that time, before the surge, were the turnstiles
   operating? - A. Yes, they were operating.

Q. Were they still going slowly? - A. Slowly, but they were
   operating.

Q. Can you say what time it was this surge came? - A. It must
   have been after half-past-2.  I could not really say because
   while I am working I am not for ever looking at my watch.

Q. No, of course.  But you say it was after half-past-2? - A. I
   think that because I know that the party from the railway came
   up, the railway supporters from the train came up and went in,
   and they went in quite well.  I was stood alongside them.
   They wanted to stand around and shout, but we were just
   saying, "Come on, come on, in", and they were moving in quite
   amicably, no trouble whatsoever.  When it started to build up
   we went in.  We had it for 5 minutes.  So it was some time
   after half-past-2.

Q. What happened as a result of the surge? - A. We had gone in
   head on to the gate.  Just before that you can feel.     You can
   feel and sense a crowd, and you can feel it building up.     So I
   turned my horse round to face on because if he c a n ’t see what
   is happening he gets upset.  So I turned him round so he can
   face the people, and the people feel a lot safer because they
   are not looking at the back end of a horse.  They are more
   frightened of the back end than they are of the front end.
   So I managed to turn him round so he was facing the crowd.

Q. Were the crowd then taking any notice of anything you said or
   did? - A. After the surge no, it had gone.  The help I had had
   been swept forward on to it.

Q.   What was the attitude of the people near to you after this
     surge had come through? - A. A lot of them were frightened,
     frustrated, frightened.  The young people were shouting for
     help, "Get me out", and they were lifted over and passed over.

Q.   How many of those people did you see having that done to them?
     - A. I can't say.  It   is going on all the time.The crowd
     themselves moved people.    You are there and stand there and
     you lift them over and pass them over, and you can do a couple
     of them.   You have to consider the people.

Q. Did you get the impression that the failure to comply with
   what you wanted the crowd to do was the result of crowds not
   wanting to assist or not being able to assist? - A. Not
   being able to assist.  I have never yet in 30 years years
   met a person out of a football crowd who will say that he
   pushes. Nobody pushes.  They are pushed, but they d o n ’t
   push.
V-
                                 84

                                                        F.N. GRUNNILL



     Q. Did you see any people who you could truthfully say were
        pushing rather than being pushed? - A. No, I couldn’t say
        that.

     Q. What was done to alleviate this situation? - A. Alleviate what
        situation?

     Q. The situation you had got of people being pushed into this pen
        where you were with your horse? - A. At that time what
        happened on the first surge I had moved away, come down a bit
        off the gates so that the crowd then were round him, and it
        was like a bar of soap.   You squeeze a bar of soap and you
        start to lift.   The pressure on the horse started to move, and
        it started to lift, and I could feel him being lifted, and he
        got agitated.  That was what told me.   The horse always likes
        to feel sound, whether it is on your foot or on the floor,
        that he has to be sound.   When that started it was my duty to
        take him out of the crowd, which I did, and went down to the
        back, and at that time I noticed they were trying to shut the
        perimeter gates .

     Q. So you took your horse to the further side of the railings
        near to gate C? - A. No, I d i d n ’t.

     Q. Further towards gate C? - A. I took him straight down there,
        out of    the thing and to assist a Police Constable that was
        trying    to shut the blue perimeter gates ,     which we d i d .
        Then I    came back.   That is when the gap developed, and I
        went into the gap at the back of the crowd - I say
        ’’people’’ would be labouring the point - but to ask people.
        Some people did.     A few people did come off the crowd.

     Q. There was a time when those gates were shut, the perimeter
        gates? - A. Yes.

     Q. And you were on the inside of those gates? - A. Yes.

     Q. With your horse? - A. Yes.

     Q. In the gap which had developed behind the crowd? - A. That is
        right.

     Q. Did you get any co-operation when you were speaking to the
        people in the crowd then? - A. A few.  A few people came off,
        but the length of time we are talking about, when you are
        there it seems like ages.  When you come back and look at
        reality it was only about 5 minutes.

     Q. You say a few people came off? - A. A few people came off.

     Q. What about the others? - A. This was where we were getting the
        abusive language and we were told what to do and where to do
        and where our fathers came from.

     Q. And was this a reaction you had previously experienced? - A.
        Yes.  I have been told what I am for 30 years.
3'
                                 85

                                                         F.N. GRUNNILL



     Q. What was the next thing to happen? - A. The next thing to
        happen was the surge again from when the gates were forced
        open and the people went in.

     Q. You say "forced open"? - A. Well, I d o n ’t know what happened.
        I was stood trying to talk.   The next minute there was a surge
        up.  I was parallel to the back of the crowd asking.         You bend
        down and are talking.  If I am bending down this way talking
        to people there and something happens h e r e . I d o n ’t know what
        happens.  The gates come.   The people came streaming in.        They
        were under.  I was not close up to the back of the crowd
        because I was endeavouring to ask people to come off, so there
        is no point in being close, but I was in the way.         So some of
        the agile supporters go underneath him.     He is very sound and
        he has done a lot of ground, but even he got a bit agitated
        with that, people popping up all round him.




                                 /Q. Did you see any of the
                             86


                                           F. N. GRUNNILL

Did you see any of the large c o n c e r t i n a gates open?
A.     No. I never saw   what you are talking about,
Gate C.     When that crowd came up, I came out again
because of this b usiness of diving under him.          I didn't
want him to injure anybody, so I went over and stood
just past that blue bar thing.       No, the other side of the
fence there.     Just a bit further over.          That's it.
Then we were g oing         There was m y s e l f and S t a nb r id g e
again.     We thought, "If we go in and try and block the
gate with the horses it will ease the p r es su re " so we
tried ---

Do you mean the peri me te r gate?            A.   The p er im e te r gate.
We tried to go in.         By this time both horses, who are without
doubt two of the best M e r s e y s i d e Police horses, would not
walk into the crowd.            They w ould not walk in;         they had had
enough.    The only way I got him to go back t ow ards that
gate was to rein him bac kw a rd s into it.             This is done
gently and eased in, and it was at this time that I noticed,
as I was going back towards that gate, which must have been
from the time you teJJ- me that Gate C was opened b ec ause
they s tarted to drift off the back of the crowd and on to
that gate.     That is where I take it they were going because
they were coming off and around and down that way and, as
I said in my evidence, I was most r e li ev ed beca us e when you
are looking down at that crowd and you see people pushed
a gainst the wall either side of that gate and the pres su re
was keeping them a gainst the wall.              They c ou l dn ' t move side wa ys
to go in the gate, they cou l dn ' t do anything;               they were
stuck a gainst the gate.             It is most f ru st r at i ng e sp ec i al l y
when you are e n d e a v o u r i n g to ask p eople to come off.          Then
they went that way and it eased g re atly - the pres su re
eased off - and then it seemed to close.                  Then I ruticed
that the Gate B opened and the p eople went in there, but
that was not open ---

Did  you see many people go in t here?     A.      It wasn 't
opened all that long.    As far as I can r e me mb er it wasn 't
open very long but it helped to take the peop le off the
front of the gate.     They went in, the gate was shut and
we got the rest of the people thro ug h the o r di na ry gates
in an o rderly fashion.

C ould you give us any e sti ma te      of the n umber    that went
t hr ough B Gate?  A.    No.

So you saw p eople going t hr ough C Gate ---             A.   No,   I
c ou ld n' t see C G&te from w here I was.

You saw people going down the side           towa rd s C Gate.   A.        I
saw p eople going down towar ds what         I now know as CGate
but I never saw a nybody go thro ug h        it.

And it was after     that that you saw       B Gate open?      A.That's
it, yes.

For a short time.       A.    I take it it must have been after
C Gate c losed be ca us e p eople were d ri f ti n g back from that
                                    87


                                                               F. N. GRUNNILL

     gate or from that d i r e ct i on to come round that pole and
     back in and I take it that that had been closed, and then
     I do know thet gate opened.

                     Cross-examined             by MR.     WOODWARD:

Q.   Sir, what you have d e s c ri be d seems like a skill and an
     art - the control of a horse in those sort of situations.
     There came a time in 1989 when you deci de d to take! your
     horse towards the turnstiles.         A.  Yes, sir,

Q.   To i mpose some sort of order there and to relieve                               a
     siutation.    A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Did     you have any qualms       about going to do that?                         A.         No.

Q.   Is that a standard, fairly r e co g ni s ed p ro c ed u re so far as
     you are c o n c e r n e d ? A. If we did not do it at Liverpool^
     sir, they w ould be amazed.

Q.   You do it at L i ve rp oo l?        A.         Yes,   sir.

Q.   So it is freq ue nt ly   done.            A.     Yes,    sir.

Q. And it has proved          effe ct iv e          time after time.             A. Yes,         sir.

Q.   When you did it onthis     occas io n it was p ro ving                 effective.
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   When there was a ma ss iv e         surge       from behind       you.          A.    That's
     right, sir.

Q.   What c aused   that,   of course,           you cannot         say.        A.        No,    sir.

Q.   But it was a sudden mo ve m en t or   influx of people                          that
     o ve rc am e your endeavours.   A.  Yes, sir.

Q. And but for that you would                 have s u c c ee d ed ?       A.        I think
   so , y e s .

                            By LORD JUSTICE            TAYLOR:

Q.   I think we may have seen you on the video; is that right?
     A.  Yes, sir.   I was not the man that lent down.

Q.   You    were not? A.       No,       sir.        That is P.C.          Scott, sir.

Q.   I am sorry.   A.   That is alright,                     sir.      I was going              to
     make that point clear.

Q.   Very well.   We had no s o u n dt r ac k at that point and that is
     what I was going to ask for.         A.    It was all very polite,
     sir.
                                       88




                        P.C.   ELI Z AB E TH   JANE WILSON,     called

                               E x a m i ne d by MR.   COLLINS:

Q.   E l i za be th   Jane Wilson,      is that    right?       A.   Yes,     sir.

Q.   You are with the South             Yor k sh i re M ou n te d Branch.      A.    Yes,
     that is correct.

Q.   I think you have got 9 years s e rv ic e?                  A.    Yes.

Q.   And have you po li ce d other football g r ou nd s?      A.   Yes,
     c e r ta in ly all the ones in the South Y o rk sh ir e district.

Q.   I nclud ing H i l l s b o r o u g h ? A. Yes% many times.    I have
     also w orked at D e r b y s h i r e as well.     Derby Coun ty ground.

Q. Have you done H i l l s b o r o u g h in a full house?                A.   Yes,
   c e r t a i n l y in excess of 40,000, 45,000.

Q. And at L eppi ngs         Lane b ef or e?      A.     Yes,   certainly.

Q.   I think on this o c c a si on you were riding a h orse w hich was
     s li g ht l y i n e x p e r i e n c e d ? A. Very much i n ex pe ri en ce d.

Q.   And that meant that you d eci de d i ni ti a ll y to keep or to try
     to keep out of the thick of any p os s ib l e problems.
     A.       Yes, I was well aware if I put the horse in any
     s i t u at io n at all that s hould he not be able to cope with
     it I would cause more p ro b le m s than enough.

Q.   I think we can c o n v e n i e n t l y split what I want to ask you
     about by the a rrival of the train.            You r em em be r the
     arriva l of a s pecial train?            A.   Yes.

Q. B efore that time, which was shor tl y after 2, about 2.15,
   I think we have heard, as I say b e fo re that time were you
   aware of any p ar t i c u l a r p ro b le m as you saw it in r el a ti o n
   to the Liv er p oo l fans a rr i vi n g?           A.     Yes, they did seem
   to be c o n g r e g a t i n g on the s e ct i on of road Vere Road to
   sweet-s hop, as is always known at any match, that we have
   to move along.              I n ot i ce d that n u me ro us of these peop le
   were c a r r y i n g cans of beer, k-litre plas ti c c o nt a i n e r s of
   beer, and it is also usual with p e op le coming over the
   L ep pin gs Lane b ri dg e to the t ur n st i le area that that tends
   to get a little bit packed and we were r e q u e st e d to keep
   this area clear, of which there were people not p a r t i c u la r ly
   c au sin g any p r o b l e m but n um e ro u s p eo pl e    ---

Q.   People     ha ng in g   about?      A.      -- s tood on the b r id g e drinking.

Q.   It was p eo pl e dri nk in g rather than anyt hi ng else - just
     h a nging a round dri nk i ng - which was the problem, was it?
     A.      Yes, they were h ang in g around.             They were not in
     a p a r t i c u l a r d es p e r a t e rush to get into the ground.    I
     have no idea if they were t i c k e t - h o l d e r s or not but they
     were quite happy to stay put where they were at that time.
                                  89


                                                 E. J. WILSON

Q. Did you at some stage make some attempts to clear them
   away?        A.        My attempt was to keep the road open.          I
   was able to see, s lightl y after the arrival of the train
   escort, that I c ould see that as the train e s co r t went
   in p r e p a r a t i o n  to the t ur ns t il e area that there was more
   than h un dr ed s of pe op l es c oming from the other d ir e ct i on
   of w hich there did not appear to be many P olice O ff i ce r s
   there, and the road would e f f e c t i ve l y be blocked.          This
   was my c oncern           at that time and this is what I a tt e mp t ed
   to do, to keep the road open.

Q. And you were then on the r ou nd a bo u t side, that is the
   swee t- sh op s ide,r ath er , of the Leppi ng s Lane o ut si de the
   p er i m e t e r ? A.  I was on the a rr ival point of the train
   s ectio n by the swefet-shop and as they filtered through
   I then moved to the start of the b ridge to cover the whole
   district up to the C atchb ar Lane area.

Q.   I think you were      aware at some stage of a fight?
     A.   Yes.

Q.   This was after     the train had arrived,       I think?     A.     That's
     right, yes.

Q. Did thet last long or cause much d i ff i cu l ty ?     A.    My
   a t te n t i o n was drawn by some foot offic er s up at the
   Ca tc hb ar Lane traffic lights who s ee me d to be c ha sing
   p erhaps a dozen people.            What they had done I had no
   idea but there was some th in g going off and they were
   waving their arms for our a ss istance, of w hich a youth was
   detained, and on that being s orted out the w hole of the
   road area - not only just the p at h wa y s both sides of the
   b ridge which were blocked, but e f fe c t i v e l y there were
   pe d e s t r i a n s m oving the whole way across the road, not just
   a few but many, and then s om e th i ng else h a p p e ne d on the
   b ridge area there as well.

Q.   What was that?             A.   That was a no th er fight that took
     place.    Many p e o p l e 9---      If a fight takes place, it is
     just a n atural r e a c ti on for more p eople to run and see
     what happens.           It was my c on ce rn at that time that
     owing to a p p r o a c h i n g half past two, knowing that there
     was many people b ehind being d el ay ed g e tt in g into the
     ground, a fight takes place, e v e r y bo d y runs.        From 20-30
     people running, you have got 200 there and chaos.

Q.   A nyway the   fight was sort ed   out,   I think.   A.     Right.

Q.   Fairly speedily.   A.    Al th o ug h the road was b l oc k e d at
     that time.    Traffic could not get through.

Q.   I think there came a time which you put in your s ta te m en t
     at about q uarter to three but I am not g oing to tie you to
     times.   A.    No.

Q. When there was an a ss is t a n c e requ es t at the turnstiles.
   A.   That is right.
                                    E. J. WILSON

You at this stage were on the bridge, I think, or at the
edge of the bridge.   A.   Yes, at the end of the bridge.
I was able to see up over beyond the crowd what was
happening.

Can you help us as to what you thought of the attitude of
the fans at about this timef that you saw around you on
the bridge area?     A.   Yes.    Ce rtainly when my attentions
were taken to going along the bridge area just before these
two in cidents it was quite easy to see that many people
were aff ected by drink.    They cert ai nly were not falling
over but they   were definitely aff ected - the glazed sort
of appearance, not wishing to listen to any instructions,
whatever you said to them just was not adhered to.

They did not listen and they appeared to be affect ed by
drink.  An yt hi ng else about them?    A.   Yes, there was
a very strong smell of liquor.       Very strong draught of it.

What was their attitude to you?    A.          Well, as the   other
Of ficers have said, plenty of abuse.

Can I now come to the call for assistance.         When you
went up to see what you could do, the state of affairs
at the t u rn sti le s was no doubt as we have heard d e s cr ib ed
by many, a co ng est ed mass.      A.   Yes, that's right.

What did you start to do or assist in doing?     A.   Well,
I could see that people were going over the wall.     I
could see that the surge of the crowd was making diff ic ul ti es
for the horses at the front there standing.     I knew that
if I tried to put my horse in that sit uation be probably
would not be able to cope with it, so the only   thing that
I could do was get to the back of the crowd and try and
calm people.

That is what you tried to do, was it?      A.    I tried to do
that.     I also kept my eye on my sup ervisors as to any
inst ruc tio ns from them but it was obvious that from the
pos ition I was in there was absolu te ly no way at all I could
get into that crowd.

So you did not form part of this perimeter ---?   A.   Yes,
I did eventually.   Something that happened prior to that
was the fact that a Police Landrover came along.    I knew
the driver of the vehicle and ---

That is P.C. BSstton, is it?         A.   Yes, I donJt think a
co n v er s at io n took place,but I knew his aim was to get
the vehicle to the back of the crowd or at least a
little bit into the crowd so mys el f and another Officer
I was working with, we tried to form a 'V' to get the vehicle
in but that was hopeless so the vehicle stayed at the back
of the crowd.         It was only until the perimeter gate was
shut that caused a sterile area so I was able to get through
between the Landrover and this area and join in this cordon.
                                    E. J. WILSON

Did you hear anything being an nounced over the Landrover
louds pe ake r?  A.     A^ain, I could see Inspector Ellis.
I know his voice but it was just a garbled message.         You
could not di st ing uis h the words.   I was only a mat te r of
feet away from him and I certainly could not hear what
he was trying to shout.

Although no doubt you are affected to some extent by
the helmet, are yog?   A.   That is too true, yes.

What about the general noise level out there?   Was there
a lot of noise?   A.   Yes, not only the noise from the
Leppings Lane end but also the noise from inside the ground
as well.

We know that very shortly after that the gates were
opened and the crowds inside the pe rimeter fence began to
dissipate a bit;  is that right?    A.   Yes.

How long did you form part of the -- or how long did the
perimeter gate barrier hold so far as you could tell?
A.    Again, I really have no idea at all.   All that I
remember is once I got into that cordon and line-up
initi al ly I had a very good impact.  It took all my
strength to hold my horse into position.    In fact, it
was smacked about the head, the reins were pulled, people were
pushing in front of it and behind it.    He did move
fractionally and people moved through, pushed behind me.
We regained it and then I think it was two horses further
down the line a large surge went through which may have
been a couple of minutes, three minutes, and then it was
regained again.




                                    /You,   I think,   heard.
                             92

                                               E. J. WILSON



Q. You, I think, heard something at some stage, or got the
   impression there might be a delay in the kick-off? - A.
   Yes, this is true.   When we formed the cordon, whether
   it was a radio message or whatever, I was quite sure I
   had heard a message that the game would be delayed.

Q. You had a radio I take it? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you say anything about that? - A. Yes, I shouted this
   to numerous people and it did seem initially to calm
   them.   In my mind at that point the only thing that
   would stop these people panicking would be the delay of
   the start of the game.   I was fully aware myself there
   were thousands still outside and it would certainly have
   to be until half past three to get these people through.

Q. Did you say that it had been delayed for that period? -
   A. I did, yes.

Q. Was that because you believed that that decision had been
   made? - A. Yes, I was quite sure that that decision had
   been made.

Q. From what you could see it was a decision which you
   thought perhaps ought to have been made? - A. Yes.

Q. I think after the people had gone into the ground you
   were aware of some remaining group of youths on the
   bridge area? - A. Yes.
                                           $


Q. Roughly how many? - A. Again, very, very difficult to
   assess.   Some had stayed on the bridge and had never
   moved forward from what I had seen at half past two.
   Others were people who seemed to be within the crowd and
   then moved back.

Q. Are we talking about a matter of a score or so, one
   hundred, or a couple of hundred, or what? - A. Perhaps
   approaching one hundred I would say.

Q.   Who did you think those people were? - A.  Well, it was
     not until that time that I thought they must be the
     people of the non-ticket holder section.

Q. They are the ones described by an earlier Officer as
   looking rather disconsolate? - A. Yes.

Q.   Shortly after that there was an announcement about - I
     say shortly after that...  You stayed in    the area until
     the abandonment of the match was announced? - A. Yes, and
     then it was the organisation of dispersal of fans as per
     usual.
                                           E. J. WILSON


            Cross-Examined by MR. H Y T N E R :

Miss Wilson, you were in a very good position to observe
things because you were not only up on your horse so you
are higher than a foot Officer, but you were also
patrolling the area which gave you a good view across
Leppings Lane bridge over the river and then up Leppings
Lane to the roundabout?    You had a very good view? - A.
From the arrival of the train escort I had Leppings Lane
behind me and I never looked back at it again because my
sole concern was with the shock of the amount of people
coming from Catchbar Lane.

You saw at least one thousand joining the mass already at
the turnstiles in the train escort? - A. Well, yes, as
far as I am aware on seeing the train escort arrive
around the corner, it just seemed to pick...   Half the
width of the road plus the pavement of people already on
their way moving down there, so it would easily double
that amount.

Then you yourself saw round about 2.20, between 2.20 and
2.30 this mass of people coming over from Catchbar Lane?
- A. The start of the train escort was already going
through into the turnstile terrace area when I realised
that that seemed to be going OK and I thought I could
then free myself to turn rny attention to what was
happening on Catchbar Lane.

Then you saw this mass coming over? - A. Yes.

That was what?   Before 2.30 or just about 2.30? - A. No,
it would be about or just fractionally afterwards.

So some half an hour before the kick-off you were
somewhat surprised and, I suppose, dismayed to see all
these people coming over from that direction when you
knew that people were already coming from the roundabout?
- A. Yes.

If somebody had said to you - and as you appreciate you
were there and you could sense how many were there and
what mass was coming over - if somebody had said to you
at about 2.30, "Well, Constable, there are still many
thousands still to come and they are all coming down
Leppings Lane", you would have said to yourself then,
there is trouble in store?   We have a problem on our
hands? - A. My main idea was the fact that as we have
just agreed the number of people coming along the
Leppings Lane bridge.   As long as they came down walking
slowly with no panic, I thought we would probably be able
to cope with the situation and receipt of them into the
reception area.   I did not want to see people running
down from the traffic lights in panic, seeing the crowd
                                 94

                                                E. J. WILSON


     at the bottom and knowing they were not going to get in
     for three o'clock.

Q. Never mind running down.   If you had been told then at
   2.30 there were many thousands still to come down
   Leppings Lane you would have realised there was a
   problem? - A. At that time I had no idea how fast they
   were going through the turnstiles or to what degree the
   crowd was there.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KA LLI PET IS:

Q. Would you turn to page 7 of your statement?   Half way
   down that page towards the end of the line on the right
   hand side you refer to:

                         ge was then received of a possible
           "A radio message
           pitch invasion ?

      - A. Yes.

Q.   Were you wearing a radio as well? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you hear that over your radio? - A. I could not say
     whether it was actually over the radio or whether it was
     with the instruction from my Inspector who then gave the
     order for a number of Officers to go to a position ready
     for this.

Q. You mean an instruction from your Inspector from
   something he had heard on the radio? - A. Well, I would
   assume so.   I do feel it was a radio message that I
   heard of a possible pitch invasion.

Q.   Why did      you put it in your statement then? -A.       Well, I
     do feel sure that it was a radio message.

Q. Your statement was made when? - A. I made this statement
   on the Saturday night.

Q. You mean the Saturday night of the events that occurred?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So we can take it that the events would have been
   considerably fresher in your mind then than they are now?
   - A. Certainly.

Q. When you made your statement you thought it was a radio
   message that told the mounted Officers of a pitch
   invasion? - A. Yes.
                                               E. J. WILSON



You then go on in your statement to say:

      "...a group of mounted officers were detailed by
      Inspector Davis for this and moved off to the
      Penistone Road end."

A. That is correct.

Were you among those? - A. No.

You refer later in that paragraph to being detailed to
Penistone Road:

      "...together with other Merseyside and Nottingham
      officers to standby."

A. That is correct.

That is after the turnstiles had been closed? - A. The
whole area was clear before we left there.

You say in your statement:

      "On reaching Penistone Road, as a result of radio
      messages, I heard of the vast number of fatalities
      inside the ground from the West Stand."

Again, is that a message you heard yourself over the
radio? - A. I think it was as a result of a mounted
Officer who had been on standby with me who had been
inside the ground to enquire and to see if he could offer
any of his services.   Upon his return he told us of the
disaster that had happened inside.

When you went upon Penistone Road on standby, whereabouts
did you take up your position, can you recall? - A. Yes.
I do not recall the name of the garage but it was a
garage forecourt where we stood the horses down.

Outside the ground?    - A. Yes, opposite an entrance to the
back of the ground.

             Cross-Examined by MR. W O O D W A R D :

Just one matter.   You have described the crowd and in
your statement you made this observation:

      "It appeared to me the crowd made a determined and
      concerted effort to prevent any Police control of
      the situation".

A. Yes,   that is correct.
                                              E. J. WILSON


You made the statement, as Mr. Kaiiipetis established, on
the Saturday night.   However, is that a view you still
adhere to? - A. Yes.

There were not simply individuals who could not do better
than they were doing, there were individuals who insisted
on behaving as they did? - A. Yes.

That amounted to going under the horses, ignoring your
requests and pressing on and even hitting your horse,
pulling its reins? - A. Yes.

Trying to prevent you even controlling your animal? - A.
Yes.

      MR. PHILLIPS:    Sergeant Crawford please.

       SERGEANT WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD Called

              Examined by MR. P H I L L I P S :

You are Sergeant William Cameron Crawford? - A. That is
c o r r e c t , sir.

You were in charge of Serial 14? - A. That is correct.

Which had the duty of being on the ground side of
turnstiles A to G? - A. Inside the turnstiles A to G,
that is correct.

There your duty was, among other things, to search people
who had just been through the turnstiles? - A. That is
correct, general searching powers inside the ground.

Did you know people were being searched on the outside of
the turnstiles as well? - A. I did.

Did you also know that your order required you to ensure
that order is maintained on the terraces? - A. That was
part of my responsibilities.

How did you propose to go about that part of your duty? -
A. If I had been deployed from Match Control, if there
was a problem in the Leppings Lane terracing I would have
taken my serial into the terraces to deal with that
problem.

How would you have taken it into the terraces?          Through
the tunnel? - A. Through the tunnel, sir.

You understood that to be a requirement for you only to
act if required by Ground Control? - A. That is correct.
                           97

                                            W. C. CRAWFORD



Q. It was not part of your duty to go along and monitor the
   situation on the terraces? - A. There was no cause to go
   and monitor the problem on the terracing at that
   particular time.   I did in fact go several times since
   we were deployed on the turnstiles.

Q. You did go, you say? - A. Yes,   several times.

Q. Down the tunnel? - A. Down the tunnel.   We took up that
   position at approximately 11.00 am and at that time there
   were a number of fans in the terracing in the central
   pen.

Q. Throughout the time between then and the start of the
   match do you say you went down the tunnel to the back of
   the terraces? - A. I last visited the terracing probably
   about two o'clock-ish.

Q. About two o' clock? - A. Yes.

Q. At that time was the situation in pens 3 and 4 quite
   reasonable? - A. There was no problem whatsoever.

Q. However, you did not go again after that.   Why was that?
   - A. Things started warming up outside the turnstiles and
   my responsibilities at that time were the people coming
   through the turnstiles.

Q. Did you at any stage receive any information about the
   terraces or the need to go on to the terraces? - A. None
   whatsoever.

Q. If you had been told that pens 3 and 4 were getting
   overcrowded, what would you have done about it? - A. I do
   not think that was my responsibility.   I would probably
   assisted the stewards there.   I think that is their
   responsibility.   I would have assisted them.   However,
   of course, our Match Control would have been aware of the
   problem.

Q. You would have expected then specific instructions on
   what you should do, if, for example, it became known that
   pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded? - A. Again, I do not think
   that was my responsibility.   My responsibility was the
   public order side within the terracing and there was no
   public order situation at that time.

Q. By which you mean what, fighting? - A. Fighting or
   general disorderly conduct.

Q. But not overcrowding? - A. There was not any overcrowding
   at that time, up until two o'clock and I believe after.
                             98

                                            W. C. CRAWFORD


     If there had been then obviously I would have been
     notified by our Match Control,

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You would have done what? -
     A. I would have probably gone in if I was deployed by
     Match Control,

Q.         MR. PHILLIPS:   Were you able to see people coming
     through the turnstiles during the period up until two
     o'clock, two-fifteen? - A, Yes.

Q. Were you attached to one particular turnstile or did you
   roam about? - A. No, I flitted between turnstiles A to G.

Q. Did you have a particular Officer on each set of
   turnstiles? - A. I deployed one Officer per turnstile.
   There was a total of seven turnstiles and two Officers
   were deployed just shortly after two o'clock, PC Burton
   to look after the programme sellers, who were directly
   behind and also PC Wild who was positioned up at the
   snack bar, that is, at the rear of the west stand.

Q. Were you able to observe what was going on as people came
   through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you see any money being offered? - A. I saw quite a
   bit of money being offered as people were coming through.
   A number of people were trying to get through two at a
   time because the turnstiles were sufficient, the actual
   bars, two people could get in there and get through at
   the same time.   I did see money, persons going up to the
   turnstiles operators with money and covered it with the
   palm of their hand.

Q. What sort of money?   How much?   Could you see what sort
   of notes they were? - A. I did see ten pounds notes and I
   did see five pound notes, but they were covering them
   with the palms of their hands.

Q. Did any of turnstile operators speak to you about this? -
   A. They said, "He has no ticket", but, of course, I was
   flitting between the turnstiles A to G and it was obvious
   to me that when I was standing there inside the
   turnstiles the operators had a look round to see if I was
   there and said,  He has no ticket".

Q. What did you do with people who did that? - A. Well, I
   could not actually push them back through so I took them
   into the ground and ejected them.

Q. Can you identify any particular turnstile where the
   operator reported to you that money had been offered to
   him? - A. Turnstile A, there was an elderly man in that.
                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


That is to the extreme right looking out, and also I
think turnstile F, which is the one next to G.

They reported to you that people were offering them
money? - A. That is correct.

Could you give us any idea of how many people were
involved in this sort of entry?   Either getting through
in doubles or getting through by payment? - A. It started
roundabout two o'clock.   There were quite a lot.    I
noticed two or three particularly on one occasion at
turnstile A, two or three were waiting to get in,
obviously by payment.   When I stood at the turnstile
they saw me and did an about-turn and disappeared into
the crowd.   That happened quite a lot and not just at
turnstile A, but several of them.

What did you do with people you had caught getting
through without a ticket? - A. They were ejected straight
through gate C at that particular time.

How many times did you get gate C open to eject people? -
A. Quite a lot.   I could not put a figure on it but it
was quite a lot.

You appreciate that under that Match Order you should
have taken these people to the Police Room and got them
fitted out with an ejection slip? - A. That is the normal
procedure, but if I had done that my serial would have
been seriously depleted and I would say there would not
have been any Police Officers inside the turnstiles if we
did comply with the instructions.

You plainly thought it was more expeditious simply to
eject them from the gate? - A. Yes.   I mean, this was
after, say, twenty past, half past two, when it became
more apparent that a lot of people did not have tickets
and they were trying to get in by payment.

Was this   a decision you took yourself to deal with
unlawful   entrants or had you discussed it with any
superior   Officer? - A. I was the only Supervisory Officer
there at   that time.

Yes, but had you previously discussed it with an
Inspector, for example? - A. There wasn't an Inspector
there.   It did not become apparent until well after
quarter past two, really, the problem.   I took it on
myself to do that.   It was the only practicable way of
dealing with the situation.




                            /Q. What about
                           100

                                     W.C. CRAWFORD


Q. What about alcohol.  Did you notice any of that as people
   came into the ground? - A. Yes, I think it is common at
   most football matches you can smell alchol when people do
   walk in.  It is common practice for them to have a couple
   of drinks and there is no problem there, but obviously
   nearer kick-off time the air wreaked with intoxicating
   liquor, particularly beer.

Q. Was this more than you would have expected? - A. A lot more,
   yes.

Q. Did you notice how the turnstiles A-G were operating, the
   efficiency with which they were operating? - A. Yes, it
   struck me the number of fans coming in was not what it
   should have been particularly Turnstile G which was the
   double turnstile next to Gate C.

Q. The one nearest to the river in fact, isn't it? - A. That is
   correct sir, yes.

Q. What was happening there? - A. Well it is a double turnstile
   and there is I think a wooden dividing wall.

Q. Could you look at photographs in the West Midlands Bundle 2
   which is the larger bundle.  Can we see Photograph 8 first.
   Does that show us G and F in fact? - A. Yes.

Q. This is looking at it from inside the ground towards the
   outside? - A. That is correct.

Q. Now on the following page I believe we have a close-up view
   of what is the same turnstile and again I think the next
   one at page 10 is Turnstile F.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Now looking at numbers 8, 9 and 10, perhaps 9 is the most
   helpful, that I think is Turnstile G? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. What was the problem? - A. The problem was the dividing wall
   there, it is the white one, that seemed to get distorted
   from the pressur © outside to such an extent that there is
   a large wooden block which is bolted either side of that
   petition or that dividing wall.

Q. Do we see that that finishes a foot or so above the floor
   to the immediate right of the turnstile? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. What do you see the purpose of that as being? - A. To
   prevent people slipping past the actual turnstile.

Q. That is of course, the turnstile comes towards us as
   it moves round? - A. That is correct.

Q. And the wooden block is on the far side of it? - A. Yes.

Q. What was happening to this block? - A. The dividing wall
   was distorted.  The pressure of the fans coming in had
 w
*“ >
                                     101

                                               W.C. CRAWFORD


            pushed this wall in towards the turnstile and it was
            restricting movement.  In other words the turnstile could
            not operate properly.

       Q. Wouldn't it turn round at all? - A. It was turning round
          with some difficulty and there was traces of paint on the
          actual wooden block, here, which I noticed obviously was
          caasing a lot of problems and it was restricting access
          in the turnstile.

       Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Can you just help me. Looking
            at that photograph the turnstile comes round clockwise
            towards us, does it? - A. Yes it is clockwise, my Lord.

       q   . Presumably it does not keep going round, it goes back, does
             it? - A. It revolves in a clockwise direction, my Lord.

       Q. I don't quite see how it clears the block when it comes
          round? - A. This dividing wall was pushed into where the
          actual operator is and it was twisted slightly so that it
          was restricting the other things actually opening through.

       Q. I see.  The blue bit of the turnstile that is against the
          background of that block there does actually clear that
          block as it comes round, does it? - A. Yes.

       Q. It looks as though it is overlapping there but in fact it
          clears it as it comes round.  Is that right? - A. That is
          correct.

       Q.          MR. PHILLIPS: I think it shows better on Photograph 10
             the other turnstile in the next cubicle.  There is just
             about enough room where the turnstile bends towards the
             camera? - A. Yes.

       q.     perhaps set a bit nearer to the outside entrance than appears
             from these photographs.    Is that right, Sergeant? - A. Which
             one are you looking at sir?

       Q.    Well both 9and 10 the block is in advance of the   turnstile
             itself? - A. That is correct.

       Q. Were you able to move it to do anything about it?- A. I
          kicked it several times to see if it would knock it free
          and it did up to a point, but it still was restricting
          access.

       Q. What time would this be? - A. It was certainly after half­
          past-2, it was nearer quarter-to-3 by this time.

       Q. When you knocked it back into position did it seem to work
          all right after that? - A. With difficulty, extreme difficulty.

       Q. Could you see any reason why any of the other turnstiles
          were working slowly? - A. I could not, no.
                                  W.C. CRAWFORD


Did they appear to you to be working slowly or was it just
this one? - A. I think there was a slight difficulty with
Turnstile A but I did not see what the problem was there.
I know it was an elderly turnstile operator and I think he
was having problems with fans and their attitude.

Now from about quarter-to-3 onwards what was the situation
as far as you could discern it from where you were at the
turnstiles and immediately outside of the turnstile? - A.
Well my view was fairly restricted. All I could see w&®\
what was through the turnstile.   The mood of the crowd
deteriorated.   We went from one extreme to the other.  From
about 11 o'clock people started coming in. They were very
good.   They were well mannered, good natured and then of
course when it got to about half-past-2 the mood seemed to
change.

Did you see a Police Officer coming in from outside of the
turnstiles? — A. I dragged a Police Officer in through the
turnstile.  Probably if I hadn't he would have been crushed
up inside the actual turnstile.  This was a Police Officer
who was outside Turnstile G.

Do you know his name? - A. I have no idea.

You could see from where you were that he was in some danger
then? - A. He was in great danger there, yes.

What about people who came through the turnstile, did you
get any information from them? - A. Well they turned a
bit nasty towards the Officers who were inside the turn­
stiles, the abuse, the obscene language etc. directed at
us.  In particular you know get your .... There was a
few obscene remarks made.  If you want me to use them I
shall do,my Lord?

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Yes, tell us what was said? -
A. "Get your fucking self out there before somebody gets
killed".  You know, remarks of that nature. A lot of
them were using this type of language.

      MR. PHILLIPS:  Did you see fit to report that to
match control? - A. A lot has been said about the radio
procedure this day.  I mean my radio signal was a bit non­
existent.  Whether it was the crowd noise or whether it
was a malfunction I was not sure.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Are you saying all the time
or just at a particular period? - A. Well after probably,
you could say about quarter-past-2, my Lord, there was
some reception up until that time and then half—past—2ish,
it could have been a bit later, the reception deteriorated
something terrible.
                                  W.C. CRAWFORD


What I want to understand was that because of the increasing
noise or because something was going wrong with the radio
that had not been wrong? - A. That is difficult to say.   The
noise was excessive*  I could not hear a thing.  I had an ear­
piece in my radio which again restricted my hearing;to a
certain extent, but there was also a buzzing noise on the radio.
I don't know whether that was something had gone wrong with
the actual transmission, I was not in a position, but I was
aware that there was a close circuit television at the rear
of the West Stand and that was monitoring the situation.

      MR. PHILLIPS:  Did you try to get in touch with Ground
Control through your radio? - A. Well I tried several times
through the day to operate the radio but it did not seem to
work.
So you were unable to do anything about what you were hearing
of what was going on outside? - A. I was unable to but the
close circuit television at the rear of the Stand was monitoring
the situation so obviously they were aware.

Did you see people climbing in over the top of the turnstiles?
- A. Yes, I did.  There was quite a lot who climbed over the
actual turnstiles, a lot of them.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Do you mean through the turnstile,
not over the roof? — A. Both, my Lord.   Several people
climbed over the turnstile, again Turnstile G because of the
malfunction.  A lot of people climbed over the top from the
Leppings Lane end.  Several people actually went underneath
the turnstiles.
      MR. PHILLIPS:  Did you see people going over the wall
on to the roof of the turnstile building? - A. Quite a lot
sir, yes.
What did you do with those? - A. Well bearing in mind by this
time I had probably eight Police Officers.  They were stretched
at that point.  They were grabbing them and ejecting them.
Obviously they did not have tickets and I did not see any
tickets.  We were taking them out and ejecting them through
Gate C.
Did you not see any tickets being passed about at all? - A.
Yes, I did.  Just inside the turnstiles there was a group
of Liverpool fans who had congregated once they got inside.
There was a fattish Liverpool lad, late 20s. He had a
bunch of tickets in his hand.  He passed them up to another •-
fan who was on the turnstile roof who in turn dropped them
down to the other side of the turnstiles. Of course both
of them when we got to them, or the fat Liverpool fan ran
off I believe through the little dividing gate between the
wall.
 So you weren't able to get him? - A. No, I believe I was
 ejecting someone at that time.
                               104

                                          W.C. CRAWFORD



Q. Do you remember Gate C being opened at about 2.48 when a
   number of  fans came through? - A. That is corr

q  were you party to the opening of that gate or was that one
°* o l y o S r other Officers? - A. I don't believe - I was not
   party to it - I don't believe it was an Officer on my
   Serial.      The fate did open when I was standing up near
   to Turnstile A and of course as it opened my attention
   was drawn to it.      I ran, with other Officers from my
   serial to try and close the gate, which eventually we did
   do       The only reason we did do this is because I understand
   tS4re was a Police horse there and the Police horse came
   between the fans and Gate C and that assisted us quite a
   bit and we managed to close the gate then.

O. Can you help us with the number of people who came through
   Gate C when it was opened on that ocasion? - A. I said
   initialTy in the report I made probably a couple of days
   afterwards, I said approximately 50, but having watched
   it on the video there was nigh on 200 easily.

q    . we know that Gate C opened again approximately four or
       five minutes later? - A. Yes.

O. And on that occasion stayed open for some time? - A. That
   is correct. It was about five minutes later.

 O     How close were you to Gate C when it was opened the second
       time? - A. Well I think my position would be between
       Turnstiles A-G, central position, when the gate sudden y
       opened.
 q     Did you see who opened it? - A. No, I was n o t > n * P ° ® ^ i0n*
       There was one or two fans around that area and of course
       that restricted my view.  I have no idea w h° °pened it,
       if it was a Police Officer, a Steward or what, I have no
       idea whatsoever.
 O    Were there any other Police Serials working in the area
       immediately behind that gate apart from your Serial 14?
       - A. I did not see anyone.
 Q. Did you hear any traffic on the radio about the opening
    of the gates? - A. None whatsoever.
 Q. Did you not hear an instruction that the gates should be
    opened? - A. None whatsoever.

 Q. Did you have any warning that the gate would be opened
    and left open for the influx of fans? - A. None at all.

 Q. If you had known that it was going to be opened, was there
    anything you would have done before it was opened? - A.
    Well there is a possibility if we had been aware it was
    going to be opened we could have moved further back Pe^ aP s
    to the tunnel and diverted, but if there is several fans
                                     W.C. CRAWFORD


  who come in there is not much I can do with ten men.    If
  there is 2,000 it is 200-1, 3,000 300-1 Officers.

Q. If the people are walking in, as they appeared to be,
   coming in towards the tunnel, do you think you could have
   had any effect? - A. It is a difficult question.  I doubt
   it. They would probably have just pushed us out of the way.

Q. Did you have any of those portable barriers available to
   you? - A. I can't remember any there.  I don't recollect
   any barriers there.

Q. Did you have at that stage any information or any reason
   to believe that there was anything wrong with the people
   going down the tunnel to the centre pens? - A. None whatso­
   ever.
Q. Did you have any cause to direct the people either to the
   North or the South wing pens? - A. No, no. When the gates
   did open there was a surge through and I ran again with
   the other Officers in my Serial towards the gate*  Several
   of the Officers were knocked out of the way by the crowd
   rushing in. A lot of the people who actually came in the
   gate fell over.  They were in danger of being trampled.
   The Officers in my Serial dragged them clear.  I think
   they all pulled someone clear because obviously we had
   like a snooker ball effect that when someone fell over
   some of us behind it and then we had that situation, so it
   was a case of we had to drag them away quick otherwise we
   could have had ....

Q. Are you talking about the first time or the second time?
   - A. The second time.

Q. When that crowd had gone through the gates of course there
   were very few people left outside, weren't there? - A.
   Well I don't know that.  I did not see it outside.
   At that time we remained inside the turnstile.

Q. Did you hear any message to go to the track? - A. I did
   not personally.  It was one of the Officers with me.    I
   did not hear it on the radio. One    of the Officers who was
   in my Serial says:  "We have got a message to go on the
   perimeter track".

Q. You see I noticed, if I may just put this to you, Sergeant,
   you say at the top of page 5 of your statement:

         "Shortly after 3 p.m. there was a radio/Tannoy
         message that all Officers were required on
         the perimeter track".

   A. Yes.
Q. Can you tell us please first did you personally hear any
                               106


                                         W.C. CRAWFORD


     radio message? - A. I did not hear any radio Officer.

Q. Did you hear a Tannoy message? - A. Not personally.       The
   Officer did who was in my Serial.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  Sorry, Officer? - A. There was
     an Officer, I believe it was a P.C. Washington who said:
     "We have got a message to go on the perimeter track".

Q. He had a radio, had he? - A. No, it was a Tannoy message,
   my Lord.  I believe that is right because the radio was
   not working.  That is why I put a radio/Tannoy because I
   did not know if it was a Tannoy message or a afcadio message.

Q.        MR. PHILLIPS:   It was simply reported to you by
     Constable Washington? - A. He brought it to my attention.

Q. Then I think you went to the track and you helped to remove
   people from number 3 pen along with your Officers and spent
   a good deal of time resuscitating and helping the injured
   that you took from the pens.  Is that right? - &. We went
   on the field via the South Stand behind match control.
   I told my Serial to stick together, stick with me as a group
   and we all went to near Gate 3 and then we worked from there.

Q. Well I don't want to go into all the details of that,
   Sergeant, because of course there are many other witnesses
   who can tell us about that.

           You I think, however, in the course of dealing with
     the people that you had to deal with you were concerned,
     weren't you, for some oxygen.  Did you ask for oxygen? —
     A. I may have done, but I can't bring it to mind.  There
     was a number of people shouting for oxygen.

Q. A lot of people were shouting for it, you say? - A. A lot
   of people, yes.

Q. Was there any available? - A. Not to my knowledge.

           MR. PHILLIPS:    Yes, thank you very much, Sergeant.




                           /Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER
                           107

                                                 W.C. CRAWFORD



                   Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. Sergeant, in the course of duties, particularly in crowd
   control and in other emergencies you are accustomed to
   receiving orders as it were on the ground and obeying them? -
   A. That is correct, sir.

Q. If at something like 2.40 or 2.45 or 2.50, at any of those
   times, if you had received a message, "Pens 3 and 4 are full.
   Pens 1, 2 and 5 are virtually empty.  Get spectators
   diverted", what would you have done? - A. I would have acted
   on instructions, but I don't think that is my responsibility
   inside the ground.

Q. That may well be, but supposing you as a Sergeant were there
   and there were just stewards without a chief steward there and
   you received that order? Suppose control had sent you the
   order, "Pens 3 and 4 are full.  It is dangerous to have any
   more in.  Make sure the crowds are diverted to the wing pens",
   what would you actually have done? - A. I would have acted on
   instructions, sir, like I said.

Q.   And what would you have done? - A. I would have tried to get
     them in the pens either side.

Q. Can we see it a little more practically.  In the area between
   the turnstiles and the stand wall there was you, your serial
   and some stewards? - A. There were not any stewards apart from
   the bottom of the stairs to the West Stand, and of course
   there was one steward on gate C.

Q.   I was thinking of him because we saw him on the video.  There
     was at least him, was not there? -A. Yes, and there was
     someone selling programmes either side, one up at the side of
     the wall, and one beside gate C selling programmes.

Q. Can we just examine this.  I am sorry to take a little time
   but it is very important.  It may well be that you are right,
   although there is some conflict of evidence, but it may well
   be you are right in saying that the position of the crowd into
   the various pens was nothing whatever to do with you.  Let's
   suppose that is right and it was the responsibility then of
   the stewards.  Is this the position, that when pens 3 and 4
   had been observed to be full from the ground side, because
   that is only where they can be observed, what could anybody
   have done about it if it was not your responsibility and
   there were no stewards in the area? - A. In answer to that
   question they could have been deviated or diverted to the
   flanks at the rear of the West Stand.

Q. By whom? - A. I suppose the Police Officers if they were
   t he r e .

Q. This is what I am really trying to get at.  Somebody, and it
   will presumably be somebody in control, somebody in control
   has observed or has been told at 2.40 or 2.45 that the centre
                            108

                                                   W.C. CRAWFORD


   pens are full, therefore it is necessary to divert fans to the
   wing pens.  If it is not the responsibility of the Police to
   do it and it is not your job, and there were no stewards
   there, what could have been done about it? Are you saying you
   would then have had to step into the breach? - A . That could
   have been the situation.

Q. So far as you were concerned it was not your job, and you
   would have expected somebody else to be doing it? - A. The
   responsibility is the stewards.

Q. And there were none there? - A. There were none on that
   particular bit, yes, apart from the places where I have
   indicated.

Q. Now, that is that situation.     That is simply a normal crowd
   situation where some pens are full and some are empty.       Now w e ‘
   come to a wholly different situation.     Suppose you had been
   told at 2.47, a messenger comes running up to you because the
   radios are off, he has just come from control:      "Mr.
   Duckenfield is going to open the gates because of the crowd
   outside.  Pens 3 and 4 are full.     Make sure the people coming
   in go to the wing p e n s . This is an emergency". N o w , you know
   what the situation was.     You know who was there.   What would
   you have done? - A. The only thing I could have done in those
   circumstances is form a line with what serial I had across the
   top to divert them either side.

Q. Can I help you a little, because this is not a case where
   anyone is trying to trap anybody into an unwary answer.   Think
   back and take your time.   Would you have said in answer to
   that, "If Mr. Duckenfield wants me to do that he must send
   reinforcements", or would you have said, "All right, I can do
   it"? - A. That is a difficult question not knowing what the
   situation is outside.  If they said, "There are several
   thousand outside.  They are going to burst in or they are
   going to come through gate C if it is open", I doubt very much
   whatsoever if 10 men could contain several thousand people.   I
   doubt very much if I could have done anything.

Q. You say, "What is going to happen?".     "There are hundreds
   outside, and they have got to be let in through the gate.
   Make sure they d o n ’t go into pens 3 and 4".  Are you saying
   your answer would have been, perfectly reasonably, that it
   would have been, "I can't do it with the serial at my
   disposal.  He will have to send me reinforcements"? - A. I am
   not saying that.    If I was instructed to do it I probably
   would have taken my serial up and done it.

Q. I d o n ’t know what briefing you had had, but did you know that
   there were gates at the entrance to the tunnel? - A. There are
   wooden gat e s , y e s .

Q. Obviously there are dangers in closing both those gates
   because they open towards the turnstiles, and if you had shut
   them and then there had been a crowd trying to get out of the
   tunnel from the terraces you might not have been able to open
                                109

                                                        W.C. CRAWFORD


     them against the crowd.      Do you follow?     - A. I think it is
     the opposite way.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        They open towards the pitch.

Q.        MR.   HYTNER:    I am sorry, towards   the pitch. - A. I      was
     going to   correct   you on that, sir.

Q. That is right, is not it? - A. Yes, they open towards the
   pitch.

Q.   So if there is a crowd coming from the pitch you c a n ’t open
     them then very easily? - A. That is correct, and then we have
     a situation which could have been even more serious than the
     one we h a d .

Q. Certainly.  The first thing you can without any difficulty at
   all is close one gate, and that immediately halves the area
   you have to monitor with your serial. That is right, is not
   it? - A. I doubt very much if that was going to be the answer.
   It could have been more difficult and it could have been a
   more dangerous situation if we had closed the gates, but there
   again....

Q. No, closing one gate. - A. There is only one gate.  It is a
   double gate, a wooden gate at the tunnel.  There again that is
   for the stewards.  That is not for us.

Q.   Sergeant, what we are trying to find out is what could have
     been done.  Are you saying that appreciating the situation at
     the time your view would have been that you would have been
     unable with the serial and the stewards in the area to seal
     off the tunnel and point the fans to the wings where there was
     plenty of room? - A. Under those circumstances it would have
     been impossible to deal with a crowd of that size and do what
     you are saying.

Q. It is possible?        - A. It is not possible.

Q. It isn't? - A. I doubt very much.

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      You would not be stopping them
     going into the match at a l l . All you would be doing is
     saying, "Go round there.   The r e ’s space there".  I quite
     understand if you were blocking their way to get in at all.
     They might say, "Get out of my way.      I ’ve paid. I ’m coming
     in", but what is suggested is simply that you indicate, "Full
     in here.   Plenty of room round there"? - A. I can accept that,
     my Lord.   We could have stood there and we could have tried to
     divert them.   Whether they would have paid any attention is a
     different story.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:   But you see, Sergeant, what we are looking
     at is a serious situation, serious in the sense it did happen.
     There were crowds outside.  Pens 3 and 4 were full and you are
     being told, "There are hoards coming in.  They have got to be
     stopped coming into the pens".  If that is right you would
                            110

                                                 W.C. CRAWFORD


     have known immediately that if you fail to keep them out of
     the tunnel there would be or was likely to be a terrible
     tragedy in pens 3 and 4 because of overcrowding.  That would
     be the consequence of failing to keep them out of the tunnel,
     would not it? - A. Possibly.

Q. Think carefully.  If you had seriously thought on receiving
   such an order that you would be physically incapable of
   complying with it you would have said so, and asked for
   reinforcements, would not you? You would have advised your
   chief that what he was asking was a policing impossibility?
   - A. I think match control would have been aware of the
   situation, but there again it is a hypothetical question.
   Yes.

Q. It is hypothetical only because nobody asked you to do it? -
   A. That is correct.

Q. If you had been faced with such an order, if you had thought
   it was possible to comply you would have done, and if you had
   thought it was impossibly to comply you would have advised
   your superior Officers so that they could make an alternative
   strategy? - A. That is possible.

Q. It is not just possible, it is the only alternative. - A.
   Well, but that was not the case, but my concentration was on
   gate C and suddenly bursting open.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Sergeant, I don't think anybody is
     criticising you because you were never asked to do it. - A.
     That is true.

Q.       MR. HYTNER:    You do understand? - A. Yes, I can see what
     you are getting at, sir.

Q. You must not be too defensive if nobody is attacking you.
   Going back, I want to deal with this.   At about 2.30 fans were
   coming through the turnstiles and being abusive, and indeed
   obscene in their language to you, but what they were
   indicating with their obscenities and ill-manners was that
   there was a likelihood of somebody being killed because
   outside the Police had not got control.   That was what was
   being conveyed to you in this obscene language, was not it? -
   A. Yes, that was the message.

Q. Of course, there is now way I am going to attempt to defend
   either bad manners or obscenities aimed at Police Officers,
   but drunk or sober, foul mouthed or not, these people
   understood at 2.30 or believed at 2.30 that the Police had
   lost control and that fatalities were a possibility, and that
   was what was getting them excited? - A. It was after half­
   past-2, sir, when the abuse was directed.  Nearer quarter-to.

Q. Nearer quarter-to.     It was between half-past and quarter-to? -
   A . Yes.

Q. Just one last thing.    This may seem a silly question but there
*>

                                   111

                                                        W.C. CRAWFORD


          has oddly enough been a conflict of evidence.  You were there.
          You saw what was happening.  You in fact were very worried and
          concerned about the size of the gates in the perimeter fence,
          were not you, when the tragedy had already occurred? - A.
          Inside the ground? Inside the actual track?

     Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I did think the exit gates were a bit on the
        narrow side.

     Q. And it was your view, being there, that had they been bigger
        it would have helped the evacuation of the bodies rather than
        hindered it? - A. Yes, up to a point, I would think, but there
        again more people could have tried to get out and there could
        have been a bigger situation.

     Q. Anyway, it would have assisted in evacuation, the larger the
        gates? - A. It could have done, yes.

                        Cross-Examined bv MR. JACKSON:

     Q. Would you look for a moment, please, at the fat bundle of West
        Midlands photographs, No. 18.  May I emphasise, Sergeant,
        again, no-one is attacking you, but is not it quite clear from
        that that by the use of that portable barrier and the Officers
        in your serial that there was little problem for the Force
        that has managed the miners' strike to block that tunnel? - A.
        I didn't realise that barrier was there, sir.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I don't know there is any evidence
          that it was.  It is on this photograph, but I d o n ’t know
          whether it was at the time.

     Q.        MR. JACKSON:   I think we can see from the video there
          were lines of these portable barriers just behind gate C.   I
          think if we look on the line there I think we will see on the
          video a number of portable, or there was available.... - A. I
          think those barriers that were inside or close to gate C were
          blocking the programme sellers. There were about 3 or 4.
          They were being used to stop the fans getting in close
          proximity to the programme sellers, and that is what their
          purpose was.  It was not anything else.




                             /Q.     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   You mean.
U   ‘
                                            112


                                                             W. C. CRAWFORD

        Q.            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:               You   mean pr og ram me- sel le rs
             needed to have that kind of protecti on?                   A.    That is
             correct, and this is one of the reasons I put P.C. Burton
             up bes id e one of the p r o g r a m m e - s e l l e r s . There was another
             one just up al ongside the wall and that was being fenced
             off and we had had in previous matches there, Semi-Finals,
             one or two snatches - you know, taking the money off the
             pr o g r am me - se ll e rs and d i sap pe ari ng into the crowd - and
             that is one of the reasons why P.C. Burton was there in the
             first place, supervising.

        Q.         MR. JACKSON:       I make it quite clear, Sergeant,
             there is when pol ic in g a football crowd a number of
             activit ie s you have to combat which would be outside the
             experie nc e of most people thinking about a crowd, such
             as sn atching p ro gr am me s and the proceeds from the programme-
             sellers.     A.    We were talking about the actual money
             from the pr og ramme-sellers.

        Q.   Sergeant, if we looked back at the order - you have no need
             to do it yourse lf - we will find that Serials 14 and S erial
             16 were the two at either side of the Turnstiles A-G.
             A.   Yes, sir.

        Q.   Serial 16 was outside it.    You have no need to look unless
             you need to particularly.    Serial 16 was outside and
             Serial 14 was inside.   At about half past two, who was
             your senior Of ficer?   A.   Inspector White.    He was in
             charge of us.    He was in charge of two serials inside
             the actual concourse.

        Q.   During the time of the build-up             outside,   did you see the
             Inspector at all?   A.   No.

        Q.   Do you   actually    know where he was?          A.     No.

        Q.   We know that the Sergeant outside was p ro ces si ng a prisoner
             and you, as it were, were the only n o n- Co nst abl e inside.
             A.  There was Sergeant Burns.  He was on the other side
             of the wall.

        Q.   The other    side of the wall?         A.      Yes.

        Q.   Sergeant, we have heard an awful lot about radios going
             down at the same time.     What we have not heard is surprise
             that they did.   No-one - not a single Officer - has added
             to his evidence about radios going down that he was su rprised
             or worried.  A.  No.   We’ll, nothing su rprises me in this
             job these days, sir.

        Q. Do I take it that it was expected that the radios would
           go down?     A.   S om eti mes that does happen. It has
           ha ppe ned at other football matches, not just Cup Finals.
           I regu lar ly police the Ba rnsley football matches and it
           has happened there.

        Q.   In particular,      you see,   if we have a chain of command           that
                              113

                                                     W. C. CRAWFORD

     relies on radios, relies on senior Officers and relies on
     television cameras, it seems that there you were not a
     bit surprised your radio did not work.   Did it work last
     year?    A.  It did.

Q. Are you sure?       A.   Yes.

Q. Was there not, in fact, virtually the same brea kd own last
   year?     A. I have no  idea of that. I never experien ced
   anything.

Q.   You never ex pe rie nce d anything last year?  A.   Not last
     year.    Not that I can remember of last year.     If there
     was a br eakdown there was a possibi li ty I would have re membered
     it .

Q.   Of course there is a possibility.     As you said, anything is
     possible.   Let me make quite clear.      You were there with
     a very serious crowd problem.     You had no Inspector.     Your
     radio was down.    You did not seem terribly su rprised about
     not being able to communicate.     A.    No.   If a message
     had to get through to me I assume then it would have come
     via the Inspector.     If he had been  trying to contact me
     by radio and could not contact me, then the Inspector would
     have come looking for me and he would have passed the
     message verbally.

Q.   But none of these happened, as it were, with anybody.          We
     have got young girl Police Of ficers outside on their own,
     you inside on your own.         No-one seemed to be able to
     communicate.         No-one seems surprised.   That is the point
     I am trying to make.        A.    Yes, I think everybody
     ap pr e cia te d there is probably a temporary fault, a temporary
     set-back and the matter would have been re medied as quickly
     as possible.

Q.   May I turn to the last matter.     It has been said by others
     that £10 notes look very much like tickets wherev er they are
     presented.     How many times did you see notes being taken
     by opera tor s and people allowed in?   A.   it is difficult
     to put a figure on it but I ce rtainly know the di fference
     between a £TTnot e and a ticket.

Q.   It is the operators who sometimes have       the difficulty,
     I understand.   A.   This is possible,       sir.    I don't
     really know.   I can't put a figure on       it but by placing
     your palm on it, it covers so much and       you canstill see
     the actual ---

Q.   Ac co rd i ng to your statement, to you it was apparent that
     a number of oper ato rs were taking payment.     A.   If said
     that and that is one of the reasons that I was flitting
     from Turns til es A-G.     I had briefed the lads on my serial
     to watch out for this and they were keeping extra vigilance
     and wa tc hi ng out for that and to see if, in actual fact, I
     could catch them out.

Q.   Sergeant,   the last matter   I want   to ask you about.   Were
                                    114


                                                         W. C. CRAWFORD

     you ever briefed as to the rate per turnstile that people
     were exp ect ed to enter through Turnstiles A-G? A.   Not
     briefed as such but I do realise it is 750 per hour.

Q.   You see, we will hear, I understand, that in fact one
     turnstile took less than 600, two others took ---

          MR.   COLLINS:      No,    we will not - that is a false
     figure.

          MR. JACKSON:     Sergeant, some time we will be told
     the correct figures.     I apologise for begi nn in g to ask
     you quest ion s based on the misinformation.

          MR.   COLLINS:      I am sorry.

                      C ro ss -e xa mi ne d   by MR.   MULLER:

Q.   Sergeant, can I ask you whether you were consc iou s that
     without any control of people going into Pens 3 and 4
     there was a po tential ov er cr ow di ng problem? A.  None
     whatsoever.    I unders ta nd from ex perience that at
     ticket matches the pens are self-regulating.

Q.   Se l f -r eg u la ti n g? A. Yes, and therefore that the number
     of fans coming in would have actually filled out accordingly.

Q. Did it ever occur to you that there might be a tendency for
   people to want to be behind the goal mouth?   A.  I think
   this is usually the case in a lot of matches.  In fact,
   it is the case in the ma jority of matches.

Q.   Does that not in itself lead to a possibility, at any rate,
     of o ve rc r ow di n g in that area? A. Well, I think this is
     a p ro ble m for the stewards again but, you know, I cannot
     comment on that.

Q.   The pos iti on is therefore nobody, ce rtainly              at the briefing,
     men ti one d that to you at all?  A.    No.

Q.   Therel was a briefing, was there not,  on the m o rni ng of the
     match?    A.    Yes, that is correct, there was a number of
     briefings.

Q.   You were, in fact, given a specific briefing by Inspector
     White, is that right?       A.       I had three br iefings that
     morning.      I had a briefing from Mr. Duckenfield, followed
     by a bri efi ng from Su pe ri n t e nd en t Murray.  11 o'clock or
     ther ea bo uts I had a short briefing by Inspector White ---

Q.   The answer is "Yes" then.            A.     -- which covered      the
     emergency procedures.

Q.   That is what I was going to ask you about, you see.
     As far as the eme rgency proced ure s are concerned, that was
     so m et hi n g that was di sc uss ed when you were ac tually on the
     terrace;       is that right?      A.   That is correct, at the
     bottom of the tunnel.
                                                  W. C. CRAWFORD

You could see    the scene in front of you.              A.    Yes.

Were you told if there was a need for ev acuation what
the em ergency routes were?  A.  The emergency routes ---
We were not told that but the emergency routes is via
the tunnel out of Gate C mainly.

Mainly.  Any others?       A.   I think in the central pens
and the Pen No. 1 coming round the back,it is mainly out
Gate C.   I d o n Yt think ----

I am sorry,   there is the tunnel.           A.     Yes.

I think you were going to add so mething to                that?  A.      I
think to -- is it the extreme right?     Is              that Pen No.    1?
This way, that one there.

Yes.   A.   I don't know if they can get in to the rear
from that side or whether they come in and filter out at
the back but they do come out Gate C.

Gate C is a long way behind.       A.        It is behind      the West
Stand.

Did you know how they got to Gate C?               A.      They come    out
through the central tunnel.

So you thought    the only exit was through the central tunnel?
A.   Yes, that    is it, and I think either side of the West
Stand.

Either   side of the West Stand.        A.        Yes.

Was that sp eci f ic al l y mentioned, in your recall? A.    Not
with the em er gen cy pr ocedure but I think in all fairness
Off icers who work that are aware of the em ergency procedure
or were made to be aware of it.

Is not the pos iti on this:   I am going to quote something
to you which we have not heard evidence of yet but I
un der st and we will be told about by one of your Officers,
Mr. Branston.      Is that one of your Officers?   A.   He
was my serial, P.C. Branston, yes.

Am I not right in saying that two Officers in your serial,
Police Co nstable McMan us and Police Constable Washing ton
were deputed, in the event of an emergency, to go - at
least accor din g to the statement we have got of this Officer -
to the radial gates to try and assist people through them.
A.    I presume by the radial gates you mean at the rear
of the Stand.     Yes.      Yes, P.C. Washing ton was deputed
to work at the div iding gate at the bottom of the tunnel.
That was his re sp on s ib il it y and as far as I can remember -
perhap s P.C. Bra nst on can tell you otherwise - that he was
on that gate like you said, which is at the front of the West
Stand.    Yes, one there and one at the other side.

I do not know if you quite    follow what it looks             like.
                                                        W. C. CRAWFORD

There is a central radial fence, do you follow, and then
there is another radial fence further towards the South
Stand.  A.    ThatTs right.

In the top of that     there is a gate.            A.      That is right.

If you go into Pen 4, which is to the north side,                 there
is a gate there as well.   A.   That is correct.

And another- -gate beyond that, beyond that the channel,
as it were.      A.    Perhaps I did not clarify that properly
but P.C. Was hi ng t on was in the middle one.   He was
in str uct ed to work just directly in front of the central
tunnel.      That is where P.C. Washin gt on was instr uc te d
to stand.      I cannot recollect whether P.C. Br an st on was
instructed to work at the other gate in the event of
em ergency pr oc edu re or that other one but the two Officers,
that was their ---

May I suggest to you, if it is right what P.C. Branston
says, that they were spec if ica ll y deputed to go one to
one radial gate and one to the other radial gate.
A.   In the event of emergency, yes.

Not to be at the tunnel, as you have just suggested, but
one to go to one gate and one to go to the other gate.
A.   I did not say that, sir.       I said P.C. Washi ng to n
was de ployed at the gate.      There is a dividing fence
at the bottom of the tunnel, that central fence there,
just in front of that.       That was where P.C. Washi ng to n
was.    P.C. Bra ns to n was at the other gate and P.C. Mc.^anus
was su pposed to have been at that gate in the event of an
emergency.

Can you help me about this, because this was another Officer
who was present at the briefing, Mr. Rich.   Do you know
Police C on st abl e Rich? A.  I know P.C. Rich bit he was
nothing to do with me.

     MR.   COLLINS;     He is Serial        15.

     THE WITNESS:       That is correct.

     MR. MULLER:   Do you remember Inspector White
saying that at normal matches the access gates, the gates
in the radial fences which I have just been poi nting out
to you, were kept locked and were manned by Police Officers?
A.   He could have done but I don't recollect.

              C r o s s - e xa mi ne d by MR.   KALLIPETIS:

Mr. Crawford, your stati on d u r i n g the match -your serial -
was in the tunnel leading to that terrace, is that right?
A.   That was the Phase 2, the second part of the match,
we were sup posed to be in the central tunnel.

I am looking at the order for Serial 14 and it says:
"Phase 2 (during the match) this serial will be located
                                               W. C. CRAWFORD

at the central tunnel to tff Leppings Lane terrace."
A.  No, I don't think that is right.    Could you just
repeat that, sir?   Could you just repeat it because I
did not pick it up right.

I was pr obably reading it too quickly, forgive me,         Sergeant.
Serial 14 - that is your serial, is it not?    A.           Yes,
that is c o r r e c t .

"Phase 2 (during the match) this serial will be locat ed
in the central tunnel to the Leppings Lane terraces to
ma in tai n order as required." A.  That is correct, sir.

And thus the extra order given as regards emergency
evacua ti on to Mr. Wa shi ngt on and Mr. Branston, does that
envisage that they will have to make their way from the
central tunnel against the flow of the crowd coming out
in the event of an emergency to the two gates in the
radial fences, either side of the pens?        A.   If\an
em ergency did arise, then they would have been expected to
take up those positions.

In the manner that I have described.    A.   Yes, but there
would have been no crowd evacuat ion until probab ly the
Police Officers were in that position, depending on the
circumstances, of course.

Very comforting, Sergeant.    That depends upon (1) you g e t t i n g
advance notice  of evacuation, (2) your radio is working,
(3) then being able to get to the gates before the crowd
realise the emergency.   A.     That £ is correct.

Can you help me on this, please, Mr. Crawford:    apart
from Police Cons tab le Burton, which other Constables
in your serial were women Police Con st ab le s?
A.   P.C. Thomas ---

     MR. COLLINS:    Can I help Mr. Kallipetis and
everyone that any officer with the prefix 3 is a woman,
that is if it is 3 etc., it is a woman officer.    That is
a four-figure, begi nn in g with 3.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       It is di sc ri mi na ti on if you
put P.W.O. but if you put     3, it is alright, is it?

     MR. COLLINS:   That I think is the position.            One
used to see W.P.C. but we do not get that nowadays,          but
if you have a 3000, that 3 is a W.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:      I am sure there is logic behind           that
somewhere.

One final matter, please, Sergeant Crawford.            You have
m e n t i o n e d that your radio had an earpiece.   A.    I think
the ma jo ri ty —       quite a lot of us had earpieces*.

That is what I wanted to ask.   Is it like these deaf pieces
that plug into your ear and there is a cord dawn^inteo the
                                  118


                                                    W. C. CRAWFORD

     radio itself?      A.     That is correct.

Q.   Is this general issue?       A.   Well, it is not general issue
     but it is issued to a number, o b v i o u s l y because of the
     crowd noise, I would say.       I find that, you know, when I
     have been w o rk in g in a situation like, you know, a football
     match, it is im possible to hear the radio but when you
     have the ea rpiece fastened then you can pick up actual
     radio messages.

                     Cro ss - e xa mi ne d by MR.   G L A S G O W !'

Q.   Sergeant Crawford, you have told us that you saw a number of
     suppor te rs of fer in g money to tu rnstile operators. A. Yesi<

Q. What did you see the turnstile op erators do with that
   money?   A.   They looked round to see if I was there and
   if I was there they drew my at tention to it and I ejected
   them.

Q.   They looked round, if you were about              you ejected them?
     A.   I ejecte d them.

Q. Would you like to see the way you put that in your statement,
   Sergeant?   Would you look at the second page of your
   statement when you deal with this very serious matter which
   can affect quite a lot of men.   Page 2, 8 lines up from
   the bottom.  "I saw money offered" - are you with me?
   A.   Yes.

Q.   "I saw money offered to several turnstile ope ra tor s when
     I was present.      When that happened the fans did an about-
     turn and mingl ed with the other su pporters who were
     qu eu ei ng in an orderly manner outside."    Is that what you
     wrote in your state me nt ?    A.   Yes ---

Q.   I will ask the questions, please.   Did you sign that
     statement?   A.   I signed that report.

Q.   Is there some d i s ti nc ti on between a statement and a report
     as to the need to be truthful when we are dealing with the
     honesty of other men who may be accused, Sergeant?
     A.   If you give me the chance to try and explain why
     it is like that, then I will do.

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, go ahead, please.
     A.    I said I saw money offered to several turnstile
     op erators when I was present, when that happened the fans
     did an ab out - tu rn and mingled with the other supporters
     who were que uei ng outside in an orderly manner.      This
     was pr obably in the region of 2 o'clock, after 2 o'clock
     when they were forming orderly queues.       Now, the fans
     who were trying to get in and offered them money, because
     the queues were not as heavy outside, then they could or
     they were in a pos ition to turn about and get, you know,
     mingle with the crowd.       Later on, as the af ternoon
     progressed, they were not in that po sition simply because
     the bulk of the support ers were pushing them through the
                                      W. C. CRAWFORD

turnst il es and they were not able to do an about -t ur n and
get through, so in actual fact they were getting p u s h e d
through the turnst il es and that is why they were not in
a po sition to do that.

      HR. GLASGOW:       Sergeant, I will be corrected if the
impl ic ati on that I am putti ng on what you say is wrong
but I think we had all un derstood you to be saying
this afte rn oo n to this Inquiry that the turnstile operators
had, when the op p o r t u n it y was there and you were not
looking, been a cc ept ing the money.        Is that not the
im pression that you were trying to create this aftern oo n?
A.    That was the im pression that I got.

Well, Sergeant, you made no mention of that in your
st atement and indeed the words that you wrote, or if you
prefer me to call it ---

     HR. JACKSON:       I think, in fact, I raised this
important matter.       I would, with respect, draw my learned
friend's atte nti on   to the top of page 3, in fairness to
all parties.

     HR.   GLASGOW:     Thank you very much,   I will go on to
page 3.

"Between 2.00 and 2.30 it was obvious that there was a
fairly large number of fans outside.   During this time"         -
are y o u ’with me, Sergeant? A.  Yes.

     I was paying partic ul ar atte nt ion to the turnst il es
when it became apparent that a number of operators were taking
money."      I apologise.   Is that the part that you were
refe rr in g to?   A.   That is correct, sir.

Are you aware of the fact that at least one of the turnstile
ope ra to rs was falsely accused of a c c ep ti ng money and that this
was reported to his e mp lo ye rs ? A.       I had no idea.




                                /Did you not know?
                                       W. C. CRAWFORD



Did you not know? - A. I have not heard that at all, but
obviously I brought it to the attention of somebody when
I did this report initially.

Did you identify any of the turnstile operators whom you
thought were responsible for this? - A. I had my
suspicions but that is all it was.

You say you had your suspicions, surely you either saw
this being done by the turnstile operators when you were
in a position to see, or you did not? - A. It would be
extremely difficult when I was not there, but when I was
there it was different.

If you were not there can you, as a responsible Officer,
be suspicious of anything that was being done behind your
back so as to entitle you to report, with all the
consequences that that might have to the individuals
concerned? - A. I think initially I said it was apparent
that was happening, I did not say it was.   That was the
reason I was keeping extra vigilance on the turnstiles
because I had the intuition that it was happening.

I certainly on behalf of the club am prepared to accept
that there may well from time to time be individual
turnstile operators who accept money.   However, I am
sure you would accept, Sergeant, that it is very
important if they are going to be accused of that, either
in a Police report or publicly, that they should be
identified as to the people you are suspicious of.  Is
that not fair? - A. Under the circumstances it was
difficult.  If I was in a position to say, "Yes, it was
the operator in turnstile so-and-so", then I would have
said so.

How on earth could you be suspicious of any of the
operators in turnstiles A to G if you had not actually
seen? - A. They were coming through.

Who were coming through? - A. The fans were coming
through.   I suppose by the operators reactions, you
know, looking round to see if I was there and before they
were drawing my attention to that individual if he hadn't
a ticket.   Then they were drawing it to my attention
that he hadn't a ticket.   I believe there was one
occasion when one of the Liverpool fans I was ejecting
from one of the turnstiles, he complained - this was when
the gates opened for the second time - he complained he
had just paid one of the operators £5.   I asked him
which one it was and he said, "That one there", but he
did not identify which actual operator it was.
                              121


                                             W. C. CRAWFORD


Q.    He said, "That one there"? - A. "That one there".    He
     had paid him £5 and he had just, you know, lost it,
     because I appeared on the scene then and he said, 'He has
     no ticket".     I took him away and he said, "What about my
     £5?"

Q.   Was this the case of a man who had come in and the
     operator had told you he had no ticket? - A. He was in
     the turnstiles.    I understood the operator turned round
     when I appeared and said, "He has no ticket".

Q. The operator said, "He has got no ticket"? - A. "He has
   got no ticket", when he was actually in the turnstile.
   I grabbed him and ejected him.   It was whilst I was
   ejecting him he said, "What about my £5?"   There again,
   it is that individual's word against the operator's.

Q. What did you do? - A. I did not do anything at that stage
   because of the situation.   They were coming in over the
   tops, climbing up over the turnstiles.

Q. Did you eject that man? - A. I ejected him.

Q. Did you make a note of which turnstile operator that
   allegation was being made against? - A. I was not able     at
   the time to pinpoint it, in fairness to him.

Q. I am sure you would appreciate, Sergeant, and it is
   important that others should recognise, that if
   individual turnstile operators are dishonest, whether
   under pressure or not, it is very important that that
   should not rub off on the turnstile operators as a whole,
   is it not? - A. Well, I realised this and this is the
   reason why I was keeping this vigilance, to try and catch
   them out.

Q. Had you policed the ground in this area before, Sergeant?
   - A. I have performed duty at Hillsborough - League
   matches, Cup matches.

Q. I am sorry, I did not make myself clear.   In this part
   of the ground before? - A. Yes.   For several years -
   normally Officers from Barnsley where I am stationed do
   work at the Leppings Lane end on a regular basis.

Q. Had you been on this particular duty at the Leppings Lane
   turnstiles before with this serial? - A. I had worked the
   Leppings Lane end in the 1988 semi-final between
   Liverpool and Notts Forest.

Q. Am I right in thinking you had had the same
   responsibilities in the previous year's semi-final? - A.
   Not quite.   My responsibilities were that of the
   concourse area and the west stand in 1988.
                                       W. C. CRAWFORD


Which serial did you command in the 1988 semi-final,    if
not 14? - A. Serial 15.   I am sorry, Serial 13.

You then had a larger number of men under your control,
had you? - A. I had the same number of men.   I had ten
PCs.

You had been responsible for the Division of Officers to
the staircases going to the various entrances to the
stands? - A. That is correct.

In the course of the execution of those duties in 1988
had you noticed the fact that the tunnel had been closed
by Police Officers at any time? - A. It was closed in
1988.   The gates were closed, probably about twenty
minutes, twenty-five minutes, before kick-off time.

You had noticed that it had been closed - my question was
"by Police Officers"?   Or are you suggesting they just
shut the gate and went away? - A. No. It was   a Police
Officer who had an instruction to close the gate in 1988
and that Police Officer was PC Lang, 1278.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   He had instruction from
whom? - A. That I do not know, my Lord.    I do not know
if it was a verbal instruction or if it was an
instruction over the radio.   It is difficult to pinpoint
where it had come from.

      MR. GLASGOW:   It certainly did not come from you?
- A. I cannot remember that, sir.   It could have come
through the chain of command like it was suggested
before, but I do not recollect it.

What did you think he was doing it for?    I mean,
obviously because he had been told to, I accept that.
However, what was the object behind the closing of the
tunnel in 1988? - A. I presume because the centre pens
were full.   I presume.  I do not know.

Can you think of any other conceivable reason for the
closing of the tunnel before the kick-off in 1988? - A.
None to my knowledge.

If that had happened in 1988, did it occur to you in 1989
when your responsibilities included the maintaining of
order on the terraces, that those pens might fill up
again in the way they had last year? - A. Like I said,
initially, if I had that instruction then I would have in
all probability closed the gates, if I had had that
instruction, but I never had the instruction.   Of
course, there was a different situation from 1988, a
different atmosphere.   It was a complete contrast from
what it was the year before to what it was this year.
r
0                                 123


                                                 W. C. CRAWFORD


    Q.   Was there anything in   the changed atmosphere this year to
         indicate that pens 3 and 4 might not fill up this year in
         the way they had last year? - A. I cannot answer that one
         be ca u s e . ..

    Q.   I thought you told us   there was a completely different
         atmosphere this year. Did you wish to imply by that...
         - A. I am talking about the general atmosphere of the
         s up porters.

    Q. Was that atmosphere, however different, in any way
       conducive to your belief that the pens would not fill up
       this year as they had last year? - A. Last year I believe
       that all the fans were in position by, say, fifteen
       minutes before kick-off and virtually the fifteen minutes
       leading up to the kick-off in the concourse area there
       was virtually nobody.   Therefore, compared with this
       year, of course it was a different story.   Last year
       they were all in position at that particular time,
       fifteen minutes before the game.

    Q. This year, at a time when in the previous year you say
       everybody had effectively been in the ground, you had
       actually seen gate C, in your words, burst open and a
       large number of supporters run down the tunnel from it?
       You saw that this year? - A. This year?

    Q. Yes. - A. When gate C opened...   Did I say in my
       statement that I presumed that that is where they headed
       towa rds .

    Q. You were there, Sergeant, we weren't.   Did you     see where
       they went or were you not interested? - A. I do     not think
       I actually saw where they went to?

    Q. Was it not pretty obviously, with respect? - A. That was
       a difficult question.   We were pulling a lot of the
       people who were being trampled as the gates opened.

    Q. They were running through so fast that people were being
       knocked over? - A. People were being knocked over as they
       came in gate C.   Therefore, my Officers were pulling
       them to one side otherwise the injuries would have been a
       lot greater at gate C.   If you ask me where they went I
       cannot answer because I did not watch where they were
       going.

    Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am just looking at your
         statement, the bottom of page 4:

               "Suddenly gate C appeared to burst open again,
               approximately 2.50 pm to 2.55 pm, a large number of
               fans ran through into the centre tunnel of the
               Leppings Lane end."
                                        W. C. CRAWFORD


- A. Yes, I did say that.   I presume if you look at the
actual thing, gate C is directly in line with the central
tunnel and I presume that is where they were all heading,
but I did not actually see them go in the tunnel.

      MR. GLASGOW:   If I can take it in stages,
Sergeant.   Did you see that the first time?   I know you
say in your statement that you saw it the second time,
but did you appreciate that the first time the gate
opened when there was the burst with people running, that
they had gone into the tunnel? - A. That did happen the
first time.

I know it sounds pedantic   and I do not mean to be rude,
but did you appreciate at   the time that that was where
they had gone? - A. I did   not because I was at the gate
trying to close the gate,   which I eventually did do, so I
did not actually see...     I presume that is where they
went.

So be it and I can appreciate it was at a time of great
urgency and difficulty.   However, the gate closes and
comparative calm is restored.   Did that incident,
frightening as it must have been, unique as it certainly
was, did that not jog your memory that in the previous
year you had seen the tunnel closed by an Officer? - A. I
do not think it crossed my mind at that particular time.




          Q. Did it cross your mind
                           125

                                    W.C. CRAWFORD


Q. Did it cross your mind at that particular time that the
   gate might open again for any reason whether authorised
   or unauthorised? - A. No, it didn't.

Q. So the second opening of the gate came as much ©M a surprise
   to you as had the first? - A. Yes sir, it certainly was a
   surprise.

Q. Did you appreciate up to that point that the gate should
   only have been opened as a result of a Police Order? - A.
   I did not hear.  I did not hear anything.

Q. I didn't challenge you on that, Sergeant, but did you at
   least appreciate, let me put it positively, that the gate
   men and the programme sellers would have no business to
   open the gate? - A. I can accept that, yes.

Q. Did you think it would be authorised to be opened by any­
   body other than a Police Officer? — A. No, not cat that
   stage.

Q. You certainly would not expect a Steward to take responsi­
   bility for opening that gate? - A. It has happened in the
   past where Stewards have opened the gates and several fans
   have got in but not in this particular match.  Again that
   is a hypothetical question.  I don't believe that this did
   happen.  I didn't see any Stewards. Well the Stewards did
   open the gates but it was at the request of Police Officers
   to eject the fans.

Q. How did you know that it was at the request of Officers
   in this case? - A. Because they were asking to open the
   gates so they could eject a fan.

Q. You heard that or you were one of the Officers making the
   request? - A. I ejected several fans so I know.  In fact
   as soon as they approached the gates the Stewards did open
   them.
Q. Can I put you back then as if you had been in Ground Control
   for a moment.  If you had been one of the Officers in Ground
   Control who would you have contacted if you had wanted
   Gate C opened? - A. I was nearest to Gate C which was me,
   if you put it like that, or Inspector White who was in
   overall charge, it could have been him, but if it was
   match control then it is down to the Police Officer.

Q. If any attempt was made by the radio to contact you you
   did not hear it? - A. I did not hear it.

Q. I know it follows but let's be quite clear about this:
   you certainly did not acknowledge any order that was given
   to you of this kind or any other order at that time? -
   A. I did not hear any radio message whatsoever from about
   20-past-2 onwards.  I say 20-past-2, it could have been
   before.
3*                                   126

                                             W.C. CRAWFORD



     Q. The last matter, Sergeant.  I don't know whether you have
        got the actual duties in front of you but it is unfair
        to cross-examine you about them if you haven't and would
        you like to look at the bundle of the Police documents, the
        fatter bundle, it is Volume 1. Your Serial appears after
        Tab 14 halfway through, sub-sector 7 it is headed under
        Inspector White and under Serial 14 your name is there
        with that Serial.  Do you see? - A. I have not got to that
        stage yet.

     Q. Sorry, you are about halfway through Sergeant or just over
        a third of the way through Tab 14.    These are theorders
        for the day? - A. I have number 14, sir.    Is that what you
        are referring to?

     Q.           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If you go through that to sub­
             sector 7 in the middle at the top of the page, Serial 14
             at the top left of the page. - A. Yes.

     q   .         MR. GLASGOW: You see that during Phase 1, before the
             match, you have already acknowledged that your duties
             included for your Serial:  "the ensuring that order is
             maintained on the terraces"? - A. That is correct.

     Q. And during the match under Phase 2, when you are located
        in the tunnel, you have a similar responsibility:    "To
        maintain order as required"? - A.   That is correct sir.

     Q. During the match under Phase 2 would the maintenance of order
        involve you in monitoring the situation yourself or would
        you only deal with the problem if you were told to deal
        with it by central control? - A. Both sir.  If it was in
        my view then we would have sorted the situation out if
        possible and if it was in the ground control then they
        would have directed us.

     Q. But you would regard the obligation for maintaining order
        as to include keeping a look out yourself? - A. Yes.

     Q. Why did it make any difference that before the match when
        the obligation was apparently the same as order, to maintain
        order, why did you regard that as meaning only to deal with
        a situation of disorder if reported to you? - A. There was
        not any problems in the pens.

     Q. How did you know unless you had somebody keeping an eye
        on them? - A. This was being monitored by Ground Control.
        At that time we were inside the turnstiles fully committed
        with the job we were doing there with the influx of the
        fans, but up until 2 o'clock there certainly was not any
        problems.  In fact I would go as far as to say that as
        late as quarter-past-2.

                   MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, thank you Sergeant.
                                 W.C. CRAWFORD


             Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

In relation to that last matter, Sergeant, the situation was
that if order required attention then you would be called
upon to deal with it? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

But you yourself were not exercising any surveillance apart
from the visits that you made from time to time up until
2 o'clock? - A. There was not any cause for it at that
particular time.
You have been asked about the smergency evacuation and you
were asked certain questions about disposition of the
Officers by the radial gates? - A. Yes sir.

Are you aware of the emergency evacuation procedure that is
laid down in the order and the coded message that would come
over the Tannoy? - A. Yes sir, it refers to ...

Never mind what it is but the message that comes over the
Tannoy signifies something to those who know it and they
then go to their positions, do they, to prepare themselves?
- A. All Police Officers in this Force are aware of the
coded messages over the Tannoy system and therefore if a
message is passed implementing the emergency procedure they
all spring into action and they will take up their respecti
positions.
They take up the appropriate positions for that task? - A.
That is correct.
And it is not until they are into position that the evacuation
or the emergency procedure is then implemented? - A. Yes sir.

Your experience of the turnstiles has been asked about.
This year you noticed some slowness in them? - A. That is
correct sir.
 Had it been the same in 1988? - A. I did not work the turn­
 stiles in 1988 so I could not compare them.  I did work
 behind the West Stand and also in the barrier area of the
 West Stand.
 Had you ever worked behind the turnstiles before? - A. Several
 times.
 Well how did the way they were behaving or performing in
 1989 compare with your experience? - A. I thought the fans
 were coming in rather slow.

 One final matter please.  When you observed the disaster
 and the casualties, what position were you in when you
 first became aware of the whereabouts of casualties?     •
 After I had been deployed on the track,^1 was            .ieg
 to attend on the track, I immediately located the casualties
 to the left of Gate 3 and also in Gate 3 up against the wa
 there.
                                   W.C. CRAWFORD



Your vantage point was on the wall, was it? - A. I climbed
up on the fence.
And looked down and you could see where they were? - A. They
were piled up.
It is where they were I would like you to tell us about please?
- A. Yes, if you are standing on the actual field the majority
of the casualties were somewhere in the actual gateway, Gate i
at the entrance to it and to the left of that up against the
wall.
If we look at Photograph 28, for example, in the South Yorkshire
thick bundle, that is an angled view of Pen 3. Do you recognise
the tunnel entrance? - A. Yes.

The gate with Pen 3 in it.    That is the gate you were referring
to? - A. Yes.
One can see on the terrace the effect of having removed the
stanchions or the remains of the crash barrier? - A. Yes sir,
it was directly in front of the crash barrier.  It appears
to be potholes there.   Right in front of there up against
the wall is where the majority of the casualties were.

 That is where the majority were? - A. Well all of them t^at
 I could see and also in the actual gateway which was partially
 closed.
 Plainly you can't speak of areas you did not look at but
 you saw, the ones you saw were from the gatfe and in front of
 the position of those potholes where the crash barrier had
 been? - A. That is correct sir.

       MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you sir.

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you, Sergeant.


            POLICE CONSTABLE PAUL BRANSTON Called

                   Examined by MR. COLLINS:

 Police Constable Paul Branston, is that right? - A. That is
 correct, yes.
 Serial 14 under Sergeant Crawford? - A. That is correct.

. I don't want to go over the same ground, I just want to
  deal with one or two matters that you were concerned with.

       I think you were aware, were you not, that the previous
 year there had been some fans who had got in by rushing
 the turnstiles, getting over the top of the actual turn­
 stile mechanism? - A. Yes, I had been on the turnstiles at
 that same end last year and I had seen that happen then.
                                  P. BRANSTON


Did you see any of that happening this year? - A. No, I put
that down to the fact that last year it was later on
towards kick-off when that occurred when things were busiest.
When things were busy this year there was not enough space
outside for anybody to get a run at the turnstiles in order
to get a foot on the top of them to get over.

You were generally on A —G. Were you positioned at any  of
those particular turnstiles? - A. I was positioned mainly
in front of D and E, the pair of turnstiles next to the
end ones nearest to Gate C.

We have heard from Sergeant Crawford how after about half-past
when the crush built up outside you had deterioration in
attitude inside, people were obviously fed up with what
was happening outside? - A. That is correct, yes.

You were I think aware of a number of problems which
appeared to be causing, in some cases, the turnstile
flow to be rather less than it ought to have been? - A. Yes.

Can I deal with them.  You say in your statement that "the
turnstiles are rather antiquated"? - A. Yes.

What part of their antiquity was causing problems? - A. I
have seen far more modern turnstiles.   The part that prevents
the person entering when he ought not to enter only extends
from about the height of a person's knees to somewhere below
his waist which does cause problems in people, as I have
described, being able to clitob over the top. The ratchet
mechanism that stops it rotating, when the crowd built up
very greatly towards the end, was causing some problems on
the turnstile pair that I was on.

Was that because it was getting stuck by people pressing
on to the turnstiles? - A. Yes, the force of people pushing
against the rotating blue metal part was forcing it against
the lever that is on the floor where the ratchet cog, if
I can describe it as that is.




                     /Q. Did you or other Officers
                          130

                                               P. BRANSTON


Q. Did you or other Officers have to go in from time to time to
   push people back? - A. Yes.  if there was too great a pressure
   on the rotating part of the turnstile the turnstile operator
   was not able physically to push the pedal down and release the
   turnstile to rotate.  There had to be a certain amount of
   slack in the mechanism for him to be able to depress the
   ped a l.

Q. We heard from Sergeant Crawford that on occasions the wooden
   partition between the pairs of turnstiles got forced out of
   true which caused difficulties and blockages? - A. Yes.

Q. You can confirm that, can you? - A. Yes.  There are some very
   stout, vertical timbers at either end of the partition
   between.

Q. Are those the blue ones you are talking about? - A. Yes,
   variously blue a n d ....

Q. Look at No. 9 in the West Midlands bundle.  Photograph 8 shows
   F and G, but I think they are all the same design.  Are you
   referring to that big blue bit of wood which would be similar
   at the other end, or are you referring to No. 9, the white
   bit? - A. The white bit at the other end of that fence.   The
   blue uprights merely form something of the doors to close
   against.

Q. It is the white ones? - A. The white part was being forced out
   of line by the fans, and was on the turnstile pair that I was
   on ....

Q. You had to deal with that? - A. Yes, we had to go in and try
   to realign the fence.

Q. I think there was another slightly bizarre problem which you
   observed? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't know whether we can see the piece of metal you are
   referring to in these photographs. - A. Yes.   I don't know if
   it is possible on these.  It is actually on 9.   If you look at
   the curved piece of metal tubing.

Q. You mean part of the turnstile itself? - A. Part of the
   turnstile tubing that rotates, that curved part there, there
   is the wooden block butting out from the central fence behind
   that as is described.  There is a small piece of metal that
   appears like a black lump near the top of the vertical piece
   of the outermost part of the rotating part, just where it
   starts to turn.  I described it as the same size and shape as
   a rubber block on a bicycle brake, an actual brake block.   It
   is actually a piece of metal screwed on to the piping.

Q. It may have something to do with clicking on to a counter in
   order to take the numbers? - A. I presume that is what it is.

Q. What problem did this cause? - A. On the turnstiles, and it
   only happens on the turnstiles owing to a fact of tailoring
                            131

                                                 P. BRANSTON


     that rotate clockwise when viewed from above the turnstile
     mechanism....

Q. So that would be the left-hand ones as you look at them from
   inside? - A. The left-hand one of the pair as viewed from the
   inside.  As it rotates, after being released by the turnstile
   operator, that small piece of metal could get caught in the
   fly zip of persons, and it was mostly with people wearing
   denim jeans, which quite a few people do, where the material
   is very strong.      The force of the crowd behind was pressing
   them against the turnstile, and that block of metal was caught
   in the fly of the jeans and not allowing the turnstile to
   rotate.  Several times I was able to go in and push people's
   stomachs back in order to release the turnstile from their
   clothing, and at one time, I believe it was turnstile F, the
   very end o n e . ...

Q. G. - A. Yes, G, nearest to gate C, it was prevented from
   rotating for some considerable length of time, talking about
   perhaps 2 minutes. I was asked to go and see if I could sort
   it out.  I spent some time straining and pushing this
   particular lad back until I was joined by another Officer from
   the serial who by habit carries a very small pocket knife with
   him, and he offered to cut the fly on this man's jeans in
   order to release the mechanism.

Q. Was that a popular step? - A. No, it was not well received.
   When he saw a Police Officer lunging towards him with a knife
   he did not initially understand what we were at.  So in the
   end we persevered without rearranging his tailoring, and
   managed to free him by merely pushing him backwards.

Q. I thought you might be rearranging something other than his
   tailoring! - A. Yes.

Q.       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    This was not just in one
     turnstile? It was more than one, was it? - A. I was standing
     outside D to E, and it was certainly happening at the end one
     as well.  So it was happening in E and in G, because it only
     happens in those that rotated that particular direction
     because of the way flies are made.  If it rotates in the other
     direction it does not,get caught in the flap of cloth over
     the zip.

Q.        MR. COLLINS:    Any other reason that you observed why
     they were going rather more slowly than usual? - A. There were
     a few arguments between stewards and people trying to come in
     about various things, such as they had the wrong tickets for
     the area.   Initially they could be turned away, but of course
     once the crush built up outside people had to be let in.

Q. I think occasionally people tried to bribe their way in and
   you had to eject them when they had got in? - A. Yes.   In the
   early stages I was alerted to this problem by Sergeant
   Crawford of people trying to bribe turnstile operators.   At
   the very outset of our duty there we have a sort of standard
   procedure with all the turnstile operators that if they have
                            132

                                                 P. BRANSTON


     any problems whatsoever and wish Police assistance they knock
     on the window, so that no matter if we are searching people
     and our attention is not actually looking down the turnstile,
     we are immediately alerted to the fact there are problems.   I
     was alerted by turnstile operators on a number of occasions
     that people were trying to enter without tickets by putting
     money across the turnstile.

Q. It is clear from what you said that if they had not knocked on
   the window they could have pocketed the money, the fan could
   have got in and no-one would have been any the wiser? - A. The
   temptation must have been there, particularly since towards
   the end we could not turn the person away backwards.  They had
   to come through, and therefore the counter would register the
   fact that somebody had come through.

Q. Of course, it could happen, but as far as you were concerned
   you can only tell what you saw. - A. That is right.

Q.   May I go on then to opening the gate. I think you were not
     aware the gate was going to be opened? - A. Not at all.

Q. Indeed, the first time it was opened you thought, judging by
   your statement, that it had been opened from outside or by
   organisation from outside? - A. I thought it had been opened
   probably from inside to eject someone, but then forced wider
   open by persons from outside.

Q. Were you aware or did you see someone being ejected when the
   gate was opened, or were you just aware suddenly of the gate
   being opened? - A. I was aware suddenly of the gate being
   opened.  I was probably searching someone or speaking to
   someone at the time.

Q.   I don't want to go into detail because we have all seen the
     video.  Then it was opened again the second time? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you aware that was going to happen?    Did that take you by
   surprise? - A. i had no warning.

Q. Did you see the fans going down the central tunnel after each
   opening? - A. The first time, no, because they came in at
   quite a pace.  Certain persons at the front were pushed down,
   and we had to pull them out, pull them to one side.

Q. Again it is obvious from the video there was a bit of chaos
   when they came in on that occasion? - A. That is correct.    The
   second time even initially they didn't come in with the same
   force.  I don't know, it must have been something to do with
   the arrangement outside,   but certainly as it remained open for
   quite a while the second  time things were slacker.    Iwas
   standing in the corner by the end turnstile and the gate, and
   several people, particularly ladies and people with children,
   were coming round that corner and standing with me out of the
   way of the main flow to let it subside.

Q. Did the main flow go down that central tunnel? - A. It did,
                          133

                                                P. BRANSTON


   yes.

Q. Indeed, there was not anywhere else for them to go obviously,
   was there? - A. It seems the logical place to go when one
   comes through that gate.

Q. Did you have any reasons at that stage to know the state of
   the pens down the bottom of that tunnel? - A. I had no reason
   to know they were crowded. I had been aware that the gates
   and the fences dividing the pens were open.  Indeed, I think
   they were opened back on themselves and then padlocked in an
   open position so they could not be interfered with.  So I was
   of the opinion that the crowd would find its own level between
   the various p e n s .

Q. I think you were expecting that the kick-off might well have
   been delayed? - A. Yes.

Q. But we know now that is not the case.  Did you hear any
   announcements over the Tannoy? - A. I heard no announcement
   saying the kick-off....

Q. No, not about the kick-off but about anything? - A. I heard
   one announcement asking fans at the West Stand to move back.
   I believe it was saying that there was space:  "If you will
   move back and be patient, you will get i n " .

Q. The West Stands? - A. The West terraces.

Q. Do you remember when that was? Before the gates were opened?
   - A. I think it was after the gates were opened.  I couldn't
   put a time on it.  I was too busy to look at my watch.

Q. Then I think you got a message that you were wanted on the
   pitch? - A. Yes.

Q. People were still coming in at that stage,   I believe? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Through the turnstiles? - A. We were still on our phase 1
   duties at that time.  Normally you don't take up your phase 2
   duties until phase 1 is over with, i.e. until people have
   stopped coming through the turnstiles.

Q. When you got round the front can you remember whether the
   match was still in progress? - A. I don't remember seeing any
   football players on the field at all.

Q. It was obvious to you, I think, when you got round the front
   that this was no hooliganism, and that people were in great
   difficulties in the pens? - A. As I came down the South Stand
   and over the wall on to the pitch I thought it may be a
   straightforward pitch invasion.      As I walked forward towards
   the goal mouth I realised it was not, because rather than
   running riot on the pitch people were filtering back in
   through another gate on to the terraces. So I realised it was
   nothing of that s o r t , and when I got to the back of the goal
r   •<*




                                       134

                                                             P. BRANSTON


               mouth I saw the people in distress the other side of the
               fences.

          Q. It was obvious. - A. It was obvious from then on.

          Q. Mr. Branston, we have all read your statement, and see that
             you did, if I may say so, sterling work in helping in that
             pen.  The only thing I want to ask you, and I am sorry it is a
             rather distressing thing to have to ask you, is the position
             of bodies, the position of people who were dead, because you I
             think looked in pen 3, did you not? - A. Yes.   I went to pen 3
             from the track side, first of all.

          Q. Perhaps to take it shortly and avoid any unnecessary distress
             for you, we know from the video and other evidence there was a
             considerable number of bodies at the front immediately inside
             gate 3, and I think as you look at it to the right of gate 3?
             - A . Yes.

          Q. I am more concerned about whether you can help us as to bodies
             any further back in pen 3? - A. I went to the right of gate 3.
             Round gate 3 there was a throng of supporters and Police
             Officers trying to get people out.  After standing there for a
             matter of seconds I realised there were enough people there
             and I could offer no more assistance.  So I went along to the
             right of gate 3 and stood on the wall in an attempt to tell
             people to move back, to appeal to those at the bac k , to try
             and get the message across what was happening, asking them to
             move back, and I made eye contact with a gentleman I should
             about halfway up the terrace.

          Q. Pausing there, you said in your statement you thought it about
             a third.  You think now a half? - A. A third or a half, yes.

          Q.    The only reason I am putting it that way is because later you
               equated this with the collapsed barrier you saw? - A. Yes.
               This gentleman was gesticulating and shouting to me, and from
               virtual lip reading he was telling me there was somebody dead
               at his feet.     He was totally exasperated that I was not doing
               anything, b u t ....

          Q.    I can understand.  You were not able, effectively. How far
               back was he in relation to that crash barrier which you later
               discovered to be collapsed? - A. I think he was somewhere
               behind where I later saw the crash barrier had collapsed.

          Gh Would you have thought, assuming there was a body at his feet,
             that that body would have been behind or in front of the crash
             barrier? When I say that, "behind", that is the tunnel side
             rather than the pitch side - or can't you really tell? - A. I
             can 't really tell.  Have you got a photograph.

          Q. We have got photographs and we have also got a plan.  I was
             going to suggest you might look at the plan.  Have you got
             that? - A. Yes.
                                           135


                                                                               P. BRANSTON

Q.   It is a p l a n of           the pen.           The one        on the l ef t is Pen 3
     and it s h o w s you         the steps.           A.           I should think behind
     that.

Q . You w o u l d say b e h i n d t h a t ?             A.   Yes,       and    if a n y t h i n g
    t o w a r d s the r i g h t end of the              barrier.

Q.          L O R D J U S T I C E TA Y L O R : I h a v e not q u i t e f o l l o w e d .              You
     h a v e got t h a t p l a n in f r o nt of y o u ?      A.       Yes.

Q.   You c a m e    to   this     gate   f ro m   the     pitch       side?      A.         Yes.

Q.    You w e n t to the        right    of    it?        A.         I went    to     the r i g h t   of
     G a t e 3, yes.

Q . So you w e r e       going       towards      Pen     4,   in    fact?     A.       That's
    right.

Q.   And you       climbed      up   ther e.         A.        Yes.

Q.    But the m a n you saw wa s not in                f r on t of you but o v e r a w ay
     to the left;         is t h a t it - b e h i n d w h e r e the b a r r i e r b r o k e ?
     A.     I d i d n ' t m o v e a g r e a t d i s t a n c e aw ay f r om G a t e 3.

Q . J u st t ur n it rou n d , p o i n t to w h e r e you were.             A.    I
    w e n t to a b o u t here.        T h e r e w as a l a r g e g r o u p of O f f i c e r s
    and p e o p l e r o u n d G a t e 3.       I w e n t to the i m m e d i a t e side
    of the group.

Q . W h e r e w as t h i s m a n who was g e s t i c u l a t i n g at y ou ?
    A.       I w o u l d t h i n k he w o u l d be s o m e w h e r e here, d i r e c t l y
    in f r o n t of me, p e r h a p s s l i g h t l y to the left, a r o u n d
    the r i g h t - h a n d e nd of w h e r e the end s t a n c h i o n is shown.

Q.          MR. C O L L I N S :    So if you s a i d a t h i r d in y o u r s t a t e m e n t ,
     you s ai d a h a l f here, it s u g g e s t s , l o o k i n g at t h a t l a y - o u t ,
     t ha t it m u s t h a v e b e e n s l i g h t l y b e h i n d r a t h e r t h a n in f r o n t
     of t hat b a r r i e r .    A.      Yes, I w o u l d say n o w b e h i n d r a t h e r
     t ha n in front.

            MR. C O L L I N S :        I am    grateful.              Sir,    that     is   all     I would
     wish   to ask.

            L OR D J U S T I C E TA Y L O R : Yes.                  I think    we    will    d ea l
     with   cr os s-examination tomorrow.

                           (The I n q u i r y was a d j o u r n e d u n t i l
                          1 0 . 0 0 a.m. the f o l l o w i n g morning")
