                                                                     C O U N T Y H ALL,
                                n,       eit/M "
                                                                        PRESTON,
                                                     ^.VVi Lm Vi ,
                                                                            L A N C A S H IR E .




Lord Justice Taylor

Dear Sir,

The Fire Service and Public Protection Committee of the Lancashire County
Council debated the recommenadtions arising from your report on the Hilsborough
football ground disaster and by now you will probably have been informed that
the committee members feel that the perimeter fences on all football 'grounds
should be completely removed. I write as the Conservative spokesman for public
protection matters to inform you that that is far from the situation.    Council
members are equally divided between those who wish the fences to be removed and
those who support an alternative course of action.   The views of this last
group I give below:

     We realise that when over-crowding occurred the perimeter fences killed
spectators who were unable to escape, but we view the complete removal of these
fences within the present sports ground climate, with extreme apprehension and
feel that all possible alternatives should be explored for allowing the public
to make speedy exit from terraces on to the ground in the event of an emergency,
for example, (a) the development and installation of collapsible fences, within
the fencing system, (b) the installation of a greater number of gates which must
be kept open, (c) the installation of wider gates, or (d) any- other alternative
which may be apparent.   Only if all of these possibilities are unacceptable would
we countenance complete fencing removal.

     We take this view because we have seen many violent football incidents on our
terraces in Lancashire which could clearly have spilled out on to the pitch or on
other parts of the ground had they not been contained,particularly in the event of
a contentious decision.   We do not wish to submit the public,the police, or the
referee - this last person is particularly vulnerable - to such dangers.

     We do not believe that the alternatives of flooding a danger matvh with
police is an acceptable proposition because (i) a number of people travel to
grounds with the sole intention of creating danger, (ii) such a presence' would
be an invitation to such people to cause trouble and (iii) we do not wish to
see the rest of the district being substantially "under-policed" at such times.

     We are very impressed by the record of the Luton Town membership scheme which
would, we believe provide a very good long term solution if other clubs could be
persuaded to adopt it; it would permit the complete removal of perimeter fences
without danger.   This alternative would also and equally important, lessen the
dangers of hooligans fighting, terrorising and laying waste to town centres before
and after matches and also during travelling.


Yours s i n c e r e l y , \ >    \                     ^
                                     '    vv \   W     \   n

County Councillor Dr. Harry K.Pi\idred
Lancashire County Council
                                                           28 th October 1989
                               Lancashire County Council
                               Hillhouse Division
County Councillor Dr. Harry Pindred, your representative on the
County Council, called to-day.


Should you have any m atter to discuss at any time he will be delighted
to be of help, please contact him on:-


      T elep h on e:                   Rose Cottage,
      Cleveleys: 8 5 2 7 8 3           31 W est Drive
                                        Thornton, C leveleys
