CHAPTER 1 - The background


The sequence of events since the disaster


1.    It will be helpful first to set out the broad sequence of inquiries and
      investigations following the disaster. Two days afterwards, on 17 April 1989,
      the then Home Secretary appointed Lord Justice Taylor (as he then was and
      whom I shall refer to as Lord Taylor) to conduct an inquiry. On 24 April,
      West Midlands Police were instructed to investigate the disaster for the
      purpose of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

2.    Lord Taylor’s Inquiry held public sessions between 15 May and 29 June
      1989. 174 witnesses gave evidence and much other material in the form of
      statements and video evidence was made available to the Inquiry. On 4
      August, Lord Taylor’s interim report was published. He concluded that
      ‘the main reason fo r the disaster was the failure o f police control’ (interim
      report, para 278).

3.    On 18 April 1990, Dr Popper, the Coroner for South Yorkshire began the
      first of 95 mini inquests to decide the statutory questions as to who each of
      the deceased was and when and where he or she died. He did not deal at
      that stage with the remaining statutory question of how each victim died,
      since that could not be answered pending the decision of the Director of
      Public Prosecutions (DPP) as to whether or not any prosecutions should be
      brought against any of those involved.

4.    On II July 1990 the Police Complaints Authority (PCA) directed that
      disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief
       Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. Mr Duckenfield
      had been in overall control of the police operation for the semi-final at
      Hillsborough, and Mr Murray was in control of operations in the ground.

5.    Both officers had been in the police control box with good views of the part
       of the ground where the tragedy occurred. In November 1990 Mr
       Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill-health. Since disciplinary charges can
       only be pursued against serving police officers, this meant that the complaint
       against him had to be dropped. The PCA subsequently announced that it
       would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on the ground that it would
       be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge against one officer
       only.

6.    In the autumn of 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no
       prosecutions. On 19 November the inquests were resumed at Sheffield.
       These proceedings are often referred to as the ‘main’ or ‘generic’ inquest,
       since they were concerned with the question common to all the (then) 95
       deceased of how they came to their deaths.

7.     Around 200 witnesses gave evidence at these resumed inquests, including 56
       who had done so before Lord Taylor. On 28 March 1991, the jury returned
       verdicts of accidental death in all 95 cases, by majorities of 9 to 2.

8.     In April 1992, a Memorial was presented to the Attorney-General inviting
       him to exercise his powers under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 asking
       him to apply for new inquests on the basis of evidence that had come to light
        since the original inquests. In August of that year the Attorney-General
        announced that he had declined to do so.

9.     On April 6th 1993, six families who had lost relations at Hillsborough were
       granted leave to move for judicial review to quash the verdict of the inquest
       and seek a fresh inquest. On 5 November 1993 the Divisional Court
       dismissed their application.

10.    Civil claims for compensation have been made throughout the period since
       the disaster. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has not contested
       liability for these claims, though he has sought contribution from other
       parties. Paragraph 65 of this chapter gives details in relation to the claims
       which have been settled.

11.    On 5 December 1996, Granada Television broadcast a programme entitled
       'Hillsborough'. The programme presented an emotive and powerful picture
       of the plight of the bereaved immediately following and in the aftermath of
       the tragedy. It also suggested that there was fresh evidence which had not
       previously been considered which called into question the verdict at the
       inquests and perhaps also some other decisions.


The scrutiny

12.    Since my appointment to conduct this scrutiny in June, I have had evidence
        either in writing or in person from a wide variety of people. There is a full
        list of those from whom I have taken evidence in person, or otherwise
        consulted, at Appendix 1. As well as the people listed there I have had about
        30 letters about my scrutiny from members of the public.

 13.   I have read the evidence given at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and most of that given
        at the Inquest. I have examined many of the ‘body files’ which contain
         information about individuals who died and considered other material, the
        nature of which will be apparent from my report. I visited Hillsborough
         Football Stadium on 24 September.

 14.   I have in particular had written submissions from Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr
         Julian Knowles, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which
      represents many of the families of those who died. I discussed these with
      Counsel, who were accompanied by the Chairman and vice-Chairman of the
      Group, in late September. I then visited Liverpool, where I met all those
      families personally who wished to see me. I appreciate the thoughtful and
      constructive way in which the family members whom I met on that occasion,
      and since, have put their points to me.

15.   Since my visit to Liverpool, I have had meetings with a number of other
      people who expressed their concern to me about the disaster, or who I thought
      could help me in my scrutiny. I am very grateful to all those who have
      helped me in the course of my scrutiny.


Evidence

16.   My terms of reference mention evidence which was not available to the earlier
      inquiries into the disaster, and invite me to judge whether any such evidence is
      significant in various ways. In an event of the magnitude of Hillsborough,
      witnessed by so many people, there will inevitably be evidence which is ‘new’
      in the sense that it has not surfaced before. I therefore think that it is
      important at the outset of my report to establish what the concepts of ‘new’
      and ‘significant’ evidence must mean in the context of the Hillsborough
      disaster.


a) - evidence which is ‘notpreviously available ’

17.   Much of the evidence which I have been invited to consider, including that of
      the two witnesses Dr Walker and Mr Houldsworth upon whom reliance is
      placed by the Family Support Group, has been previously available in the
      sense that their existence was known at the time of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or
      the Inquests and written statements were taken from them. But for one
      reason or another they were not called to give oral evidence to Lord Taylor or
      the Coroner, or their evidence may not have been considered by the
      prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities and the Divisional Court.
      Evidence which falls into this category might in my opinion be regarded as not
      having been previously available, so long as it was not - at the time of Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry or the Inquests - in the public domain.

18.   I would regard evidence as being in the public domain if the substance of it
       was known to the legal advisers of the parties - including the legal advisers of
       the families. In the case of items such as videotapes, or other ‘exhibits’, I
       would regard them as not previously available if they were unknown to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry team or to the Coroner, or if it seemed that Lord Taylor’s
       team or the Coroner did not appreciate their significance. I would also regard
       videotape or other evidence as not previously available if its existence was
       unknown to the legal advisers acting for the families - even if Lord Taylor or
       the Coroner knew about it.
19.    But I should make it plain that I have looked at all the evidence I have been
       asked to consider, whether it was previously available in this sense or not.


hi -   ‘significant evidence ’

20.    In order to be significant a piece of evidence must first of course be credible,
       but it must also differ in some important way from evidence which has already
       been given. Over 50,000 people were present in the Hillsborough Stadium
        on the day of the disaster. Many others were involved in the rescue
        operation, including police, ambulance and fire service personnel, doctors
        and nurses. It is highly unlikely that any two had precisely the same
        perception or recollection of the fast moving and horrific events.

21.    The West Midlands Police took 3,776 statements from witnesses. These
       included the people who were most involved, but even so this was only a
       fraction of those who witnessed something of the events. Lord Taylor was
       satisfied from the evidence that he heard that he was able to reach the
       necessary conclusions for the purpose of his report. He said that to have
       heard further evidence would not have added significantly to the picture
       (interim report para 14).

22.    Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues, for example
       why the police lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles. The evidence of witnesses who have not previously come
       forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight of the evidence already
        given on these controversial issues.


(r) - evidence significant enoush to justify a new public inquiry

23.    So far as a further public inquiry is concerned, the new evidence needed to
       justify one would in my view have to be such that there would be a real
       possibility that the conclusions reached by Lord Taylor in his Report might
       be different. Neither Counsel appearing on their behalf nor any of the
       families who I have seen in interview had any criticism of Lord Taylor’s
       Inquiry or the conclusions that he reached.

24.    I would also recommend a further public inquiry if I considered that there
        was an important aspect of the disaster or its aftermath which had not been
        sufficiently investigated, and that it was in the public interest that it should
        now be investigated, notwithstanding the long lapse of time.
(d)   -    evidence o f such significance that I should draw it to the attention o f the
          Director o f Public Prosecutions, the Attorney-General or those in charge o f
          police disciplinary matters

25.       The Director of Public Prosecutions had the responsibility of deciding
          whether criminal proceedings, in practice charges of manslaughter, should
          be brought against any corporate body or individual. In their submissions to
          me Counsel for the Family Support Group have only invited me to make a
          recommendation to the DPP in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray
          (see note 1).

26.       The DPP, accepting the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel,
          concluded in 1990 that there was not sufficient evidence to justify such
          charges against either of these officers. The fresh evidence therefore would
          have to be of sufficient significance that there is in my view a real possibility
          that in considering it the DPP might change her mind and institute
          proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both of
          these officers.

27.       My terms of reference also mention the Attorney-General. The Attorney-
          General has powers under the Coroner’s Act 1988 in relation to Inquests.
          Section 13 provides that:-

                  ‘.... where on an application by or under the authority o f the
                  Attorney-General, the High Court is satisfied .... where an inquest
                  has been held .... that (whether by reason o f fraud, rejection o f
                  evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, the
                  discovery o f new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or
                  desirable in the interests o f justice that another inquest should be
                  held, the High Court may .... order another inquest to be held into
                  the death .... [and] .... quash the inquisition on that inquest’.

28.       In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group
           stated “it is accepted, eight and a half years after the event, that it is
           impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests to be convened.” In
           my view the Courts’ powers under section 13 only arise if it is 'necessary or
           desirable’ in the interests of justice that another inquest should be held. If it
           is impracticable, it cannot be said to be necessary in the interests of justice.
           I agree with Counsel that it is impracticable and undesirable to hold fresh
           Inquests. In their oral submissions to me Counsel accepted that this remedy
           was not available (transcript 30 September 1997, page 3).

29.        Counsel however submitted that there could be a further application to the
           Divisional Court for judicial review of the Coroner’s Inquest with a view to
           quashing the verdicts of accidental death. He further submitted that I should
           grant leave for such an application. That I cannot do, since no formal
           application has been made, nor am I sitting as a Judge dealing with the
           Crown Office List.
30.   If I came to the conclusion that a further application to the Divisional Court
      for a review of the Inquest would have a reasonable prospect of success I
       would be prepared to say so, in the hope and expectation that the single
      Judge hearing the application might be inclined to grant leave. Since
       however it would be impossible to substitute a verdict of unlawful killing in
       the absence of a fresh inquest, I cannot see what the point of such an
       application would be. As Lord Justice McCowan said in his judgement in
       the Divisional Court in 1993 (transcript page 41B):

               “As to the ... suggestion o f a mere quashing o f the existing verdicts
              leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as absolutely
              valueless

31.   The effect of quashing the accidental death verdict without substituting any
      other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict.
      (R v St Pancras Coroner ex parte Higgins. 152 JP 637.640). An open
      verdict is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record any
      other suggested conclusion. In practice there were two alternative verdicts
      here - unlawful killing or accidental death. If the jury did not consider that
      the evidence justified a verdict of unlawful killing, then accidental death
      must inevitably be the verdict.


Other action which should be taken in the public interest

32.   My terms of reference also ask me to advise whether there is any other
      action which should be taken in the public interest. I shall return to this
      later, in Chapter 3 Part 2 and Chapter 4 Part 2.


The previous proceedings

33.    It is necessary to summarise the previous proceedings as briefly as I can in
       order to see what possible impact any fresh evidence might have upon the
       conclusions reached by those making the relevant decisions. It is important
       to bear in mind that each set of proceedings had a particular scope and
       purpose.

Lord Tailor's Inquiry

34.    Lord Taylor conducted a thorough and wide-ranging inquiry which was in
       some respects - certainly in its effects upon crowd safety at major sports
       events - one of the most important to be held in this country for many years.
       His terms of reference were -
        “To inquire into events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on
       the 15th April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f
       crowd control and safety at sports events

Lord Taylor’s interim report was concerned with the events of 15th April,
while his final report dealt with his recommendations. The 174 witnesses
from whom he heard oral evidence included more than 50 Liverpool
supporters, over 50 police officers, 11 representatives of the Ambulance and
Fire Services, including senior officers, 15 employees of Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club together with their consulting engineers, and 5
doctors (3 of whom were Liverpool supporters) who had attended the injured
and dying.

The purpose of the first part of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was to find out what
happened and why, and to consider the response of the emergency services.

It was not difficult to discover what happened. The Leppings Lane standing
terrace on which the disaster occurred was separated from the pitch by high
metal fencing, and divided into pens by ‘radial’ fences which stretched from
the pitch back towards the rear of the terrace. The match was to kick off at
3 p.m. - by about 2.50 pm the central pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
terraces were full or nearly full. At 2.52 the police had an exit gate by the
Leppings Lane turnstiles, Gate C, opened in order to relieve dangerous
crowd pressure which had built up outside the turnstiles. The result was that
some 2,000 supporters came through Gate C into the ground in a relatively
short time. Most went through a tunnel leading into the rear of pens 3 and
4, and the result was a crush of people substantially exceeding the safe
capacity of those pens. Part of a crush barrier in pen 3 collapsed.

The police did not at first appreciate what was happening. When they did,
rescue was difficult because of the congestion and restricted access to the
pitch.

The question of why the disaster occurred was more complex. The first
issue was why the police lost control of the crowd outside the turnstiles.
The police said it was due to the unexpected late arrival of very large
numbers of supporters, many of whom were determined to get into the
ground on time come what may. They said that there was a larger number
than usual affected by drink, and behaving badly. A substantial number had
no tickets, which increased the problems of crowd control. The position
was exacerbated by people not knowing where to go because of poor sign­
posting.

The police said that they could not stop those at the back pushing forward
and crushing those at the front, near the turnstiles. They said that they could
not have anticipated such a large unco-operative crowd in the last half hour
before the game. The policing operation was conducted on similar lines to
that which had been successful during the identical Nottingham Forest-
Liverpool semi-final fixture at Hillsborough in 1988.

The other side of the picture was given by the supporters. Many of them
criticised the policing. The police should have appreciated that many
people would turn up in the half-hour before kick-off, and should have taken
more effective steps such as filtering the crowd well before they reached the
turnstiles, as was done in the previous year. This would have prevented
people without tickets getting in the way and adding to the throng in front of
the turnstiles. If need be the kick-off should have been delayed.

Lord Taylor rejected the view advanced by the police. He summarised his
conclusions on this aspect of the matter at para 268 of his interim report:

         “the need to open Gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the
        turnstiles. That occurred because, as both Club and police should
        have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the large
        numbers demanded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy
       period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed
        to provide fo r controlling a concentrated arrival o f large numbers
        should that occur in a short period. That it might so occur was
       foreseeable and it did. The presence o f an unruly minority who had
        drunk too much aggravated the problem. So did the Club’s confused
        and inadequate signs and ticketing. ”

Lord Taylor also criticised the police decision not to delay the 3 p.m. kick-
off for the match.

I have heard no fresh evidence relating to what took place outside the ground
before 3 pm. There is no question of reviewing Lord Taylor’s finding on
that.

But the crucial question was what happened inside the ground. Lord Taylor
concluded that the influx of supporters going through Gate C after 2.52
should not have been allowed to go down the tunnel. He said (para 231):

        “It should have been clear in the control room where there was a
        view o f the pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
        to be closed. I f orders had been given to that effect when gate C was
        opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas o f the
        wings and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure to give
        that order was a blunder o f the first magnitude. ”

He also criticised the police response to the situation. He said they should
have appreciated earlier than they did what was happening and summoned
the emergency services earlier. But here we are only dealing with a few
minutes - albeit vital minutes.
47.    Lord Taylor was therefore highly critical of the police. But he also
       criticised others. The Safety Certificate issued for the ground by Sheffield
       City Council was unsatisfactory so far as the capacity of the Leppings Lane
       terraces was concerned once the radial fences had been installed. He
       criticised the Club and their consulting engineers, because the layout of the
       forecourt and turnstiles at Leppings Lane was quite inadequate to cope with
       so many people. There was no method of monitoring how many people
       went into the individual pens on the Leppings Lane terrace except by a
       visual check, which was wholly unsatisfactory. The signposting at the
       ground and the information on tickets for the match was inadequate and
       misleading and the club had no stewards in the concourse directing people
       where to go. The result was that most standing spectators who went in
       through the turnstiles A-G or Gate C did not realise there was any
       alternative but to go down the tunnel.

48.    Barrier 124A which collapsed was of insufficient strength. The crush
       barriers were insufficient and poorly placed and the gates on the perimeter
       fence were too small.

49.    Lord Taylor also considered the response of the Emergency Services. He
       said at para 296 of his interim report:

               “I say at the outset o f this chapter that no valid criticism can be
               made o f the response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by South
               Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service or by the fire brigade on
               15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism o f
               them. ”

50.    He considered the criticisms of two Liverpool doctors in relation to the
        rescue operation, and specifically rejected them.

51.    None of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord
        Taylor’s censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate
        or additional ground of criticism in respect of the events leading to the
        tragedy. Nor, save in one respect which I mention in Chapter 6, has it had
        any impact on the responsibility of other parties criticised in Lord Taylor’s
        report.


 The decision not to prosecute

 52.    I have read the joint opinion of Counsel dated 6th August 1990 which gave
        advice to the Director of Public Prosecutions on the possible criminal
        proceedings against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield, amongst others.
        Although the material available to Counsel was more extensive than that
        which was placed before Lord Taylor, because by that time the criminal
        investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police had been completed,
        Counsel stated that
       “the criminal investigation, fo r all its thoroughness, has not
       significantly added to or contradicted Lord Justice Taylor’s findings.
       In our judgement, therefore, the Taylor analysis o f the facts is as firm
       a base as any from which to approach the question o f Criminal
       Liability

Counsel then set out a full, detailed and careful resume of the facts based on
the evidence then available. I have not found any error or omission in this
resume, nor in my view is any particular aspect understated or exaggerated.
I have also considered the statement of the law set out in the opinion.
Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and culpable
misfeasance in public office. They were plainly correct to consider that the
latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in the
circumstances of the case.

In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the decision not to prosecute
therefore I must be satisfied that any fresh evidence establishes or may
establish facts not previously considered by Counsel or the significance of
which was not fully appreciated, which makes it more likely that charges of
manslaughter could be established. Essentially this relates to Mr
Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
injury in doing what they did or omitted to do {but see note 1 at the end o f
this chapter).

From my meetings with the bereaved families and their representatives I am
left in no doubt that there was widespread disappointment at the DPP’s
decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult to understand in the light of
Lord Taylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South Yorkshire police and the fact
that the force have been paying compensation.

What the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however, is
the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is involved
in manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as against the
degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and compensation
payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual police officer
would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be enough
simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the high
standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the order
to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the serious
degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter.
Police Complaints Authority

58.    The decision by the Police Complaints Authority not to pursue charges
       against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray was
       not taken on the ground that there was insufficient evidence to charge them
       with neglect of duty. Mr Duckenfield retired from the police on grounds of
       ill health and, as the rules stood (and still stand), such charges cannot be
       pursued against a retired officer. In the case of Mr Murray it was
       considered unfair to pursue a joint charge against the junior of the two
       officers only.

59.    It is clear to me that many of the families of victims consider this to be
       unfair and unsatisfactory. I sympathise with this view. But it is not my
       task to comment on these rules. The issue is a complex one and is a matter
       for Parliament. The Police Complaints Authority commented on it in their
       Annual Report for 1988, and the matter has recently been reported on by a
       Parliamentary Committee. In the context of my scrutiny it means however
       that fresh evidence is unlikely to have any impact on the decision not to
       pursue these charges.


The Inquest

60.    The purpose of an inquest is to find out who the deceased was and how,
       when and where he or she came to their death (Coroner’s Act 1988, section
       11(5) and Coroner’s Rules 1984, Rule 36 - which also prohibits the Coroner
       or jury expressing an opinion on any other matter). No verdict can be
       framed in such a way as to appear to determine any question of criminal
       liability on the part of a named person or civil liability.

61.    The Hillsborough inquests therefore were, or should have been, of much
       more lim ited scope than the wide ranging Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor.
       The questions of who the deceased were, and where and when they died
       were dealt with at the mini inquests. At each mini inquest a police officer
       gave a summary of the evidence relating to the deceased. This was based on
       statements taken from witnesses and sought so far as possible to trace what
       happened to each person from the time they left home to go to the match to
       the post-mortem examination on them. A second police officer gave
       evidence based on photographic material in an attempt to trace the
       movements of each individual.

62.    Then the pathologist gave evidence in relation to the post-mortem
       examination and cause of death. Because of the general confusion as the
       disaster unfolded it was not always possible to trace what happened to
       everybody who died from the time they were last seen alive on the terraces
       to the confirmation of their death and subsequent identification. This has
       understandably caused great concern to families who are anxious to trace the
last moments of their children or relatives. I will return to this question in
Chapter 5.

The main inquest began on 19th November 1990 and concluded on 28th
March 1991. As I have explained in paragraph 31 there were in practice
only two possible verdicts, unlawful killing and accidental death. The jury
returned the latter verdict. Again as a result of my meetings with the
families and their representatives I have been left in no doubt that there is
widespread dissatisfaction among them as to the verdict and much criticism
of the Coroner and the way the inquests were conducted. As to the verdict,
as I have already said, Counsel for the Family Support Group has accepted
that it is now impossible to have a fresh inquest with a view to substituting a
verdict of unlawful killing. The Support Group argue that the public
perception is that the verdict of accidental death implies that there was no
fault on the part of the police or any other party. I cannot say what
perception, if any, the general public have. In any event the proposition is
wrong. In his summing up the Coroner correctly stated that a verdict of
accidental death did not mean that the deaths occurred without fault.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has never contested civil liability on
the part of the police to pay damages for negligence to the bereaved and
injured. This was accepted in a letter from Hammond Suddards, solicitors
for the Chief Constable and his insurers dated 15 December 1989 and
recognised as an admission of liability by the Courts (Divisional Court
Transcript, page 40; Lord Keith of Kinkel in Alcock v Chief Constable
[1992] AC 310, 392).

Compensation has been paid. In respect of the fatalities, 37 claims were
made for loss of financial dependency pursuant to the Fatal Accidents Acts.
Of these 36 have been settled. 53 fatal claims were restricted to damages for
funeral expenses and/or statutory bereavement payments. 50 have been
settled. Offers have been made in respect of the other 3 but not accepted.
1473 claims for personal injury were intimated. All claims included a
psychiatric element. The great majority were for psychiatric as opposed to
physical injury. 1035 have been settled, 19 remain outstanding. The
rem aining claims have been closed with a nil payment or not pursued. The
Club and Eastwood and Partners, the Club’s consultant engineers, made a
very substantial lump sum contribution to those settlements; so also did the
City Council, although their insurers were the same as those of the police.
The major portion was borne by the police and their insurers. In total
£13.25 million has been paid in compensation and legal costs, not including
compensation to police officers.

I have heard the suggestion that the verdict of accidental death at the
inquests in some way undermined or reversed the findings of Lord Taylor.
But it did no such thing. In order to justify a further application to the
Divisional Court for judicial review to quash the inquest verdict of
accidental death, without an order for a new inquest, any new evidence must
      in my opinion show that had it been presented to the jury they would have
      been likely to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.


The Divisional Court

67.   As I have already mentioned the Divisional Court heard in 1993 an
      application on behalf of six families to quash the inquest verdicts of
      accidental death and seek fresh inquests. It considered ten grounds which
      were advanced on behalf of the six families, but rejected all of them. I will
      discuss some of the points which the Divisional Court considered in more
      detail later.

68.   The main arguments before the Divisional Court were -

      a.      That the Coroner should have disqualified himself on the grounds
      that he was too closely associated with the Sheffield City Council, one of the
      interested parties, who appointed him and paid his salary. This was said to
      give rise to apparent bias. The Divisional Court said the point was far too
      late, since no objection was taken at the time. This ground was raised for
      the first time before the Divisional Court - nobody had mentioned it at the
      inquests. The Divisional Court concluded in any event that the point had no
      merit.

       b.      That the Coroner wrongly conducted the mini inquests by reference
       to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses which were read out and the
       contents of which could not be tested by oral evidence and questioning.
       (Ground 1 of the application). The Court held that Rule 37(3)(C) of the
       Coroner’s Rules 1984 permitted this. It had been done with the complete
       agreement of Mr Fraser who was then acting as solicitor on behalf of the
       relatives. This ground was not pursued by Mr Alun Jones QC who appeared
       before the Court on behalf of the Applicants.

       c.      That there was now (1993) available some evidence that the Coroner
       and his jury were not given the full picture of the evidence of some of the
       witnesses whose statements were partially summarised at the mini inquests
       and the result was that the proceedings were vitiated (Ground 7). Six cases
       were relied upon. One of these was that of Kevin Williams, with which I
       shall deal in more detail later. The Court rejected this ground.

       d.     That the Coroner wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15 pm
       (Ground 3). The Court upheld his decision about the cut-off point, and the
       Coroner’s reasons for making it. I shall deal with this in more detail later,
       because Counsel say that further evidence now shows that this approach was
       wrong.

       e.     That the Coroner wrongly limited his inquiries into how the deceased
       met their deaths so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have been
      saved by calling the Emergency Services sooner and providing better
      emergency care for the injured thereafter (Ground 5). This point is clearly
      related to the 3.15 pm cut-off point. The Court held that there was a
      sufficient inquiry to answer the statutory questions of who the deceased was,
      when, where and how they died.

      f.     That the Coroner should have left the verdict of lack of care to the
      jury (Ground 6). After considering the authorities the Court held that

              “the verdict o f ‘lack o f care’ is concerned with the failure to provide
             care in the form o f food, medicine, clothing, shelter, etc., not with
             carelessness, and is appropriate only in cases which are the other
             side o f the coin o f self-neglect such as starvation, hypothermia and
             persistent failure to provide medication. ”

      Such a verdict could not have been appropriate in this case. The law on this
      point has subsequently been affirmed in Reg v N Humberside Coroner ex
      parte Jamieson [1995JQB 1 at 24 and 25. It was not seriously argued before
      me, either by Counsel for the Family Support Group or by Professor
      Scraton, who has taken a keen interest in the Hillsborough Disaster and who
      made written and oral submissions to me, that this was a possible verdict.
      In my view the decision of the Divisional Court on this point needs no
      further consideration. None of the evidence I have been invited to consider
      could make this an appropriate verdict.

69.   Although only six families made the application for Judicial Review, the
      Court’s reasoning applies to the inquest verdicts on all those who died at
      Hillsborough. There was no appeal from the Court’s judgement. A fresh
      application for Judicial Review could only succeed, therefore, if fresh
      evidence undermines the Court’s reasoning, or shows that it may have
      proceeded on an incorrect factual basis.

70.   The Divisional Court also stated that even if any of the grounds had been
      made out, the Court would not have exercised its discretion to order a fresh
      inquest and gave cogent reasons of this decision (per McCowan LJ at pages
      40 and 41 of the judgement). These reasons are even more cogent now and
      as I have already said Counsel did not contend that there should be a fresh
      inquest.




Note 1 (to paragraphs 25 and 54L

The only person who suggested that another officer should have been prosecuted
was Mrs McBrien. In a clear and restrained submission to me she argued that the
sole cause o f the tragedy was the opening o f Gate C when the need to do so had not
arisen and when it was quite contrary to the whole concept o f proper crowd control.
She contended that the fault lay mainly with Superintendent Marshall who called fo r
the gate to be opened, and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield fo r ordering it to be
opened.

Lord Taylor rejected this argument. At para 228 o f his interim report he said that
  “Having lost control and rejected the option o f postponing kick-off, the police were
faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries. They were left therefore with no
 alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that stage
 to ask fo r it and Mr Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects o f so
 dramatic a step required other action ’’.

Moreover, M r Hytner, the QC who appeared fo r the bereaved and injured at Lord
Taylor’s Inquiry, specifically stated that he did not blame M r Marshall in requesting
the opening o f the gates (transcript day 10, page 112). I have not been asked to
consider any fresh evidence bearing on this issue and there is no basis fo r re­
considering the decision not to prosecute him.
