HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY

15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry. West Midlands
Police investigation begins 24 April 1989

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - mini-inquests to identify each of the deceased
and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 May 1990 so as not to risk prejudicing
police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174 witnesses at a
public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their supervision) by
West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy of report subsequently passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating to the
incident as a whole was heard - verdict of “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief Supt.
Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no longer
subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been dropped
because the joint allegation of neglect o f duty could not be heard in the absence of the more
senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review of the Coroner’s proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard promises to consider any
“new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of new evidence announced.

18 February 1998:      Home Secretary’s publishes scrutiny report.
 8 May 1998:           Adjournment debate on Hillsborough




:odma\meridio\edrm#90210# 1
SUPPLEM ENTARY QUESTIONS


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny


It was important that there should be an independent and thorough examination of
material which the families and others had brought to our attention, so that it could be
determined conclusively whether earlier proceedings should be re-opened. That is why I
asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in June 1997 to conduct a scrutiny to determine whether
there was any significant new evidence which was not available at the time of the earlier
proceedings.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive
report, published in February last year, set out clearly the matters he considered and the
reasons for his conclusion that there was no further action which it would be appropriate
to take.


Will the H om e Secretary place copies of all the evidence about the Hillsborough
disaster in Liverpool Central Library?


We have no plans to place copies of the evidence in Liverpool Central Library and I am
sorry for suggesting that this might be the case when the issue was raised by the Rt. Hon
Member for Birkenhead last October, [<Official Report, 26 October 1998, Vol 318, Col 3]

When I announced the outcome of the scrutiny in February last year, I undertook to
place in the Library of the House as much of the evidence considered by the scrutiny as
possible, including all the police statements. This we have done and the material is
available if Members wish to arrange for their constituents to view it.

We also provided copies of the police statements to the Family Support Group in
response to a specific request on their behalf. The police statements have now been
returned to South Yorkshire Police, whose property they remain, and it would be a large
and costly exercise to copy the material again now that the scrutiny which I established
has ended.


Will the Minister applaud the decision of the D PP to allow the private prosecution
against two former officers of South Yorkshire Police for manslaughter to
proceed?

I understand that the Director o f Public Prosecutions has indicated that the CPS will not
intervene in the private prosecution brought by the Family Support Group against
former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray. The
matter remains sub judice and it would not be appropriate to comment further.

Police discipline

When will the H om e Secretary introduce new police discipline procedures?




::odma\meridio\edrm#90210# 1
New procedures for dealing with unsatisfactory performance and for misconduct will
come into force on 1 April 1999. I announced to the House in March this year that I
would implement most of the recommendations o f the Home Affairs Committee’s
report into police disciplinary and complaints procedures.

I have decided that the standard of proof in discipline cases should be changed from the
criminal to the civil standard and that it should be possible for officers to face both
criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also accepted the HAC's
recommendation that we should implement a system of 'fast track' dismissal for use in
the most serious cases.


What changes ate you proposing to prevent officers escaping discipline by taking
early/ill-health retirement?

I intend to strengthen the procedures so that where accused officers claim they are
unable, through ill health, to appear at disciplinary hearings, matters can be decided in
their absence, with appropriate safeguards. Although ill-health retirement will be the
correct course in some cases, I am also concerned that the existing regulations should be
rigorously applied so that any outstanding disciplinary matters have to be completed
before any application for early retirement can be considered.


There is no provision for disciplinary action to be taken or continued against officers
who have retired from the force and this would require a change to primary legislation.
The Government is looking at other ways to provide a more effective and accountable
system to deal with police misconduct and it has already announced the introduction of
new procedures from April this year, including a fast track system to deal with those very
exceptional cases where it is in the best interests o f the public that an officer is swiftly
removed from the service prior to the completion of criminal proceedings.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90210#1
