hs.2.22/hillsb2.peb

From:     P E Bolton                     cc   Ms Craig
          G2 Division                         Miss Nicholson
          X3322                               Mr Godfrey
                                              Mr Mower
          22 February 1990                    Mr Goddard
                                              Mrs Re


Ms Dent



HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
You asked for advice on the attached letter from Robert Hughes
MP to Mr Brandon-Bravo covering a letter from Trevor Hicks, the
Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

2.   The letter from Mr Hicks is concerned primarily with remarks
made by Mr Peter Wright the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
quoted in the "Sheffield Star" (of which we do not have a copy)
about drunkenness among football fans on the day of the
Hillsborough tragedy.    Although we do not know precisely what
Mr Wright said, his remarks are undoubtedly along similar lines
to those attributed to members of the South Yorkshire Police in
an article in "Police" magazine which appeared in November 1989.
Mr Eric Heffer MP drew this to the attention of the Home
Secretary and the draft reply which I have provided for
Mr Brandon-Bravo's use draws heavily on the reply to Mr Heffer
which was sent by Lord Ferrers on 19 February.

3.   The other issues raised by Mr Hughes is the possibility of
a meeting for Mr Hicks with one of the Home Office Ministers,
preferably the Home Secretary.

4.   I cannot see that there would be any practical purpose for
such a meeting for the reasons which I have set out in the draft
letter.   In fact Ministers would doubtless have to explain to
Mr Hicks why they were unable to prevent Mr Wright or members of
the South Yorkshire Police holding or expressing the views which
have been attributed to them.      Nevertheless Mr Hicks is a
responsible individual who lost 2 daughters in the tragedy.
5.   The Hillsborough Family Support Group has already had one
meeting with a "cross party" group of MPs and a second has been
arranged for 27 February. Mr Hicks is often interviewed by the
media and there may therefore be a strong presentational case
for granting him an interview - which should perhaps be with Lord
Ferrers. (I have today submitted a separate note to Lord Ferrers
suggesting that he should agree to meet, at their request,
representations of the Football Supporters Association and the
Federation of Football Supporters Clubs.)
6.   However as the draft letter suggests, the Home Office is
already committed to meeting the 3 specific objectives of the
support group which are in the Home Office area of responsibility
and if Mr Hicks wished to discuss these matters in greater
detail, I shall be very happy to see him myself.




                                         P E BOLTON


Encs
               FROM: ROBERT G. HUGHES VIP (Harrow West)


                                                                ( U ^ - W r W


                                                             rwv
                                                             iL r oJM   UQ
                                                                  n IWA'T         O U U U JL

                           H O U S E OF C O M M O N S                  ^
                               LONDON     SW1A OAA                            /       ' /
                                                                       1W. LvnL k ^ n
13 February 1990                                                             _ { \flJ K M T

Martin Brandon-Bravo Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA




      rd»-x"K/\. t

Re: Hillsborough Family Support Group


Trevor- Hicks, who is the Chairman: of the- above- Group, is: one- of my
constituents and. he- lost two teenage daughters in the Hillsborough
disaster*.,

Mr- Hicks: and the other- members of the Hillsborough. Family Support Group
recently met with the- Leader of the Opposition,. Neil Kinnock MP. Mr
Hicks; has now approached, me with, the possibility of meeting with, one of
the- Home? Office- Ministers:, preferable- the Home Secretary the Rt Hon
David Waddington QC" MP..

The Group are very concerned to obtain justice and they are keen to put
forward their views about the disaster. Nevertheless, their overriding
interest is to ensure that such a disaster never happens again. I have
met with Mr Hicks on several occasions and although his circumstances
are very close to the issues, his comments are thoroughly thought
through and he can and does discuss the Group's objectives logically.

I strongly believe that the Hillsborough Family Support Group should be
afforded an interview by the Home Office and indeed the Party. For your
information I am enclosing some details regarding their objectives which
I have been passed by the Group.

With best wishes
                                                         Trevor & Jenni Hicks




House Of C o aa o ns ,
London,
5W1A OAA.

f.a.o: Robert Hughes MP (Harrow West)                       7th February 1990.




                          re: Peter Wright Article

further  to our   discussions   I enclose copies    of the "Sheffield Star”
newspaper that carried the interview with Peter Wright.

  ^ ^ Y o u will see that despite Taylor and all the conflicting evidence to
nhe contrary      he   insists on claiming drink was a major factor in the
disaster.The families find this outrageous and offensive to the memories of
our loved ones.

      He also   claims that    "additional   evidence, particularily about the
effect: of alcohol on- fans w-i.lL present a different, picture at the Coroners
Inquest." This is alarming families and again, is most offensive.

It is: wrong- that Mr-. Wright should infer/ us e confidential information: (if
indeed he has it!) to deflect the critiscsym. that he justly was subjected
to.He is abusing- his pr.iviledged position.     His comments beg two further-
questions

1)w h y was all the evidence not given to Taylor /West Midlands Police?’

2)It could be argued that this .act of "disclosure" could well
prejudice the Coroners Inquest/ Jurors.

At the Inquiry, Andrew Collins QC became so vexed at the Police Barrister's
( Mr.Woodward QC)  attempts to use this smear tactic that he released blood
alcohol levels of the victims in an attempt    to stop  it. Now here we go
again.

I would welcome your views on how we    can stop  it once  and for all and
obviously a statement from Mr. Waddington  supporting Taylor would be one
way.




                                 Trevoi^-'Hicks .
     HILLSBOROUGH             F A H I LV*                 SUPPORT   GROUP




                            O B J E C T X V F H F;



      To support and assist each other.



2)    To seek justice




 ^    T° press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
      Certification process.




          improve   safety at all sports stadia by revision of "The: Green
      Guide- and the introduction of.such other recommendations              from
      Lord; Justice Taylors: Reports- as are necessary.



5)    To   press-   Parliament for the introduction       of        the   necessary
       legislation to ensure (4) above becomes mandatory.



6)    Press for   immediate improvement of the Administration of Justice
      Act 1982 (incorporating the Fatal Accident Act 1976      ) and for
      the introduction of "non - liahiii'-v"
                                 ilaaiii0y compensation legislation.




                                =i< 5 K >fe *   3 K 5(C




                                         4
hs.2.22/hillsbl.peb                       FILE NUMBER
DRAFT LETTER

ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE




TO                         ENCLOSURES       COPIES TO BE SENT TO

Robert G Hughes Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON    SW1A OAA


•
(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)
                                         (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
                                         NECESSARY)

                 LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..Mr Brandon-Bravo....
                                                     (NAME OF SIGNATORY)


                 Thank you for your letter of 13 February enclosing one
                 from Mr Hicks.


                 You did not send me a copy of the article to which
                 Mr Hicks referred but I can understand his distress.


                 I do not want to add to the controversy or to your
                 constituent's grief.    I think it is fair to point out
                 that Lord Justice Taylor accepts that there was a drunken
                 element in the crowd at Hillsborough but was satisfied on
                 the evidence that the great majority were not drunk or
                 even the worse for drink.


                 In his general conclusions in Chapter 16 of his Interim
                 Report, he attributed the immediate cause of the incident
                 to the failure when gate C was opened to cut off access
                 to the central pens which were already overfull. He said
                 that the presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too
                 much aggravated the problem of dangerous congestion of
                 the turnstiles but he placed that in context.
I have no doubt that there will be some people who were
at Hillsborough on the day of the tragedy, whether fans
or policemen, whose individual perception of the events
does not accord with Lord Justice Taylor's conclusions.
I think that those of us who were not there, or who did
not hear all the evidence, really have no basis to
question his considered views or his conclusion about the
immediate cause of the incident.


I have shown your letter, and that from Mr Hicks, to
Lord Ferrers who is the Minister of State at the Home
Office whose responsibilities encompass police matters
and the safety of sports grounds. He has pointed out
that of the 6 objectives of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, only 3 come specifically within the area
of responsibility of the Home Office, and the Government
has already announced that it intends to act on each of
them.    The Football Licensing Authority, which the
Government expects to appoint within the next few months
under the Football Spectators Act, will be given the
responsibility of reviewing the way in which local
authorities carry out their responsibilities for safety
at sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975.


The Home Office has already agreed to revise the "Green
Guide" on safety at sports grounds to incorporate
recommendations made by the Taylor Inquiry, and some
other changes, and will shortly be setting up a working
group to consider the revised guide before it is sent out
for wider circulation and comment. Home Office Ministers
will also be considering an order under Section 15A of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 which will have the
effect of requiring local authorities to include specific
terms or conditions in safety certificates.


The question of "no fault" compensation is for the Lord
Chancellor's Department, rather than for the Home Office.
You said that Mr Hicks had approached you about the
possibility of meeting with one of the Home Office
Ministers.   I do not think that that is out of the
question.   Lord Ferrers is the Minister of State with
responsibility for both sports ground safety matters and
the police.     If Mr Hicks wishes to see him with
representatives of the Support Group, I suggest he
contacts the Minister's Private Secretary on 273 2468 to
arrange a date and time.


Although Lord Ferrers is happy to meet Mr Hicks he has
suggested that since the particular objectives of the
support group are already being addressed, he might find
it more helpful as an alternative to have a mara detailed
discussion with the Head of the Division within the Home
Office who has responsibility for taking these issues
forward. His name is Mr Peter Bolton and his telephone
number is 273 3322.
