NOTES FOR QUESTIONS FOLLOWING THE HOME SECRETARY'S
STATEMENT



When will the Government implement Part II of the
Football Spectators Act 1989?


We plan to implement Part II as soon as the practical
arrangements are complete.      This
           ".   Once Part II is in force courts may impose
restriction orders on those convicted of hooliganism in
this country which will prevent them from travelling to
key matches abroad.



Will Part II of the 1989 Act have any effect on
hooliganism in Italy at the World C u p in June?


We are discussing with the Italian authorities the
arrangements which will enable our courts to impose
restriction orders on offenders convicted of football-
related offences in Italy.     We aim to have these
arrangements in place before the World Cup.      We expect
them to have a useful deterrent effect.


[IF RAISED]: What about offences in Scotland?


We hope to agree shortly with the Scottish authorities
arrangements for "corresponding offences" there.      This
will enable courts to place restriction orders on
offenders convicted of football-related offences in
Scotland
NFIU       Is the National Football Intelligence Unit fully in
           operation?


           Like Lord Justice Taylor,    I believe that the NFIU will be
           of great value in dealing with hooliganism at home and
           abroad.   Since November the Unit has been gathering
           intelligence and putting it to good use.     [IF PRESSED ON
           COMPUTER FACILITY:    Computer facilities for the Unit are
           being procured and are expected to be fully operational
           by the end of Mar ch . ]


NEW        When will Ithe Government implement Lord Justice Taylor's
OFFENCES   recommendations for new offences and penalties for
AND PENAL­ dealing with hooliganism?
TIES
           As I said in my statement,    I shall look sympathetically
           at these Recommendations against the background of the
           existing provisions of the criminal law.     [It is too
           early to Say when I shall reach firm decisions on
           implementation.]


CHARGING   Will you ensure that clubs pay the full costs of policing
           football grounds?


           The Report recommends that police authorities should
           ensure that charges made to clubs for policing inside
           grounds are realistic.     I support that recommendation and
           will encourage consistency of practice,    subject to the
           need, recognised in the report, for local discretion.


POLICE     Will you ensure that the police service act on Taylor's
RESPONSE   recommendations directed at them?


           The police service responded quickly and positively to
           the recommendations in the Interim report.     I have no
           doubt that chief officers will respond in the same way to
           the final recommendations.
STS Who will bear the costs of improving CCTV at grounds?


    It is for football to bear these costs.   The Football
   Trust have made generous grants towards these costs in
   the past.   I hope they will continue to do so.
