                                           26th August 1997

Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,


My wife and I would like to thank you for your letter of
16th July and for the sympathy expessed therein over the
death of our son Kester at Hillsborough Stadium on 15th
April 1989.

Most of the letters you will receive from families affected
by this tragedy will be written by relatives who were not in
the fatal pens. I would like to make it clear that I was
standing next to my son when he was crushed to death.
Indeed, I lost consciousness myself, and am lucky to be
alive today.

I was not invited to give evidence to the Taylor Inquiry,
but did give evidence at the resumed Inquests, after asking
Mr. Popper to do so. I still believe that my unique
experience of the events on 15th April 1989 has not been
properly recorded, despite several statements to Police and
my evidence to the Inquests. My wife and I also feel
particularly aggrieved about a number of matters which we
consider unresolved or unsatisfactory. I think some of them
may constitute possible new evidence and may therefore be
relevant to your Scrutiny.

Our main concerns are:

1. We have never been satisfied about the Police version of
continuity in respect of our son's removal from pen 3 to the
gymnasium. We have a letter from West Midlands Police
admitting that there is a conflict of evidence between a
Police Officer and a Liverpool supporter.

2. I do not believe that the Inquests established the
precise conditions within pen 3. I am quite sure, after
attending hundreds of football matches on crowded terraces,
that the conditions in pen 3 were not conducive to all
victims being dead by 15.15h.

3. We were obliged to submit questions in writing to
Kester's mini-inquest, and were therefore denied the right
to question witnesses in the Court.

4. Mr John Motson, the BBC commentator, was not allowed to
give evidence to the Inquests about his view of the pens
from the TV gantry. I have spoken to him about this, and he
maintains that from his position more than twice as far away
as the Police control box, the overcrowding was "obvious".

5. In a statement to West Midlands Police dated 26.02.90,
(copy attached) I made:
* nine specific criticisms of South Yorkshire Police
* two specific criticisms of the Football Association
* four specific criticisms of Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club.

I have received no response to any of these criticisms.


In writing this letter, it has been difficult to know what
to include, as there are so many aspects of this sorry
business about which we feel aggrieved. The above points are
those which we consider most relevant to your Scrutiny. I
shall of course be pleased to provide further information,
either in writing or personally, if you so wish.

Yours sincerely,




ROGER BALL MA(Cantab) ACIB
