NOTE OF A MEETING BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
AND WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITIES AND THE HOME OFFICE TO
DISCUSS THE REIMBURSEMENT OF COSTS OF THE INVESTIGATIONS BY THE
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


Thursday 14 September 1989 at 11.00am in room 619. Home Office.
Queen Anne's Gate


Present:-         Mr M J Addison      (in the Chair) Home Office, FI
                 Ms P Ransford        Home Office, FI
                 Mr R C Johnston      Clerk and Financial Officer to
                                      South Yorkshire Police
                                      Authority
                 Mr C Tomlinson       Representing Clerk to West
                                      Midlands Police Authority
                 Mr J M Jones         Assistant Chief Constable,
                                      West Midlands Police
                 Mr S C Waghorn       (Secretary), Home Office, FI


Mr Addison welcomed the representatives from South Yorkshire and
West Midlands.     South Yorkshire Police Authority had requested
this meeting to clarify the position on special payments from the
Home Office.     He hoped that decisions could therefore be taken
quickly by South Yorkshire Police Authority so that West Midlands
Police Authority could be reimbursed for the services they had
already provided.


It was agreed that the meeting would take questions arising from
the West Midlands' investigation first and then consider the
question of compensation which might be payable by South
Yorkshire Police Authority.


Mr Johnston referred to the two letters which he had sent to the
Home Office on 21 and 23 August which reflected the views of his
Police Authority on this issue.    There was a need to take account
of developments in the Hillsborough investigation which had
necessarily increased its scope to take account of the need to
consider possible criminal charges.    He said that his Authority
were agreed in principle that they would pay the West Midlands so
long as the Home Office offer of special payment covered all
aspects of the investigation by West Midlands, including the
criminal investigations.    He also said that his Authority would
wish the payment to cover any interest payable to West Midlands
on the costs.   The Home Office had replied to his letters
confirming that in principle the special payment would extend to
the criminal investigation, subject to our being satisfied as to
the reasonableness of the claim.


Mr Addison explained the Home Office position concerning the
criminal investigations.   Investigations by the West Midlands
police up to the publication of the interim report by Lord
Justice Taylor would have covered directly or indirectly much of
the evidence which would be relevant to criminal prosecutions and
coroner's inquests.   The work done on the investigation to date
is clearly covered by the special payment.   However Mr Wright had
issued a second invitation to Mr Dear asking him to handle
possible criminal investigations.   The Home Office could not
issue an open cheque to cover any conceivable cost and that was
the reason for the proviso in the Home Office's letters.     The
original offer of a special payment had been approved by the
Treasury on the basis of an estimate of costs of around
£5million.   If it had appeared that the criminal investigations
were likely to substantially increase those costs or be on such a
scale that they could be argued to constitute an unnecessary
duplication of the original inquiries, then it might have been
necessary to seek further authority from the Treasury on the
basis that the terms of the original agreement had been exceeded.
He added that he understood that Mr Walker from South Yorkshire
Police Authority had informally suggested (in a telephone
conversation with Mr Waghorn) an estimate of total costs
including the further work which did not differ too materially
from the original estimate.   He added that it was virtually
unprecedented for the Government to give special assistance for
what was essentially a police inquiry into criminal offences.
Although it had been anticipated that the original investigations
would have a dimension which concerned interest peculiar to South
Yorkshire Police Authority as well as to the National Enquiry, it
was necessary to ensure that we were talking about something
which went substantially outside the terms of what was initially
expected.
Mr Addison said that in the Home Office's view the possible need
for discussion over any further costs should not stop South
Yorkshire from making payment to West Midlands in relation to the
invoices already submitted to them in respect of the original
part of the investigations.


Mr Johnston accepted that the nature of the investigation had
shifted from one which was primarily, in South Yorkshire's view
for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry, to one which
was primarily an investigation of possible criminal acts within
South Yorkshire's jurisdiction.     The reason for asking that this
be included within the special payment, rested more on the
expectation of the total cost which would be more than South
Yorkshire would be able to meet from within its own resources.
He felt that in the light of the further explanation offered by
Mr Addison, it was likely that he would be able to satisfy his
Authority's remaining queries.


Mr Jones described the nature of the West Midlands Police
investigations.   By the end of July 1989 the number of men
involved was down to 50.   In a traditional investigation the
police would assemble the facts initially available, and then
interview witnesses in a systematic way.     In the case of
Hillsborough, the West Midlands police had had to assemble and
process a wealth of information in a very short space of time.
This had had to be done by using written recollections from
officers and other principals, and there had not been the
opportunity to ensure that these were supplied on Criminal
Justice Act forms, nor were statements taken under caution.      It
was therefore necessary to convert the evidence taken so far into
the proper form, and obtain the consent of witnesses to this
being done.   In some cases it might mean that witnesses would
have to be substantially re-interviewed.    It should not however
be necessary to re-interview anything like the 4,000 persons who
had initially made statements.    Subject to the views of the
Director of Public Prosecutions, it might be possible to focus on
the principal witnesses.   These would include police, football
club personnel and possibly some fans who might be involved in
allegations of criminal offences.    The enquiries needed for the
coroner's inquests would cover much of the same ground.     It had
originally been hoped that information obtained from the Taylor
investigations could be stored in the force computer and
reprocessed for further enquiries, but in the event there had not
been enough time to process the original information onto the
computer in a re-usable form.     Evidence needed to be collected in
a far more precise and detailed form than was necessary for the
Taylor Enquiry.   A QC had been appointed by the DPP and was
advising the police so as to avoid unnecessary effort.     However,
corporate manslaughter was a very difficult area and the police
would need to proceed carefully in order to ensure they had all
the necessary evidence needed by the DPP for the purposes of
assessing whether or not to bring a prosecution.


Mr Jones added that while enquiries for the Police Complaints
Authority may need to be very thorough in some cases, he thought
that the level of investigation in this particular case would not
be materially affected if there were PCA enquiries in addition to
the criminal investigations.    As far as resources assigned to the
investigation were concerned, there were currently about 50
officers assigned to the enquiry, but by November the size of the
team would need to be increased to include higher ranking
officers who would be needed to supervise re—interviews under
caution.   An ACC would be involved in November and December and a
new spurt of activity might occur in January when it is hoped to
conclude the investigation.     The West Midlands police hope to
submit evidence to the DPP by the end of February 1990.     He did
not foresee a significant increase in manpower or extension of
interviews beyond that time but it would be essential for the
interviews to be very thorough and complete.    He did not think
that there would be much difference in the extent of
investigations, if the DPP were to decide against prosecution.
Although officers would not then be needed to assist in obtaining
any necessary additional information or in processing the
evidence, the families would then be likely to pursue their cases
via the coroner's inquest; private prosecutions or requests for
judicial review could also not be ruled out as a possibility.      He
expected that the bulk of the work on the criminal investigation
should be completed by the end of February 1990 and decision by
the DPP would be made by around the early summer of 1990.        If no
criminal action were taken, the coroner would then proceed to
open the inquests which would result in a build up of officers
back to a level of about 50 in order to arrange statement-taking
for the inquests.     During the period when the inquests were in
session, the numbers would again drop to about 20 officers.        If
criminal prosecutions were to proceed, the number of officers
would have to be similarly increased, but any additional numbers
involved in the discipline aspects would be likely to be
relatively low.


Mr Addison said that he was grateful for Mr Jones' explanation
and accepted that police investigations would have to be
thorough.   He explained that as far as timing was concerned, the
offer of a special payment stood for the financial year in which
it was made.   The Home Office would expect the Police Authority
to make plans for covering costs which could be foreseen as
likely to arise in the following financial year.     South Yorkshire
Police Authority might wish to bear this in mind.     The Home
Office would expect a new case to be made next year, if the
Authority wish to apply for a further special payment.     Any such
case would have to indicate why some provision could not have
been made to meet the contingency when the Police Authority's
budget was set.     In fact it appeared likely that the bulk of the
costs would fall before April 1990.


Mr Johnston said that while he understood Mr Addison's point, he
believed that there was a precedent for carrying special payments
over as this had happened in the case of the miners' strike.       Ms
Ransford explained that the miners' strike had, as it happened,
run for the duration of a single financial year; payments
subsequently made between authorities for mutual aid in fact
related to costs incurred by the aiding authorities within the
initial financial year.    Moreover the overall scale of costs
relating to the dispute was considerably greater than in any
subsequent case of a special payment.    Mr Addison added that the
special payment for Greenham Common and Molesworth had both
applied for one financial year only.     After that the costs were
considered predictable and absorbable.     If the costs should prove
unexpectedly high, South Yorkshire would need to come back
separately to the Home Office making a fresh case for special
payment.


Mr Addison explained that it was long standing Government policy
that police specific grant is not paid on interest.     The Treasury
would have to be consulted if it were proposed to make any
exception to this policy and he personally saw no prospect of a
change in policy.


Mr Addison said he had a suggestion which he hoped the West
Midlands Police Authority might find helpful.     In the mutual aid
context, there was a court case which ruled that the Secretary of
State could not determine a contribution to include interest and
was not therefore obliged to pay grant on it.     The aiding
authority was, however, to some extent helped in meeting any
indirect costs of administering mutual aid, by the Home Office
advice in its circular on mutual aid, that the aiding force can
make an administration charge of up to 5%.   West Midlands Police
Authority might like to consider this option as far as their
costs were concerned and include such a charge if they had not
already done so. Police grant and special grant would be payable
on such a charge.


Mr Johnston said that West Midlands1 members will point to the
Home Secretary's assurance that no costs will fall on their area.
Mr Addison said that the Home Secretary had given no assurance in
respect of interest when saying that the costs of the
investigation should not fall on West Midlands.     It had never
been the practice to encourage forces to reimburse one another on
a basis which included interest nor to pay grant on it if any
such interest were to be paid.   Mr Johnston accepted that there
was not much point in further discussing the matter at the
meeting, but he anticipated that West Midlands members would wish
to come back to the Home Secretary on this point.    Mr Tomlinson
said that the West Midlands had not to date included a charge for
loss of interest in their invoices to South Yorkshire.    However
his authority had written to South Yorkshire informing them that
they intended to charge interest.   He thought that the West
Midlands had already lost about £60,000 in interest.     West
Midlands Police Authority members might well wish to take the
issue further.     Mr Addison noted the point while registering the
fact that it was not in his gift to depart from existing
Government policy on this issue.


Mr Addison said that it was up to South Yorkshire to decide what
to reimburse West Midlands and that the question of what would
then be eligible for police grant and special grant was a
separate matter for the Home Office.     As far as the
reasonableness of costs were concerned, this was not intended to
set any specific ceiling of costs but, given the information
which had been made available about the expected costs, all that
was required in addition was for South Yorkshire to scrutinise
costs carefully and ensure that they had been properly incurred
and they were properly accounted for, seeking further information
from West Midlands if necessary.     Mr Johnston said that due to
the nature of the investigation, the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire was himself subject to investigation.     It would
therefore be very difficult for South Yorkshire to become
involved in anything which might have a bearing on operational
conduct of the investigations.     Mr Addison said he accepted that
the investigation had logic of its own and that the West Midlands
police could not promise to keep within particular levels of
expenditure.     He also accepted that Mr Wright's decision to ask
Mr Dear to continue the investigations was absolutely correct
given that an independent investigation was necessary and it
would surely have added to the costs to ask another force to
begin investigations afresh.     Nor was he asking South Yorkshire
to do anything which could prejudice the operational independence
of the West Midlands police.     Nevertheless he felt that there
were areas where South Yorkshire could make an input, if it
appeared reasonable to them to do so.     For example during the
Taylor investigations he understood that the West Midlands Police
Authority had arranged to have their officers accommodated in
hotels.   This might still be desirable, but it would not be
unreasonable for South Yorkshire to query whether this was the
case or whether there might be a less expensive way of doing
things which would not interfere with the operational
independence of the investigating force.     He mentioned this by
way of example, and not to suggest a particular decision on this
aspect of the arrangements.     Mr Jones said that West Midlands had
kept records of the reasons for decisions; internal auditors had
moreover reviewed all expenditure as the operation proceeded.        Mr
Tomlinson said that they were subject to the Audit Commission
External Auditors, who also audited police grant payments.      He
accepted the point that South Yorkshire was entitled to
scrutinise invoices and look at the details of a claim.     However
he pointed out that the West Midlands police were incurring
expenditure on the investigation and that it would be too easy
for criticism to be made after the event.     Mr Addison said that
his example was intended to point to ways in which South
Yorkshire could make a constructive input in a forward-looking
sense, rather than arguing unnecessarily over decisions already
taken.   In further discussion of how South Yorkshire should
satisfy itself that what the Authority is being charged for is
reasonable and directly related to the investigation, Mr
Tomlinson mentioned that West Midlands would have to consider how
to charge for use of a computer purchased at the beginning of the
investigations and effectively dedicated entirely to it since its
purchase.   Mr Addison said that this was the kind of area in
which South Yorkshire might be expected to have a view about what
would constitute a reasonable basis for charging; another example
might be consequential costs.    Mr Johnston said that he saw a
need to seek more detailed and specific invoices from West
Midlands.


As far as consequential costs were concerned, Mr Tomlinson made
the point that Mr Dear had given an assurance to his Police
Authority that policing levels in the West Midlands would not be
unduly affected by the investigations, but he did not expect that
the consequential costs incurred as a result of the
investigations would be excessive.    This appeared to be borne out
by the charges made to date.


Ms Ransford said that as the supplementary bid to Parliament had
to be put to the Treasury by 2 October, she would find it useful
to be able to give the Home Office Finance Department a best
estimate of total additional costs arising from the investigation
as soon as possible.     Mr Tomlinson said that expenditure up to
the end of July had been £2 million and that monthly expenditure
would drop proportionately with the reduction in manpower
committed.     The estimating process had become more difficult
because of the unpredictability of the criminal investigations,
because of the need to satisfy the DPP.     However he would not
expect the costs to far exceed the original estimate of £5million
including the £2million incurred to date.     There were
uncertainties, including the likely effects of pay awards or
inflation which might lead cost to rise above the current
estimate.     Consequential costs were not easy to predict but at
the present time he did not foresee then going above the current
levels, which in terms of additional costs were not, he thought,
unreasonable.     Mr Tomlinson said that a further factor which had
a bearing on the difficulty in predicting costs was that West
Midlands had had to seek guidance from the PNB Secretariat about
how far the PNB agreement on officers away from their normal
place of duty for 24 hours a day was applicable to this case.
The standard of accommodation would be material to this but it
was conceivable - although not in his view very likely - that it
might prove necessary to pay the officers for 16 hours each day.
This could add about three quarters of a million to the bill,
which might then bring the total amount to around £5.5million.
He felt that it was unsatisfactory that regulations on this
subject were insufficiently precise.     Mr Addison said that as
this was a PNB agreement and not a matter of police regulations,
it was not within the gift of the Home Office to alter the
wording.     He hoped that no payments would be made until the
position had been clarified by the PNB and Mr Tomlinson confirmed
that that was the West Midlands' intention.


Mr Addison said that he hoped that in the light of the
discussions at the meeting, South Yorkshire would now proceed to
pay West Midlands as soon as possible.    If they did so the Home
Office could then pay them immediately 51% in police grant.       It
would not be possible to pay immediately the special grant
element as Parliamentary approval was required to make the
payment.    As South Yorkshire had not previously agreed to make
payment, it had not been possible to obtain approval before
Parliament had risen.     It was therefore necessary to wait until
the end of the recess.     However on the first invoice for
£1.6million the special grant element would only be £120,000.
Immediate payment of the 51% could be authorised as soon as South
Yorkshire had scrutinised the invoices and paid West Midlands.
Mr Tomlinson pointed out that the cumulative bill to date was in
fact £2million, West Midlands having recently sent South
Yorkshire a further bill.


Mr Johnston asked about the operation of the special grant
formula.     Ms Ransford explained that South Yorkshire would get
51% at once and a further 39% on expenditure above the
£1.3million threshold, once the special payment came into
operation.     On the bill of £2million, the special payment element
would be some £270,000.      If South Yorkshire's total contribution
to the bill were to exceed the product of the 3/4 penny rate
(about £975,000) they would start to get 100% grant.     This would
happen when the costs reached around £4.68million.     Mr Addison
said that he believed South Yorkshire should meet all the costs
immediately, but it would be helpful if they would at least
agree to reimburse the £1.3million on which they would
immediately get all the grant which was due.     Mr Johnston said he
thought that there would not be too much problem in meeting the
sum reached to date, with an immediate advance of the 51% grant
element.     He hoped that the special grant element could be made
available as soon as possible after Parliament had returned.


The discussion then turned to the question of compensation.      Mr
Johnston said that the sheer size of the potential settlements
was the problem.    The Home Office had previously asked South
Yorkshire whether they were adequately insured for damages and
they had confirmed that they had cover of up to £8.5million.     Mr
Johnston referred to press reports which had mentioned figures up
to £50million; while that figure was probably a exaggeration the
insurers themselves considered that £8.5million might well be
exceeded.    This was based on an assumption that South Yorkshire
could end up meeting liability for 3/4 of the total amount of
damages, which they estimated would reach £16million in total;
thus South Yorkshire's share would be some £12million.        The
timing of any payment depended very much on what view the
insurers, in consultation with the police authority, reached
about the desirability of attempting to make an early settlement
of claims.     It was very difficult to put a figure on any possible
settlement, but he thought that while it might theoretically be
anything from £0 to £33million it was more likely to be in the
region of £10million.     Such a sum would mean lOp on the community
charge.    The South Yorkshire Police Authority had been thinking
of this amount of being part of the total costs arising from the
incident from Hillsborough.  They therefore wondered whether this
might qualify for special grant.


Mr Addison said that the current special payment arrangements had
not been agreed with a view to including any element of
compensation, which at the time of the Home Office's discussions
with the South Yorkshire Police Authority were not thought to
represent a problem.     Although it now appeared that the
Authority's insurance might not be sufficient to meet the costs,
it appeared that, depending on the timescale of any likely
settlement, there was an opportunity to budget for any costs.        If
legal advice were to be that damages must be paid immediately
during the current financial year so as to avoid the greater
costs ofany action, then     an application for a special payment
could be     made although he could not give any guarantee as to its
likely success.     If costs were to be more likely to spread into
future financial years, the Police Authority was in a position to
increase their precept so as to meet them.     Mr Johnston said that
South Yorkshire Police Authority would be likely to ask formally
for special aid on an unspecified sum as soon as they got into
their budget cycle.     Mr Addison replied that in formal terms and
on present information    it was hard to see that the Home Office
would be     in a position to agree to any special payment.


Mr Addison asked Mr Johnston whether his authority had reached
any conclusion on the extent to which it would wish to contest
liability.    Mr Johnston said that they were seeking Counsel's
advice but that it was necessary to await the out coming of the
coroner's inquest.    There could be circumstances in which it
would be recommended to the Authority that they should seek
settlement of the cases rather than contesting them.


Mr Addison asked the meeting whether they thought that police
authorities generally might need to think about increasing their
insurance cover for compensation.   Mr Tomlinson said that
following Hillsborough the third party element of the West
Midlands' cover had increased by 60%.   West Midlands cover was
now Ellmillion.


Mr Tomlinson inquired whether the Home Office was going to issue
guidelines on inter-force investigations as these were becoming
more frequent.   Ms Ransford said that she understand that F2
Division were attempting to finalise such guidance.    One problem
being that there was very little information on costs incurred in
this type of investigation on which to base a standard formula
for payment like that which had been developed for the mutual aid
type of situation.


Mr Addison said he had one final question which had been raised
by Mr Shersby, the Parliamentary Adviser to the Police
Federation: had South Yorkshire sent a bill to the Football
Association for police services at Hillsborough on the day of the
tragedy?   Mr Johnston replied that the Police Authority had not
yet presented a bill and nor had it decided whether it should do
so.   Mr Addjson said he understood the possible sensitivities but
thought that the Authority should reach a decision one way or the
other, given that they were asking for special financial
assistance.   Mr Johnston said that the Police Authority would be
considering the Hillsborough costs issue on Friday 14 September.
They would take into consideration the further advice which had
been provided at the current meeting in doing so.



                                                    FI Division
                                                       October 1989
