Mr Addison
FI Division




HILLSBOROUGH:   COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

Following our discussion on the issues raised by the Clerk to the
South Yorkshire Police Authority in his letter to you of 31 July,
1989, I have had some enquiries made and I would suggest your
response covers the issues set out below.

The investigation on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor by the West
Midlands Police is virtually complete other than any follow-up
enquiries or particular aspects that may require some further
work.  It is not anticipated that much further will need to be
done.

At the same time that the work for Lord Justice Taylor was being
undertaken, West Midlands Police have been necessarily dealing
with all the relevant aspects that are associated with 95 deaths.
Although this work is wholly on behalf of South Yorkshire as it
relates to gathering evidence for the South Yorkshire Coroner, it
is inextricably linked with the disaster and would be difficult
to apportion costs just to this aspect of the inquiry.  I
understand that West Midlands are to seek a specific ruling on
"who is to pay" for the work done on behalf of the Coroner in the
near future.

There are also two other matters that I should draw to your
attention.^ Firstly, as you know there will be pressure for
consideration of criminal proceedings.  If such a development
does occur it would seem sensible for West Midlands to carry out
any subsequent investigation as much of the work has already been
done. Without wishing to prompt future action it may be useful
if some general guidance could be given as a steer to the Police
Authority at this stage. Alternatively, it may be more
appropriate to make no comment on this aspect until the dust has
settled.

The second point relates to discipline matters.   You are aware
that Northamptonshire have been tasked with looking at a current
complaint on behalf of South Yorkshire.   It can be assumed that
sny further ^discipline matters would therefore be referred to
Northants with any costs of the enquiry being charged to South
Yorkshire.   Initial contact between Northants and West Midlands
reveals that a considerable amount of the work already undertaken
by West Midlands will form part of the investigation by
Northants which is covered by the PACE Act 1984 provisions.
Accordingly, there will be difficulties when it comes to
accurately apportioning costs.   It would not, however, be
appropriate at this stage to change the investigating force for
the disciplinary matters and consequently this difficulty will
remain.                                                  -1
I suggest that your response to the South Yorkshire Police
Authority should make it clear that "special payment" will cover
the Taylor Enquiry and other matters that are inextricably linked
to it such as the work being undertaken for the Coroner and any
other similar matters apart from disciplinary investigations that
may stem from the work already carried out.

Forgive me for not being more specific with my advice but like
those involved I am having difficulty in separating areas that
come outside the work for the Taylor Enquiry.




                         8 August, 1989
