                                                                     £
                                                          cc Mr. Yates
                                                            Mr. Chilcot
                                                                  HMCIC
                                                         Mr. Boys Smith
                                                         Mr. Malone-Lee
                                                             Mr. Nagler
                                                          Mr. Sandiford
                                                            Mr. Whalley
                                                             Mr. Archer
                                                             Mr. Durbin
                                                           Ms. Ransford
Mr. Addison
FI Division

           TTTT.T.fiRfYRQUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - POLICING COSTS


     I refer to your note of 26th July concerning the options
which will be available to us in the event of South Yorkshire
Police Authority rejecting the offer made to them of a
contribution in respect of the costs incurred by West Midlands
Police in relation to the investigation arising from the
Hillsborough Stadium tragedy.

     Sofar as the setting up of the original investigation is
concerned, it seems to be accepted by South Yorkshire that the
West Midlands  Police were commissioned by them and not by the Home
Office and that it is the subsequent widening of the ambit of that
investigation which has led to the dispute about responsibility
for meeting the costs. To that extent, our situation is better
than it was in relation to the further investigation in connection
with the Guildford and Woolwich bombing cases.

     We are, however, presented with other difficulties. We have
conceded that the investigation being carried out by the West
Midlands force does go beyond an inquiry related solely to the
policing of South Yorkshire, into an area of more general public
concern. For this reason we have agreed that a contribution from
central government funds is appropriate and that South Yorkshire
are not legally liable to meet the whole bill. The issue between
the Home Office and South Yorkshire is therefore whether South
Yorkshire should pay anything towards the costs incurred by the
West Midlands force, and if something, how much.

     We have given a guarantee to West Midlands that the costs
they are incurring will not be borne by that police authority.
This is somewhat akin to the situation in the Guildford and
Woolwich case. Given that we apparently accept that South
Yorkshire are not liable to pay the entire costs, this can be
construed as an undertaking by us to reimburse West Midlands at
least part of their costs. The problem revolves around the extent
of our contribution and the machinery for paying it.
     Turning to the various options canvassed in your note, I
agree that (a) and (b) present no obvious legal difficulties, but
are simply matters for negotiation with the Treasury and South
Yorkshire.

                                                                      1
     I do not think that it is really for us to advise West
Midlands, either to sue or to take any other form of action.
Nevertheless, it seems to me that to the extent that West Midlands
are acting at the behest of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
they have a good claim to recover the costs referable thereto.
Which part of their activities arises directly from that original
request and what part constitutes an enlarged and separate inquiry
for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor is   a question of   factwhich
it might be far from easy to resolve. It    might well be
embarrassing if it had to be resolved in public in the course of
court proceedings. Furthermore, as I have already mentioned, West
Midlands might seek to argue that our guarantee that they will not
have to meet the costs renders us liable in full if South
Yorkshire cannot be persuaded to pay their share.
     I agree with you that it is likely that if West Midlands
decide to sue, the defendant might well be the Home Office either
instead of or together with South Yorkshire. As I have indicated
above, I think that any proceedings would be likely to result in
an apportionment by the court between South Yorkshire and the Home
Office; the court would not necessarily accept the basis of
apportionment we have suggested. It seems to me that the South
Yorkshire police would be unlikely to be held liable to     meetthe
full costs of the further investigation.    As to your suggestion
that West Midlands might sue for the additional costs remaining
after we have made to them the special payment we have offered to
South Yorkshire, this seems to suggest leaving West Midlands out
of pocket for a fair time. As we have offered to pay the costs
beyond a particular sum, we could presumably make payment to West
Midlands only when the costs of the investigation had already
reached £975,000 (or has that happened already?). If we were to
be sued alone, I think it likely that we would decide to join
South Yorkshire as a defendant. I hope that if matters get that
far, all concerned will regard it as preferable to negotiate a
settlement rather than submitting the matter to trial.

     I share your view that option (d) would be an unwise course
to take. I think that our chances of reclaiming the money from
South Yorkshire would be negligible.

     I am afraid that I am not much attracted either to option
(e). I do not think that Article 1(2)(b) of the Police Grant
Order 1966 would serve our purposes. As you suggest in paragraph
12 of your note, if South Yorkshire refused to pay at all, there
is nothing to form part of their gross expenditure. In addition,
any payment they do make ought presumably to be recognized for the
purposes of the payment of police grant. There may be some
argument for using Article 2 in the way you suggest, but I am not
convinced that this situation was really in the contemplation of
that article. I would want to give the matter further thought
before recommending that we might take such a course, and I think
that we could do so only after giving South Yorkshire warning that
we intended to withhold the grant in that way. A challenge by way
of judicial review might well follow any withholding of grant in
this way, and I would be uneasy about our prospects of success.
     I think that the Treasury's suggested option (f) seems a
curious and unsatisfactory way of dealing with what we hope is a

                                                                   2
one-off situation. In any case, there is certainly no power under
section 31 of the Police Act 1964 to make different provision for
different cases, by contrast with the power in section 33(5). We
do of course make a distinction in the case of the Metropolitan
police, but when I recently amended the Police Grant Order I did
have doubts about the vires but I went ahead because there was a
precedent for such differentiation. Making different provision
for different 1964 Act forces would, however, be a different
matter again and it doesn't seem to me that the enabling power is
adequate to do what has been proposed.

     I am of course very ready to discuss this further either now
or as the matter develops.




                                              P. A. EDWARDS (Miss)

LEGAL ADVISER'S BRANCH

7th August, 1989.




                                                                    3
