hs.11.15/tennis.dm




                                            273 3099


Mr C Carter, C.Eng. MICE, MBIM
ACIArb, FRSA                                      C/TJM/SD/S004
Development Department
London Borough of Merton                           FEP/89 35/278/6
Crown House, London Road
MORDEN, Surrey    SM4 5DX                         15 November 1989




Dear Mr Carter

SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS:   ALL ENGLAND LAWN TENNIS CLUB

Thank you for your letter of 2 November about spectator safety
arrangements at the All England Lawn Tennis Club, Wimbledon.

On the general question of spectator safety, both the Safety of
Sports Ground Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) and Part III of the Fire
Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act) set
down that a safety certificate should contain terms and
conditions which    are necessary or expedient to         secure
"reasonable" safety. Ultimately, what constitutes "reasonable"
is a matter for the courts on an appeal, not the Home Office.
We did however attempt to give some guidance on the point in
Annex C to Home Office Circular 96/1988 in the context of safety
certificates issued under Part III of the 1987 Act.

The Home Office/Scottish Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(the Green Guide) provides advice on securing safety at sports
grounds. It is, as you recognise, orientated towards spectator
safety at football grounds but it does have application to other
sports grounds. Seating arrangements within stands is one such
area where the Guide's recommendations might be followed
irrespective of the type of sports ground. The provisions of the
Guide on seating, are not, we believe, unduly onerous. However
the recommended maximum of 28 seats per row must be seen in the
context of the other recommendations relating to seating (widths
between rows, widths of gangways, travel distances to exits,
etc), and some flexibility may be justified when using the guide
to address individual circumstances at a particular location.
For example an increase to 32 seats per row might still provide
reasonable safety if other margins are sufficiently generous to
ensure that spectators are still able to evacuate the stand
safely in much the same or perhaps shorter time. In a converse
situation, 28 seats per row might be regarded as too many.
Similarly, if the proposal by the AELTC to resolve the problem
of congestion affecting the evacuation routes from the Centre and
No. 1 Court Complex is judged to be effective and will achieve the
desired objective, it is difficult to argue that a more
elaborate, more expensive solution to achieve the same results
should be sought.

Determination of terms and conditions to be contained in a safety
certificate are entirely a matter for the local authority in
question after consultation with the police, fire authority and,
of course, the ground occupier. The 1987 Act does not require
the   local   authority    to   incorporate   their   advice   or
recommendations within the safety certificate, although as
interested parties they can all appeal against the terms and
conditions contained therein. The Home Office has no role to act
as mediator where there is a difference of view on the
reasonableness of proposed measures or indeed on how best
reasonable safety might be achieved. We are willing to try to
give advice on the interpretation and application of the Green
Guide but we are not in a position to resolve individual
difficulties arising at a particular ground which properly fall
to the relevant local authority for decision.       Any views or
opinions which we express have to be seen in that context bearing
in mind also that we do not necessarily have first hand knowledge
of the sports ground in question or the particular stand (or
stands) which are to be subject of certification.        This was
I think made clear in our conversations with your Department.
I hope all of this is of some help and I am sorry if I have not
been able to give you the reassurance you would like.       I am
copying this letter to the AELTC, LFCDA, Metropolitan Police and
also to the Secretary to the Hillsborough Inquiry and to
colleagues in the Department of Environment         (Sports and
Recreation Division) to whom your Chief Executive has written.
A copy has also been sent to your Chief Executive.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division
<ยง>
