                                             Inspector E Brentnall
                                             South Yorkshire Police
                                             Complaints/Discipline Department
                                             Snig Hill
                                             Sheffield S3 8LY


                                             Our Ref:    EB/MR
                                             Your Ref:   CHN 90 401/11/3


                                             Date:       12 March 1990
Mrs Sad
Home Office
Cl Division
Room 324
Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1 9AT




Dear Mrs Sadler

Attendance Centres - Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I refer to your letter of 7 February 1990 and the extract from the report
by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster which
was enclosed.

I have read the extract and considered the proposals.  Before responding
to your letter I took the opportunity of discussing the implications with
members of staff at my centre.  Without exception they expressed an eagerness
to support any initiative implemented.

Listed below, for your consideration, are my thoughts on the proposals
contained in the extract of the report

The making of an attendance centre order, together with an exclusion order,
would provide an immediate method of detecting a failure to comply with an
exclusion order provided that the imposing court made failure to comply with
one order a breach of both orders.

Almost without exception all members of the four divisions of the football
league have stadiums located within urban areas.  Likewise I would expect
all senior attendance centres to be situated in urban areas and relatively
close to football grounds.  My own centre, for example, is less than one
and a half miles from a fourth division football stadium.

I believe that the majority of centres operate from 2pm to 5pm on alternate
Saturdays so a man complying with an order is every other Saturday precluded
from attending at an actual match.  He is, however, free to travel to and
from the attendance centre in the company of persons travelling to and from
football matches and therefore available for involvement in any hooliganism
that may occurr.  Most matches commence at 3pm and are completed by 4.45 pm.
Mrs Sadler
Home Office

2

To be an effective measure, centres would have to be open on each Saturday
during the football season and possibly throughout the entire year.

Provided that the premises used to house the senior attendance centres can
be made available each week and that central government make available the
necessary financial resources, the necessary increase in staff numbers should
pose no problems.  I envisage no problem in attracting staff of the required
calibre.

If power to make orders were to be extended to cover offenders over 21 years
of age and to offenders who have served a custodial sentence, the proposition
that those over 21 should not mix with 17 to 20 year old offenders would
cause immense difficulties.  If such a proposition were to be accepted, a
completely separate attendance centre would be required.  How else could
the two groups be kept separate? They may still mix en route to and from
their respective centres.

Practically it is difficult to secure the regular attendance of many 17 to
20 year olds and regular court action is required to revoke orders because
of an offenders failure to comply with the original attendance centre order.
To raise the upper age limit would, I believe, increase disproportionately
the number of revocations sought for failure to comply with orders.

Some two years ago in a pro-forma questionnaire circulated to officers-in-
charge, I highlighted the difficulties experienced in relation to court
appearances and suggested that consideration be given to employing, for
example, a retired police officer or probation officer to liaise with all
officers-in-charge within a particular area and for this person to serve
as a home visitor/process server for non-attenders and possibly to present
revocation applications at court.

An alternative, but more expensive option, may be to instruct local
solicitors or for a national approach to be made to the Crown Prosecution
Service for that service to act in such matters.  Almost without exception,
in my experience, offenders brought before the courts for failing to comply
with an attendance centre order admit the breach.  The presentation of facts
to the court is neither difficult nor particularly time consuming, it is
the travelling, waiting time etc. which removes an officer-in charge from
his primary duty.  It is not always possible to ensure court hearings fall
on leave days.

I apologise for the delay in responding to your letter and for any
inconvenience this delay may have caused.

Yours sincerely
