From:     P E Bolton                     cc   Miss Nicholson
          G2 Division                         Mr^JFdrney      j
          X3322                                  Goddard
          21 March 1990                       Mr Mower
                                              Mr Taylor




Ms Dent


THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE


You asked for advice on the attached      letter   from the   Chief
Executive of the Football League.


A simple encouraging acknowledgement is all that is required.
I attach a draft for the Home Secretary's signature.       Though a
Private Secretary reply would not be altogether inappropriate,
it would be seen as a sign of encouragement if the Home Secretary
responded personally to this positive move on the part of the two
football authorities.




                                         P E BOLTON
DRAFT LETTER


Arthur Sandford Esq
Chief Executive
The Football League Limited
Lytham St Annes
Lancashire
FY8 1JG



Copies to: S of S for Environment
           Chancellor of the Exchequer




                              FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY




    Thank you for your letter of 15 March in which you informed
    me that the Football League and the Football Association
    have agreed to adopt Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
     for the establishment of an Advisory Design Council.


    This is a very positive step and I was delighted to see
     that the two organisations have acted so quickly.
                                      iZSL               7                                                                                H/oT!                         —


                                                                                                                            ->flv                   >        pj    f e ^    pC_0iU-€

                                                                                                                                                             IVrotv-61.cf^^-
                                                                                                                                                 (Wf.         I L^iV-^\yj   ^
                                                                                                                                                 i-W/ OorzUUv/Ti
                                                                                  °^iVDED                                                        y/W .
                                                                                                                                                 i/W .

                                       T H E F O O T B A L L LEAG UE L IM IT E D
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1|G. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                                                Secretary). D. Dent

                    Chief Executive: A. Sandford                               T e le p h o n e : 0602 508720   Facsimile: 0602 508621


15th March 1990

R t . Hon David Waddington M.P.
Home Secretary
The Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Dear Home Secretary,

Following a joint meeting between the Football Association and
the Football League, I was asked to write to you to let you
know that these two bodies have agreed to adopt the proposal
from Lord Justice Taylor in his enquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster for the establishment of an Advisory Design Council.
A meeting at official level has been held prior to yesterday's
meeting and I enclose for your information, a copy of a note
of that meeting.   You will see that Professor Maunder is
being approached for advice on the establishment of the
Council which it is hoped will be in place at a very early
date.

I am sure that you will welcome the initiative of the Football
Association and the Football League in demonstrating our early
adoption of this recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor.

Your        incer




ARTHUR SANDFORD
Chief ^Executive



                                                                                                                    ft**??




c.c. Secretary of State for the Environment
     Chancellor of the Exchequer

                               Please re p ly to: City House. M aid Marian Way. N o ttin gh am NGI 6BH

              A lfo o w o g p o n e te ftg e -t'o be? a d d ro flo e d to The? S e c re to ry ^           oo oboMOi R e g is te re d in E n g la n d 80612
                 TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE


Report of a meeting with The Football Association on Friday,
2nd March, 1990 to discuss the setting up of an Advisory Design
Council.




Present:   A. Sandford and J.D. Dent (Football League)
           R.H.G. Kelly and A.R. Titcombe (Football Association)
           W.H. Carter (Geo. Corderoy & Co.)




     The Final Taylor Report recommended that "The Football
Association  and  the   Football  League  should   es-ablish an
Advisory Design Council whose functions should be:

     (a)   to conduct and marshal research into the
           improvement and design of football stadia;

     (b)   to disseminate regularly such information
           and expertise as they acquire in this field
           to members of the Football League and, on
           request, to other football and sports clubs
           in England, Wales and Scotland."

     Mr. Kelly confirmed that the Football Association, like
the Football League, were committed to this recommendation and
agreed that steps be taken to ensure that the Advisory Design
Council be set up with the minimum of delay.

     It was accepted that the Council would be a technical body
whose main terms of reference would be to produce a design
guide for the benefit of all clubs   whether building new stadia
or improving existing ones.   It would, act as a vehicle for co­
ordinating information.   After discussing the question it was
felt there would be no conflict with safety.

      Whilst there would obviously be representation on the
 Council from the various professional bodies, e.g_. architects,
 structural engineers etc., it was decided to seek advice from
.Professor Leonard Maunder (Chairman of the Technical Working
 Party set up to review the technical aspects, of the Guide to
 Safety at Sports Grounds) before making any approaches.     Mr.
 Carter was deputed to discuss matters with Professor Maunder
 with a view to arranging a meeting.   He was also authorised to
 discuss the chairmanship of the Design Council.



                                                   Cont inued/2
Continued,/ 2

     It   was   felt   that   representation   from clubs    may  be
desirable    (possibly   a   stadium  manager)   and Mr.    Sandford
outlined   the   initiatives   being undertaken by the      Football
League to obtain information from clubs.

     It was agreed that the aim should be to have      the Council
in place by 1st May, 1990.




                                                        J.D. Dent.
