A S S O C I A T I O N OF C H I E F P O L I C E O F F I C ER S ( S C O T L A N D )


                                                                       P olice Headquarters,
                                                                       F e t t e s Avenue,
Telephone   0 3 1 -3 1 1 -3 0 5 1 /2                                   Edinburgh,          EH4 1RB.




                                                            Our Ref             1738/2.32/S/M/89

                                                            Your Ref

                                                            D ate
                                                                                   29th May, 1989




 R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
 Secretary,
 Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
 50 Queen Anne's Gate,
 LONDON,    SWlA 9AR.


 Dear Mr. Whalley,

 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

 I refer to your letter of 23rd May, 1989, inviting the Association to submit
 written observations on matters relating to the events at Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Ground and to that in regard to the needs of crowd control and safety
 at sports grounds as a consequence of the Hillsborough disaster.

 You will wish to know that this matter has been referred to the appropriate
 Sub-Committee for consideration and I shall advise you in due course of the
 outcome of their deliberations.

                                              Yours sincerely,




                                           (Sit
                                           (Si^WiULiam
                                                 WiULiam Sutherland)
                                       ^        CtTief Constable
                                                 Hon. Secretary
     \* {
nP
.k,
 A S S O C I A T I O N OF C H I E F P O L I C E O F F I C E R S ( S C O T L A N D )



                                                                       P o lic e Headquarters,
                                                                       F e t t e s Avenue,
Telephone    031-311-3051/2                                            Edinburgh,          EH4 1RB.




                                                      Our Ref
                                                                                1738/2.32/S/P/89

                                                      Your Ref

                                                      D ate                        9th June, 1989




  R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
  Secretary,
  Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
  50 Queen Anne 1s Gate,
  LONDON,    SW1A 9AR.


  Dear Mr. Whalley,

  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

  Further to my letter of 29th May, 1989, in relation to the tragic events which
  occurred at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, you will wish to know that
  this matter was considered at the meeting of our        General Purposes Standing
  Committee Sub-Group on Football Crowd Control, Security and Safety Recommendations
  held on 2nd June, 1989.

   It will be appreciated that members are unaware of the full facts of the disaster,
   the pre-planning measures made or the supervisory arrangements implemented and
   therefore the comments proffered below can only be      seen as being general and
   pertinent only to deficiencies thought to      be inherent in the certification
   process.

   These ares

   (i)      All standing enclosures should be subject to fencing between the enclosures
             and trackside.

   (ii)     Fencing should have an adequate number      of double gates opening inward
             on to the trackside and identified by a different colour to (i) enable
             police officers to enter the terracing and (ii), permit in cases of
             emergency, spectators to gain access to the trackside and pitch under
             supervision of the police and/or stewards.

   (iii)    There should be steps up   to   these   gates     from   the well   of the terracing
             (where relevant).

   Civ)/
(iv)   There should be no advertising hoardings placed on the trackside in front
       of these gates.

(v)    In cases where enclosures are all seated and there is no access from
       standing enclosures, consideration can be given to removing the fencing
       if it is regarded as safe and practical.

(vi)   As far as possible, and if the location of the venue permits, there should
       be some form of police check on ticket holders some distance from the
       venue so that non-ticket holders are not allowed to approach the
       turnstiles.

During the course of discussions, members intimated that should Lord Justice
Taylor wish to visit any of the Scottish Football Stadia to discuss in greater
detail any of the arrangements pertaining thereto, they would be delighted to
meet with him.

Accordingly, should Lord Justice Taylor wish to take      up   this   offer   I extend,
on behalf of the Association, a warm invitation to him.

                                Yours siik:erely




                       V          WiHliam Sutherland)
                                 Chiejf Constable
                                 ~SOn. Secretary
