                                      IV j w         ^ '*
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                  The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                               50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                               London SW1H 9AT
                                               01-273 2577/3602/2370

Chris Wright Esq
Acting National Branch Co-ordinator
Football Supporters Association
Selhurst Park
Outwood Lane
Chipstead
SURREY
                                                 19 December 1989




        Nv.   WtrijUtr
Thank you for your letter of 14 December, which I have shown to
Lord Justice Taylor. He was grateful to you for your
explanation. As you know, he was rather concerned by what he
read in the press, but understands what happened, and is content
to let matters rest.




                                           R M WHALLEY
                                      Secretary to the Inquiry
                 FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                                           Chris Wright
                                           Acting National Branch
                                           Co-ordinator
                                           Selhurst Park
                                           Outwood Lane
                                           Chipstead
                                           Surrey

                                       Tel;                (anytime)

Lord Justice Taylor
(Att: Mr Whalley)
Home Office
50 Queen Anne Gate
London
SW1 H9AT                                            14 December 1989



Dear Lord Justice Taylor

May, as I did to your very nice Mr Whalley, apologise for things
that have appeared in the press this week about the terrible
happenings at Middlesbrough and the reports that, it would seem,
we were asking you to investigate through the press.

The situation is this.  Without Rogan Taylor I have been asked to
help set up new branches and on 12.12.89 we had a long commitment
to set up a new Teeside Branch.  We have a very clear procedure
for doing so but as you can imagine events overtook the meeting.
On the day of the meeting the press announced the Club and Police
had blamed the fans, without speaking to us about the disaster
that happened.

At the meeting freelance and accredited journalists turned up to
hear what we had to say as did a number of supporters baying for
the blood of the club and police.

We elected a complete set of officials and I was asked to address
the meeting and answer questions.  Basically the format was those
who wanted to go to Ayresome Park and lynch the Directors and
those who saw an official enquiry as the best way out.

The Licensing Authority, Cleveland County Council, we were told
were going to hold their own enquiry as were the police and club.
I maintained throughout that it needed to be independent and your
goodself was the person to do it.

To cut a long story short, a democratic vote decided by over 80%
to ask you to investigate, and I instructed the new local branch
secretary to write you accordingly.

                                              Continued
                                -2-




However, in spite of the journalists presence I did leave   him a
press statement to be issued when a reply from you was at   hand,
but it seems the local and national media overwhelmed him   and as
he did not understand embargoes it got out.  May I say he   has
since resigned unfortunately, and we now have a secretary   who is
a journalist.

There was no move to undermine you or negotiate with you through
the press, far from it, and I apologise unreservedly about this,
and hope you will accept this knowing we are "Rogan-less" and our
office has been closed.

May I also make the point that we were misled by a journalist who
told us he had been informed by your office you were sympathetic
to our request.  We have now been informed by your Mr Whalley
that no one contacted your office.  This also got confused by
Cleveland County Council's decision to call an emergency meeting
next Wednesday and the police and club to call another emergency
meeting next Wednesday.  Both, I now hear were held yesterday,
but in the event all this caused confusion.

Further, your Mr. Whalley said you were concerned about The Times
reference to children.  This I can clear up.  In the edition of
The Northern Echo of 12.12.89 Chief Superintendent Terry Taskers
is quoted as saying

  "If we had been told there would have been Children coming, we
  would have let it been known that the enclosure was an
  unsuitable place for them."

I said at the meeting that in your interim recommendations 23,
and such informations as I read it should have been carried on
the tickets.  It was not.  I never mentioned children so again
was taken out of context.

In finality, can I say this.  The request for you to investigate
still stands, and we did not, and never will, seek to invite you
to come or discuss anything through the media, and that is why
after collecting all the information I contacted Mr. Whalley as
soon as I could.

I ask you to put this down to local concern and inexperience,
coupled with enthusiasm on our new officials part.


                                             Continued
                            616
11452Q8
HO 397/11
4757452 (Mr, arm marie adlington)



      Reading Room
S     28/06/Z001 12:53:11
                               -3-




If I can be of any further help, please do not hesitate to
contact me at the above address, and I hope you find the
explanation satisfactory as we continue to have the highest
regard for you, your staff and your investigation.

Yours sincerely




Chris Wright
Acting National Branch Co-ordinator
