hs.6.12/fl.peb


                                         cc   Ms Snow
                                              Ms Craig
                                              Miss Nicholson
                                              Mr Yates
                                              Mr Chilcot
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Angel
                                              Mr Clayton
                                              Mr Goddard
                                              Mr Cogbill
                                              Mr Cooke, C4
                                              Mr Moorey


Mr J D B Taylor



FOOTBALL LEAGUE

I am replying to your note of 31 May to Mr Brown in my Division.
I have the following comments on points 2 and 4.

The Football Licensing Authority (FLA)

As you will know from other papers, Ministers have been asked to
consider nominations for the chairmanship of the FLA and when
that has been done we shall ask them to consider the nominations
for membership.

Mr Sandford came to see me on 6 June and I have already told him
that we hope to see the members of the Authority named within
weeks rather than months.  I do not think it would be politic to
tell him exactly where we stand.   I have also explained to him
that the Government's view is that clubs do not have to wait for
the FLA to be set up before getting on with ground improvements,
and we agreed that it would be helpful if that was stated
publicly.    As you know Lord Ferrers has now written to
Mr Sandford on these lines (copy annexed).

Government Steering Group

Mr Sandford has raised the possibility of an official steering
group on a number of occasions. He has raised it with me and you
may recall that he raised it when representatives of the League
and the FA came to see Lord Ferrers.      I can understand that
Mr Sandford feels that there are too many Government Departments
with an interest in football at the moment, but the fact is that
some of them with whom Mr Sandford has been in contact (the
Treasury in relation to Pools Betting Duty, the Inland Revenue,
Customs and Excise etc) have only a limited and occasional
interest in football and their presence on a standing working
group would be a waste of time.
I have discussed this with my colleagues in DoE.    We feel that
what might be a sensible compromise will be an arrangement under
which we, that is to say my side of the Home Office and the
Sports and Recreation Division of DoE, agree to form the nucleus
of a group which can arrange to meet the League from time to
time, but that others would be brought in only if there is
something to discuss which impinges on their area of interest.
Even so, it may not be practicable to avoid the need for one to
one discussions on some issues.

I suggest you reply to Mr Sandford saying that you understand
that I proposed such an arrangement, that I am at present
consulting colleagues in other Departments and that I will write
to him again as soon as possible.

I would alfeo like to suggest that if we do engineer such a forum
we should be careful not to confuse the situation by engaging in
other discussions with the League and the FA of a general nature.
I can understand the reason for your meeting on 10 May, but it
did touch on issues with which my Division was already in contact
w i 4 ^ the League.




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         G2 Division



12 June 1990



Enc
                                                      H o m e O ffice
                                                    Q UE E N A N N E ’S GATE
                                                     L O N D O N SWIH 9AT




                                                   ^ J u n e 1990




      lIL,,          ,
When we met on 4 April I told you that the powers to set up
the Football Licensing Authority would come into force on 1
June and that we hoped that it would be operational as soon as
possible after that.    It will be clear to you that the process
has taken longer than we had anticipated.

I hope that we shall be able to make an announcement about
membership of the FLA quite soon although, for entirely
practical reasons, it is unlikely that the new licensing
system will become fully effective for some months.

A considerable amount   of preparatory work   has been completed
in consequence of the   changed emphasis in   the role of the
Authority, but the FLA will be exercising     entirely new
functions and it will take time to recruit    and to train its
staff and inspectors.

I can understand that the football authorities will wish to
discuss a range of issues with the FLA as soon as possible.
It would, be wrong to consider that the football clubs must
wait for the FLA to be set up before making the improvements
to their grounds which were proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.

I thought, therefore, that I should write to you, since both
your President and the Chairman of the Football Association
are in Italy, in order to give you a clearer idea of how we
see the FLA operating in relation to the recommendations in
the Taylor report on all seated accommodation.  I hope that
this will enable you to give clearer guidance to the clubs.

The Government's view has always been that the primary
responsibility for responding to Lord Justice Taylor's



                                         /recommendations.

A Sandford Esq
recommendations on all seated accommodation rests with the
clubs themselves.  The Taylor report is quite clear in
recommending that standing accommodation should be
progressively removed by 1993, 1994 or 1999, depending on the
nature of the matches for which the grounds are used.  In
order to meet that overall timetable, clubs will need to be
planning -indeed should have been planning for the past 6
months - on how they will achieve it.

The FLA will itself have no powers to require all seated
accommodation unless the Home Secretary makes a direction in
respect of a particular football ground.  When the licensing
scheme is in operation, we shall be looking to the FLA to
examine the plans which clubs have made and to advise us on
the progress which is being made towards all seated
accommodation.

Nevertheless, in the first instance at least it will be for
t ^ P clubs to decide whether to reduce standing accommodation
or to make proposals for additional seating using their own
funds or those which the Government has made available through
the Football Trust in consequence of the reduction in pools
betting tax.

Only in those cases where progress is unsatisfactory should it
be necessary to resort to a formal direction.  We hope these
will be few.

I have already indicated to you and your colleagues from the
Association and the Football League that we shall not insist
on strict adherence to Lord Justice Taylor's interim timetable
if satisfactory progress is being made.  The interim
timetable, as you know, envisaged reductions of standing
capacity by 20% or 10% a year depending on the type of match
being played but regardless of the amount of seated
accommodation already provided.

This does not mean, though, that the interim timetable need
not be complied with.  It remains as a guide, and it will not
be open to a club to avoid reducing standing accommodation for
no reason other than that it has plans for major redevelopment
at some ill-defined date in the future.

We accept, though, that it may be necessary to place some
priority on the funds which are available.  We also recognise
that it might suit some clubs to make major changes to their
grounds which will exceed the Taylor recommendations but which
cannot be achieved in a single season.  We also want clubs to
make use of the available money in order to improve their
accommodation - and not simply to make piecemeal changes,
especially if they are unlikely to contribute to improvements
in safety or public order.




                                             /I hope.
I hope that this provides a basis for any clubs, who have
yet applied their thoughts to all seated accommodation, to
start making plans.



                                SUf^

                                \

                           FERRERS
h s .6.13/steergp.peb


                                                        3322




                                         13 June 1990




Peter Lee Esq
SARD, Room/ P3/167
Department of the Environment
2 Marsham Street
LONDON     SW1P 3EB




I mentioned to you on the telephone the request which has been
made to us on a number of occasions by Arthur Sandford, the Chief
Executive of the Football League, that there should be a
Government Steering Group of officials with whom the League, and
presumably the FA could discuss matters of common interest,
particularly in the wake of the Taylor report on Hillsborough.

There is a superficial attraction to this idea, because we are
anxious to retain the support of the League and the FA to bring
about changes in the football environment smoothly.       But in
practice, some of our colleagues will have little need to meet
these organisations regularly in such a forum.     Moreover when
they have a need to meet them it may well be that the issues are
so specialised, that they may be of little interest to the rest
of u s .

In the circumstances I would like to ask colleagues who are copy
recipients of this letter whether they would be content to
co-operate with a compromise solution, which you and I have
already discussed.

The proposal is that your Division and mine should provide the
kernel of such a steering group and that we should offer the
League and the FA the opportunity to meet us from time to time.
We would keep other Divisions of our Departments and those in
other Departments informed but they would be asked to attend only
if the football authorities wanted to raise something which
concerned them which was also of interest to the rest of us. We
would need to decide who would chair it.     I would be happy to
defer to DoE in this respect.
I hope that copy recipients will feel that a working group run
on these proposed lines will serve their needs as well as those
of the football authorities without causing an unnecessary
additional burden. I shall value their comments. A list of copy
recipients is annexed.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)



Enc
Copy recipients


Home Office

Mr J Goddard         Police Department     F8 Division
Mr A Cogbill         Criminal Department   C4 Division


DoE

Mr H Corner            PDC1


Treasury   /

Mr J Mortimer


Inland Revenue

Mr^J^McGivern


Customs and Excise

Mr Gaw


Scottish Education Department

Miss Margaret McLean


Welsh Office

Mr T M Timlin
