From: Sue McDougall                                    cc      Mr Maclean
Operational Policing Policy Unit                               Mr Boys Smith
Room 527                                                       Mr Pugh
9 273 2621                                                     Mr Granatt
26 February 1997                                               Mr Rock
                                                               Miss Whetstone
Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

Issue
How to respond to the news that a hospital doctor who treated victims of the Hillsborough
disaster has claimed that victims were alive after 3.15 pm on the day of the disaster.


Timing and recommendation
2.      Journalists will ask about this when you visit the Wirral on Friday: lines to take are at
paragraph 8.


Consideration
3.      A hospital anaesthetist, Dr Ed Walker, who apparently treated victims after the
Hillsborough disaster has claimed in tomorrow’s edition of Hospital News that he treated
victims who were alive after 3.15 pm. The time is significant because the South Yorkshire
Coroner made the decision that he would not hear evidence about any events after 3 .15 pm on
the day of the disaster because he considered that all the victims were dead by that time. The
claims have been widely reported in the press and are being used to fuel suggestions that either
the inquest or the inquiry into the disaster should be reopened.


4.      It appears from the press reports that Dr Walker did not give evidence at either the
Taylor inquiry or the inquest and only recently saw transcripts of the inquest describing him as
                   «


“an unidentified doctor”. He has offered to testify that 14 year old victim Philip Hammond was
alive until 3.40 pm. According to the Press Association, the Hillsborough Family Support
Group plans to use his testimony to ask the High Court to quash the accidental death verdict:
its solicitors hope that a new inquest would change the verdict to unlawful killing. The
victims’ families consider that the decision not take evidence after 3.15 denied them the
chance to submit evidence that South Yorkshire police failed to activate its disaster plan in
5.      The Attorney General’s Office said today that they had not yet received a new
application for a fresh inquest. It was pointed out that, thought the Attorney is bound to
consider new evidence, the fact that it could be established that some of the victims were alive
beyond 3.15 would not in itself be grounds to reopen the inquest. The point was considered in
November 1993 in the judgement on the application for Judicial Review in respect of various
decisions made by the Coroner and also in respect of the verdict recorded by the Coroner’s
jury at the end of the inquest. Lord Justice McCowan found that in respect of one of the
victims there was ‘‘a realistic probability” he was alive after 3.15. but nevertheless
concluded:


        “   I have discovered no good reason fo r ordering a new inquest or fo r merely
       quashing the existing verdict.


       I f I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following matters
       would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose o f a fresh inquest? To get a
       verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already been firm ly levelled by the
        Taylor Report. The police have admittedfault and paid compensation. To get a
       verdict criticising the emergency services? I see no evidence to justify such criticism,
       and in any event it would be irrelevant i f all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To
       obtain further examination o f the last minutes o f their lives. I doubt that anything
       more would be learned, but the process would be a very harrowing one involving
       large numbers o f witnesses and lasting i f notfo r 96 days, fo r notfa r short. Moreover,
       irrespective o f whose fa u lt, i f anyone's, it is , the fa ct is thatfour and a halfyears
       have already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion o f a
       mere quashing o f the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would regard
       that as absolutely valueless.


In view of the of this judgement it appears unlikely that the Attorney will wish to recommend
reopening the inquest as a result of this new evidence.


6.     As agreed with Mr Maclean, I am due to meet Mr Kilfoyle on Monday. The meeting
has been arranged in order to clarify the allegations that have been made particularly by Mr
Roger Houldsworth, the video camera technician. Although we would have preferred this to
have remained confidential, Mr Kilfoyle has already announced it to the press. We hope to put
up advice as soon as possible after we have explored any additional concerns that Mr Kilfoyle
or the Hillsborough Family Support Group may wish to make. So far, on the material we have
examined, we have not been convinced that the programme has uncovered any new evidence.


Handling


7.       The matter is getting a lot of press coverage and journalists can be expected to ask you
whether you are likely to re-open the inquiry and particularly whether Dr Walker’s claims will
make a difference. When you come to announce a decision - particularly if you decide against
reopening the inquiry - it will need careful handling. It would be wrong therefore to suggest at
this stage what the outcome might be. I suggest the following lines to take, which have been
agreed with Press Office:


• I have received a report on the questions raised by the Granada television programme from
     the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and I am carefully considering this material.


• My officials are due to meet Mr Kilfoyle in order to clarify the concerns of the Hillsborough
     Family Support Group.


• We have not as yet received any information from Dr Walker but if we do I will carefully
     consider anything he might say along with other evidence when making my decision.


• I hope to be able to come to a decision soon, but I am sure you will appreciate that I must
     consider all the 'representations most carefully.


                                                         Sv/ N-oO ^                    l    (
                                                          Sue McDougall
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 6 - F E B . ' 9 7 (WED)
Hillsborouah: Doctor’s crucial
—    —   —                                          — —— a—   I                         a—   —         ■   — I—   —    —
                                                                                                                           new evidence . . .
                                                                                                                                   —   ■ !■ I




                                                                                                                                                                                                             15:40
                                                                                                                                                                                              e y t- c ^ o

                                                                                                                                                                                              2 6 ( ^ 7




                                                                                                                                                                                                             OBJECTIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ONE SE
                                                                             DRAMATIC new medical
                                                                             c v i d c n c e t o d a y gave                        By Debbie Johnson
                                                                             victims              o fI t h e
                                                                             Hillsborough tragedy fresh                    llS p m ttn Ihc irsu iid i that lltoic
                                                                                                                           killed were already brain-dnid.
                                                                             hope Tor justice.
                                                                               A do c to r who t re a t e d                   Now, Philip’* father, also Philip,
                                                                             rnsudlliet on Ihc day of the                  •lays that at last H illsborough
                                                                             disaster in April 1089 lias come              (•milieu see a light at the rnil ot Ine
                                                                                                                           tunnel.
                                                                             forward lo support * hid to have
                                                                             Ihe •Jiquesl into the 96 deaths                  "I am travelling down lo Laodon
                                                                             reopened.                                     today lo see my barrister about what
                                                                                                                           He are going lo do next.
                                                                               Thai could p a w Ihe way tor a
                                                                               naw In q u e s t va rd fct o f                 ' I icnieinlier Dr Walker treating
                                                                                                                           PhSip at the hospital and we had
                                                                               unlawful killing.                           been trying lo trark him down for
                                                                               Dr Ed Walker rushed I d Northern            seven and a hair years.
                                                                             General Hospital in SliflTiHit I d help          "His evidence says what r>c kavr
                                                                             wilh the influx or palients.                  claimed all along — lhal many ol the
                                                                               Tlte Tint he treated was H >cjr             virtiin< were alive a f t e r 3.15,       • MIctiMl Howard . . .
                                                                             old Philip Hammond — who, lip 'ays,           including my son, This does Rive as       the Horn* Secretary's




                                                                                                                                                                                                             TEL:0151
                                                                             was still alive by 3.40pm.                    hope."                                    decision on whtttier
                                                                               At the original inijuesl Sheffield             Dr Walker, who now works at            lo order ■ fresh
                                                                             coroner Dr Stefan Popper rcluscd to            Dewsbury Hospital, West Yorkshire,       Inquiry Into lha
                                                                             hear details of what happened after                        • Him lo Pag* *              d lia itii la due loon

                                                                             I can't
                                                                             believe I




                                                                                                                                                                                                             224 6 4 7 2
                                                                             have been
                                                                             sitting on
                                                                             this stuff
                                                                             for 8 years.
                                                                             I had no
                                                                             idea it
                                                                             was so
• Flgtil tor kictlo*; . . Philip Hammond with • photograph ol hi* beloved’   important ’
          Phflip. H *tnm ltoato London today lo apeak to hit Ibarrister
A6-FEB.'97(WE0) 15:41   OBJECTIVE ONE SE
                                                                 TEL:0151 224 6472
                                                                                             P. 0 0 4




                                            C 'M <
                                       C o i u m e n L




                                       Hope
                                       at lost                                l = r o tT 0


                                       □   Long awaited
            M                          breakthrough for
                                       Hillsborough families
                                        IT is the news th -,t a small
                                        but extremely determined
                                        group of people have waited
                                        almost eight years to hear.
                                           After the agony of losing
                                        iheir loved ones at
                                        Hillsborough, and the
                                        subsequent battle lo get the
      / i                              world to listen to their pleas
                                        rhat justice is still waiting
                                        ro be done, a ray of hope
                                       dawns today.
                                           The Hillsborough families
                                       have always maintained
                                        that many ot the victims
                                        were alive well after 3.15pn)
                                       on rhat terrible day in April
                                        1989.
                                           Bur the inquest decision
                                       not to hear details of what
                                       happened after that time,
                                       on the grounds that those
                                       who died were already brain
                                       dead, is now lo be seriously
                                       questioned.
                                           New evidence from a
                                       doctor on the scene th a t
                                       victims he treated were
                                       alive well after 3.15pm —
                                       and th a t victim Philip
                                       Hammond was alive a t
                                       3.40pm — will now be used
                                       to help a legal bid to
                                       overturn the original
                                       inquest verdict of accidental
                                       death.
                                           The argum ent against
                                       such a move has always
                                       been that there is no new
                                       evidence, but surely this is
                                       it-
                                           And now it is time to do
                                       the decent thing for all
                                       those who have hoped and
                                       prayed for this day.
                                          It Is time that everyone was
                                       told what really happened at
                                       Hillsborough, for the take of
                                       the families who grieve, and
                                       to do justice to those who
                                       went to a football match on a
                                       aprmg afternoon and lost
                                       their lives.                      .<
                                                                         y
