            THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007



Peter C Metcalfe                                            Your reference:
Hammond Suddards Solicitors
Empire H o u ^      % r w U L-ct*^                          Our reference:
lO Picraitfly                          ,
BRAlfFORD BD13LR                   US a                     Date:         V t December 1997




                 it


                Preparation of Statements following the Hillsborough Disaster



You have given me advice about the part which your firm, and you personally, played in the
preparation of the ‘recollections’ by South Yorkshire police officers who were involved in
the Hillsborough disaster, in particular about the way in which changes were made to some of
these before they were submitted to the West Midlands police investigation team and to Lord
Justice Taylor’s Inquiry.

2.      I must refer to these matters in my report to the Home Secretary, and the Home
Secretary has said that he intends to publish my report. I think it proper for me to show you
the relevant sections of the draft, which are Part II of Chapter 4 and Appendix 5. The draft
mentions you by name at paragraph 7 of Chapter 4.

3.     I should be grateful for any comment which you may have on this material, to reach
me if possible by Monday 5 January 1998.
                                               t




                                       Aa . •/*—
LORD JUSTICE STU ART-SMITH




G: | HILLSBOR \ MA1N\METCALFE, 2 1 3
CHAPTER 4
                                        Par t2
            Alleged improper Pressure on South Yorkshire Police Officers


1.   In his written submissions to me Professor Scraton stated that there was a ‘range of
     claims that witnesses were subjected to pressure in giving their statements’. When
     he came to make oral submissions to me I asked him to tell me what these claims
     were. In addition to the three cases which I have dealt with in the first part of this
     chapter he invited me to consider the evidence of Mr David Frost. Mr Frost was a
     Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police on duty at Hillsborough. His duty
     was as part of serial 21 which was at the Penistone Road End.         He assisted in
     arresting a drunken fan and taking him to the charge room.       He returned to the
     Penistone Road End. At 2.55 his serial was called inside the ground and sent to the
     Leppings Lane Terraces where he assisted with the rescue operation.


2.   Like other officers he was asked to write out his recollection. He did so in his own
     handwriting and this appears to have been typed up into the form of a statement
     dated 9 May 1989. This was submitted to the South Yorkshire Police solicitors, as
     a result of which a number of deletions and some alterations were made. (Appendix
     is the amended version). I can see nothing to take exception to in these amendments
     save possibly in two instances. The reference in the third page to the radio being
     garbled and frantic might be considered both factual and material, though other
     officers had also spoken of the difficulties with the radio.   On the fifth page the
     word ‘bottleneck’ possibly amplified the sentence that follows.       Otherwise the
     deletions or alterations in my view do not alter the substance of the statement. He
     was asked to sign the amended statement. He said he refused to do so. He said that
     other officers also refused to sign their amended statements, though he was unable
     to name any, and although he said he would let me know their names, he has not
     done so.   He also said that others were ‘asked/impelled to sign things that they
     didn’t want to that had been changed’. I asked him if he had witnessed any one
     being impelled to sign he said that he personally had not, but he knew officers who
     had.   Again I have not been supplied with their names.        He accepted that his



                                          87
 original statement was not in a suitable form to be a witness statement. He said that
 he himself was not put under any pressure to sign, he was left alone. He said:


  ‘This was an attempt by senior management to sanitise and protect themselves; and
 any honour that the South Yorkshire Police, which I thought at the time was
 considerable, disappeared for me.


That is why I left the force.    I was medically pensioned off.     I couldn’t wear a
uniform after this sort of thing took place;’ (pl4 lines 13-19).


He also suggested that the reason why officers were asked to submit statements on
plain paper as opposed to CJA forms was so that they could be doctored.


On the strength of this evidence and that which I have dealt with in part 1 of this
chapter, Professor Scraton submitted that officers’ statements had been taken in a
manner which was “highly irregular and leaves itself open to accusations of
widespread and institutional malpractice; it does smack of ‘getting our stories right
before they go to the investigation force’ and pressure, no pressure, but people are
expected to make changes in their statements to their recollections”.


I have investigated the facts surrounding the obtaining of statements from South
Yorkshire Police officers. The facts are these:


At a meeting at Police HQ South Yorkshire Police on the 17 April 1989 it was
decided that officers principally involved should set down their recollections of
events in writing. On the 25 April ACC Mervyn Jones, who was in charge of the
Inquiry on behalf of West Midlands Police and the Taylor Inquiry was told that the
South Yorkshire Police were obtaining self-serving (ie self written) statements by
police officers down to Inspector level and also from all officers at Leppings Lane
End of the ground.     At a meeting on the 26 April 1989 in the morning Chief
Superintendent Wain told a group of officers who were concerned with the inquiry
carried out by the South Yorkshire Police that it was necessary to obtain self written



                                      88
statements from the relevant officers. These would be on plain paper and not taken
under CJA rules. It was said that ‘our job is merely to collate what evidence South
Yorkshire Police officers can provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can
present a suitable case, on behalf of the force, to subsequent inquiries”. An aide
memoire setting out the matters to be dealt with appears to have been distributed.
These included the time of coming on duty, to whom the officer was responsible,
and where they were deployed and what they said and did. It appears to call for a
factual account.


At 2pm that day there was a conference between senior South Yorkshire Police, the
solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police, Messrs Hammond Suddards, and
leading and junior counsel. A note of the meeting records that in the course of it
Mr Woodward QC advised that the operation undertaken by South Yorkshire Police
should be regarded as an evidence gathering operation for the information of the
legal advisers.    He said that any statements taken for this purpose would be
privileged, and that writs were expected. He suggested that some officers might
“want to put all their thoughts and expressions of that day down on paper, as a sort
of catharsis”. The process was a confidential one and the legal advisers would
choose what they wanted to leave in or leave out.


By letter dated 7 May 1989 ACC Jones told the Chief Constable South Yorkshire
that he had been asked by counsel for Lord Taylor’s inquiry to request statements
from a selected number of officers for their recollections of the day. This was in
addition to the statements of senior officers which had already been sought. In a
telephone conversation referred to in an attendance note dated the 9 May this
request was discussed between Mr Metcalf, a partner of Hammond Suddards and
Chief Superintendent Denton of the South Yorkshire Police. Statements from some
120 officers were being sought by the West Midlands Police; of these about 100 had
already written their accounts. It was agreed that many of these might be suitable
to be handed over as they were; but some might include comment and speculation
and might have to be redone. The solicitors were to consider them. Mr Denton
sent a number of statements under cover of a letter of the same date. He said “no
doubt you will advise me on the propriety of supplying these documents to the West
Midlands Police.”      Over the next 5 weeks in excess of 400 statements were
submitted to the solicitors. Of these, 253 attracted no comment at all. In 60 cases
the comment was confined to pointing out some minor error or ambiguity. I have
examined approximately 100 amended statements where on the face of the
comments something of substance might have been referred to. In 74 instances the
amendment is of no consequence. In some cases the solicitor’s recommendation is
not adopted and the suggested amendment not made; in some cases adverse
comment on fans’ behaviour, intemperate language, personal feelings or hearsay is
removed; in others the statement is clarified or ambiguities or inconsistencies put
right. Of the remainder 9 amendments are of some significance and I deal with
these in Appendix       . In some of these factual matter has been excluded which
should not have been. In others, although what is excluded is comment, factual
matters canbe said to be implicit in the comment.


In the remaining cases comment and opinion are excluded.        These are generally
criticisms of the police operation and in the main fall under three heads: complaints
about lack of radios, lack of information on the radio and difficulty of
communication by radio due to interference; apparent shortage of police on foot at
Leppings Lane; and lack of organisation by senior officers in the rescue operation.
Not infrequently the factual matters underlying the criticism are apparent from the
rest of the statement. In a factual statement these comments and opinions would not
normally occur and I do not think the solicitors can be criticised for recommending
their removal.


A number of officers had expressed concern over the alterations to their statements.
With the approval of the solicitors an explanation was circulated. I exhibit a copy
at Appendix      pi.


It appears that in some cases, because of the short timescale before the inquiry got
underway (it started on the 15 May 1989) some statements were sent to the inquiry
team and circulated by them to representatives of the parties before they had been
vetted by the solicitors, with the result that on the 16 May one police officer was
cross-examined on the basis of a criticism contained in his original statement but
later excluded.     This was a matter of concern to ACC Jones, because it was
contrary to an arrangement which he had made with the Chief Constable South
Yorkshire. The matter was taken up with the Treasury Solicitor, who replied on
the 7 June. A copy of this reply is in Appendix      p2.


This letter shows that Counsel to the Inquiry and the Treasury Solicitor were well
aware that self-written statements were being vetted by Hammond Suddards, and
Mr Whitehurst, Assistant Treasury Solicitor and part of the Inquiry Team has
conformed to me that that was the case. So also has Superintendent Foster who was
in charge of the investigation by the West Midlands Police.


I do not think statements which came into existence prior to 26 April 1989 were
subject to legal professional privilege. There is no evidence that they were obtained
so that the legal advisers to the Chief Constable could advise, as opposed to the
officers being asked to record their recollections while they were fresh in their
minds. Those that came into existence following the conference with Counsel may
well have been privileged, though there may have been difficult questions relating
to the dominant purpose for which the statement was obtained. In the event I do not
think the point is of any consequence since the question of legal professional
privilege only relates to the non-production of documents in litigation. Nor do I
think there was anything improper about asking officers to record their recollections
in their own words on ordinary paper, rather than in their notebooks. The occasion
was wholly exceptional and a notebook is not a convenient form in which to write
what, in many cases, was likely to be a very long statement. While it might have
been preferable for statements to be taken in CJA form, I doubt whether this was
practicable having regard to the time constraints.    It would probably have been
difficult for South Yorkshire police to take these statements from their colleagues in
the time available. It is quite clear to me that the West Midlands Police could not
possibly have taken such statements for them to be available for consideration by
the Inquiry team.    The Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were clearly well
 aware that original self-written statements were being vetted by the solicitors and in
 some cases altered.       I have no doubt that they either knew or suspected that
 criticisms of the police operation or conduct of senior police officers were being
 excluded on the basis that such criticisms were comment or opinion.


 All the alterations were made on the advice of solicitors. Moreover the process of
 submitting these statements to the Inquiry did not materially differ from that
 adopted by the Club and the Ambulance Service.         In their cases the respective
 solicitor took the statements and forwarded them to the Inquiry team.


 Having regard to Mr Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie as to why Gate C was opened
 and the fact that some shocking stories about the behaviour of fans, said to have
emanated from some police officers, which were reported in the press (see Lord
Taylor s Interim Report, para 257), I have considered this matter critically because
of the allegation of cover up.        I have no doubt that in the days following
Hillsborough the police perceived themselves to be on the defensive. This was also
the perception of their legal advisers. There was an understandable desire not to
give anything away.        For the most part the suggestions for amendments by the
solicitors is not open to criticism; in a few cases however I think it went too far.
There is no evidence of any improper pressure being brought to bear on police
officers to agree with amendments and sign the amended versions.           What was
happening was well known to the Inquiry team, though not the detail of the
amendments, except in those cases where the unamended version was forwarded
due to pressure to time.


In fact I think the whole effort may have been counter productive. Had the legal
advisers paid more attention to the comments and opinions of the junior ranks, they
might have avoided the stinging rebuke from Lord Taylor.        At para 285 of his
Interim Report he said:
      ‘It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South
      Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in
      what occurred. Mr Duckenfield, under pressure of cross- examination,        apologised
      for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
      case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for
      failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal crush was not caused by
      the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being defective.         Such an
      unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt.
      It would have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility had
      been faced’


16.   I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry team were in no way inhibited or
      impeded by the exclusion of material from the original statements.             All the
      questions on which comments were made and excluded were matters investigated by
      the Tribunal and adverse findings made on the basis of the facts found, and this is
      so in relation to those cases I have commented on in Appendix


17.   Equally I am quite satisfied that the exclusion of these comments could not possibly
      have affected the DPP. As I have already stated, Counsel proceeded on the basis
      that the evidence before them supported Lord Taylor’s findings.




                                            93
Appendix 5


Comments on amended South Yorkshire Police Statements


PC 2359 Woodcock
       The following is omitted:


              ‘I saw Inspector Harry White at the debrief.     He told me that his
             serial usually got the job of putting the crowd in the different pens in
             the rear of the goalmouth, working from the outside to the centre, but
             for some reason he’d been told to let the crowd find their own level
             on this occasion resulting in too many going into the area immediately
             behind the goal. ’


This is clearly hearsay. Inspector White makes no mention of this conversation.


Chief Inspector Creaser
       The following is omitted:


                     ‘At approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room
              and there spoke to Superintendent Murray. I asked him if he had any
              preference as to the manner in which the spectators should be
              allowed to fill the Leppings Lane terraces. I was informed that the
              filling of the fenced pens would be allowed to take place in a natural
              fashion and that no control would be exercised by the Police on the
              supporters regarding which particular pen would be filled.          This
              instruction was exactly in line with the instruction given the previous
              year, when Liverpool supporters had occupied the same parts of the
              stadium.      I only raised this question because I was aware that on
              previous occasions different methods had been used to accommodate
              spectators.
In my opinion this was a factual matter which should not have been excluded.
But PS Goddard’s statement refers to this conversation thus:


               ‘Inspector   Creaser came       into the    Control   Box   and   asked
               Superintendent Murray about the Leppings Lane terraces and it was
               stated by Superintendent Murray that the standing fans would find
               their own levels in the pens rather than trying to fill one pen at a
               time.’


Although the solicitors suggested this might be reconsidered, it was left in.


The whole question of allowing supporters to find their own level on filling the pens
 sequentially was considered at great length by Lord Taylor and he made findings
 critical of the policy of allowing supporters to find their own level.


PC 446 Groome
Apart from Mr Frost’s statement, the statement was more extensively altered than
any other:


       Deleted - ‘An officer of Inspector Calvert’s experience of policing would
       have been far better placed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground’


       Deleted - ‘The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort of
       paralysis’


       Amended - ‘It was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the
       rank of Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and
       Superintendent Greenwood. Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous
       by their absence. It was utter chaos.’ This was changed to ‘On the pitch
       were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and Superintendent Greenwood’.
       The words in bold were deleted.
       Deleted - ‘Why, during the period 2.00 and 2.45 pm when the Leppings
       Lane end and the West Stand were not very full, except for the centre
       pen, was the kick-off not put back and the delay broadcast to the
       supporters outside.     You cannot pass 30-40 thousand through the
       turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end in one hour.        At 2 pm I would
       estimate that only 12,000 were in the ground.


       Why was there a 10 per cent reduction in manpower from the previous
       semi-final in 1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end
       could have made a difference, filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end.
       Approximately 980 officers were used for the semi-final in 1988, 1,000
       for the semi-final in 1987 and 1,200 for the semi-final between Wolves
       and Spurs.


       The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure of a
       control room. The staff for control room duties should be from weekly
       leave staff or mornings, as they are used to making decisions under
       pressure.


       ... The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least
       (sic) 2-3 years
       ... various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that
       things were starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was
       taken. Manpower levels were steadily c u t ...


       The decision to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final
       needs to come under some scrutiny.          This man had many         years
       experience of policing big matches at Hillsborough.’.


Although these criticisms are trenchantly expressed they are all matters of opinion
and comment (the underlying factual matters are not necessarily correct); and they
     were all matters which were considered at length in the Inquiry and findings adverse
     to the police made.


     PC 115 Huckstepp
     Omitted was:


            ‘The crush outside the ground could have been better controlled with more
            police officers and a better regulation of the flow of fans ... knowing the
            ground as I do and how the Leppings Lane end fills up it might possibly
            have been better to direct the fans coming in through the open gates into the
            flank areas.’


®   This is a pure statement of opinion, but it might suggest that other methods of
    filtering supporters had been used in the past. However in this case the unamended
    statement was available to the Inquiry and PC Huckstepp was cross-examined on
    this point (Day 15, page 113).


    PC 1669 Walpole
    Omitted was:


             ‘I did not hear any radio message for the central pen to be closed off
            despite this being packed solid.’


    This immediately follows a reference to the central pens being packed solid at
    2.55 pm but the side ones still having plenty of room, which is retained. While the
    deletion can probably be regarded as comment, it does carry with it the implication
    that in the past the centre pens have been closed.


    Inspector White

    A somewhat similar point can be made in the case of an omission from this officer’s
    original statement:
       ‘During the briefing no mention was made about the tunnel gates being used
       to control ingress of the crowd. Although on rare occasions in the past I
       have used the gates nearest the concourses to control flow away from the
       tunnel around to the south pen. I did this only for a few moments merely as
       a psychological support to turn the fans round to the south pen. I would not
       use them for any length of time as when they are in the closed position they
       would be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they would
       have to be opened against the crowd and also because this is the only
       ingress/egress for fans in the central pens to get to the snack bar and toilets.’


PC 1842 Brookes
A similar point arises here; the following passage was omitted:


       ‘Why were the sliding doors at the back of the tunnel not closed at 2.45
       when those sections of the ground were full as at the Manchester United
       match this season. ’


This point however was considered exhaustively at the Inquiry and the finding made
that the tunnel should have been blocked off.


PC 2102 Eustis
Deleted is the following:


       ‘I remember that last year the crush behind the goal was immense and was
       appalled that people would stand being in amongst people so tightly packed.
       Whenever anything happened on the field for example the Liverpool goals
       last year the crowd in the pens below us at Leppings Lane just became a sea
       of waves the crowd from behind pushing forward time and again to create
       waves of people. I passed comment to fellow officers last year about how
       glad I was not to be in amongst the crowd.’
Although this statement is to some extent at variance with other evidence about
1988, it is a factual statement.


PS Crawford
Omitted is the following:


           ‘I personally thought we were very light on manpower at this end compared
           with previous years.


           I have worked this end of the ground either outside the turnstiles, inside
           searching or in the West Stand for several years at Cup ties, FA Cup Semi-
           Finals and league matches with a lot more manpower. In fact I have seen
           more manpower at this end during league matches. Normally we have had
           a serial at the centre tunnel to direct fans to the North or South pens when
           the Centre pens had been filled. This was not the case at this match and
           several of my serial remarked on this.’


His personal feelings may be irrelevant, but his past experience is not.


PC 2302 Powell
Referring to the position in Leppings Lane at 2.45 pm, the following passage is
omitted:


       ‘The first thing I said was, “Where are all the bobbies, there’s hardly
       anybody there”.       I saw numerous people climbing over the tops of the
       turnstiles and the few Police Officers that I saw appeared to be doing
       nothing about it. My main observation at this point was the lack of Police
       presence. I couldn’t understand how such a large crowd could have possibly
       gathered.      I recall in previous games there was usually a large Police
       presence concentrated on this part of the ground usually forming some sort
       of cordon. ’
Although this passage contains irrelevant matter relating to his own feelings, the
reference to a cordon on previous occasions is factual. This was an important issue
at the Inquiry and Lord Taylor made an adverse finding about it.
