                                                             Parly No. J 02903




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON WEDNESDAY
12 MAY 1999



Mrs Claire Curtis-Thomas (Crosby): To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, if he will index and catalogue the evidence placed in
the House of Lords Library which was provided to the inquiry into the
Hillsborough Disaster.




DRAFT REPLY


Any cataloguing of the material it holds is a matter for the Library itself. My
reply to the Question from the Rt. hon. Member for Birkenhead on 20 April
1999 (Official Report, column 486) listed the categories of evidence placed in
the Library. The South Yorkshire Police included an index, which listed the
officer’s name and the individual reference number for each statement, with
the police statements themselves.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90218# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE


Claire Curtis-Thomas’ Question refers to the material from Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster which was placed in the
House Library following the report of the scrutiny.


2.     We have already set out the categories of material copied to the
Library in reply to a Question from Frank Field on 20 April (Hansard
attached). The bulk of the material is made up of police statements and,
although the police indexed the statements for their purposes and the lists
were enclosed with the statements, we understand from the Library that the
material is stored and catalogued there as several large boxes of material. It,
therefore, requires some effort to sort through the papers, particularly if one
wishes to compare original statements with those which were later amended.
This appears to be the reason behind Mrs Curtis-Thomas’ Question, although
it is difficult to see how to improve the position unless the Library itself breaks
the material down more and catalogues and stores the statements on an
individual basis.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90218# 1
The altering of police evidence

Is it fight that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A num ber o f statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny considered this m atter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. H e is satisfied that the procedure was
legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcom e o f the Taylor Inquiry, the
Inquest or the conclusions o f the D irector o f Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events o f 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections o f the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently subm itted to the force solicitors to advise w hether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority o f cases, no recom m endations were made
on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to rem ove comment,
hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recom m ended some am endments o f a
similar nature, w ithout reference to the solicitors.

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated this m atter thoroughly. H e did n o t criticise the procedure
followed, but there were several statements where he believes it would have been
preferable for the am endm ents n o t to have been made, because w hat was rem oved was
either factual or com m ent where factual matters were implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry w ere aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did n o t materially affect the outcom e o f the Inquiry or
other proceedings.
