   HOME SECRETARY’S MEETING




Time 1 \ '. ^ D   cvaaa.



Date


Place      (&AC(
Subject


Present    k*r   A (a A o 4
           Aaa, kcixxyrK




l?aiW                            ^
 /U fa ?    , HVm     a iw    ' , CW-
From:      Colin Harnett                                      Mr Michael
           PS/Home Secretary                                  Mr Howarth
           0171 273 4602                                      Mr O'Brien
                                                              Permanent Secretary
                                                              Mr Boys Smith
           19 May 1997                                        Mr Halliday
                                                              Miss Loudon, PPD, PTU
                                                              Miss Weston, LAB
                                                              Mr Evans, ABCU
                                                              Mr P Edmundson, OPPU
                                                              Mr Granatt
                                                              Mr Warner
                                                              Mr Owen




Mr Puah. OPPU



HILLSBOROUGH

The Home Secretary and Mr Michael have seen your submission of 8 May. The
Home Secretary has asked me to express his gratitude to officials for the very
thorough way in which they have examined this matter.

2.      The Home Secretary's view is that there w ill have to be some independent
examination of the "new" evidence. Ministers consider that the matter simply
w ill not be resolved otherwise. The Home Secretary adds that we w ill need a
respected judge to conduct this examination rather than a senior member of the
Bar.

3.      The next steps are therefore as follows:

        there will be a meeting between Ministers and officials to discuss the
        terms of reference, handling with colleagues and presentation of the
        judicial examination:

        the Home Secretary is minded to meet Mr McBride, the producer of the
        "Hillsborough" programme;

        there.will be a meeting with Merseyside MPs and the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group;

        the Home Secretary w ill make a statement to the House.



12091-ch
       4.     We w ill be in touch to arrange the handling meeting. In the
       meantime, I would be grateful if you could offer early advice on the terms
       of reference, etc for the examination as a basis for discussion at that
       meeting.




                                COLIN HARNETT




12091-ch
  E .R .                                                                          ftlk i'c

                                                                                    o)
                                                                             n -        is    h




                  fl I L L S          6 0 ^ 0 0




             f LjU           S^-X                 __                              ^ylA^A.


         '0 ^ 1      1       ^ ? < ~ -J i          fu s A - . )      rj          < S ff< -r-C ^



                             Lj                          ^WV-v            fr ^


M       0 &                  —            I                       o>ljv>            CIP^^k X


'JlA-        ^ <X^-*-n              <f.           ^ ^             £ £>w )


//^i-L rC (jV            -                    J            S      icA ^                   S,<^jV-A_oC


         ^-e > K > u > C                  Ca J U U ^                       A-a^                     f
         ^        l* J            dUrCo           fJ V      u /u _ >        f.


                                                                                           P t <>
                                                                                                  •
                                                                   <JJC/G_Cv~ J v^w J

                                                                    ^
                                                                                           (rC O ^ /-<_
                                                                    lv T ^ 7
                                                                                                 C\a-
                                                                   U -



                                                               ))
                i^ ( k          L jkS)          >1U X a .
                                               jC                                   Cv    U0-Ov-A '



G^y                      c>J        J l^ ~ ^
                                    <                                                     u jA ,

AlUvA J K T I                  CW         /KjC^Ju»w-j                     c l^ A                      'j «vv
$->-£_         /Vj^jw^JLj®^.             'K         fc>'-\r-'C«.                                        &J


(                                  J' c^dl x^y                     c fj            4cx_    r3 T ^ J L        •




JVX^aX j r                     j                    /K~JK^J                          ^          c j^ ^ v a /


    K
    J t>^ -^        t/v-e^O              o^-«k.                                             ^


                                    (b o A ^           H cXe-^: I
E .R .


                                    T ^ n -o *

                         Ov^




         J   o   .


                                                         CAA.




                                                                O   w   -   A




                 '   / / , p ju .        yA                     ■f'-*~




                                            I yy
                                                   57.
                                                     7 ?
E .R .




                     «U_               vv^^V ,               —    *j       ^

                                 ' J '^ -
                                                     (b-     ^    /0 ^
                                            errv .         i _ * Ww> "  >s
                                                                       /TJ (^ v
                                                            «—■£■—\XAyv. /'>£r-s/V^V>|
          «->A''»^ vr-'Af c«^e_ r~>»-o*-\vJ *-«^           o fC ^V '^v.V ^ f
                         AT ( V - ^ N ' ^
         (jNjl-<iVJs>s^A*^/ <

         T, * U -* ^      ^                  ^
          .'       « -< w v              <=w* ^ 0 ' - ^ - < ^ ' rv' 1
                                 ~     _ _ *x , ~ v -^ - * ^                              «




               0                        -     I >■—0 " ^         r-HAjsu
              ^                J - fC w - l,
              ^          Aw^-Oo, M —
                    U    / ( ^     ~ '< -                              , *
                                  "•A/S r
              n ~ J r , ^ J b ' - , « V 'K
                      *          ^ f*wv V              *) ~v'~Vv----       C          ^
                   > j^ r> u   <^>w-           oNsr^|-P <^n            U       ^ ’- a V       w   ^
CT)                      n * ~ 7
      Kj>V> ,   » X ~ - T.<=>-




O X     I '?
                                                                                       0
                                                        c
                                                                   cc     Ministers
                                                                          Special Advisors


                                                                                13 May 1997




Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

You asked for my views on the subject of Hillsborough and I’ve reflected on it further in the
light of yesterday’s discussion.

As the subject has been under such scrutiny in the public eye for so long, I think it is
important to “lance the boil”. Appearing to limit the scope of the inquiry might even increase
the pressure, rather than solving the problem - when we need to enable people to feel content
that they can draw a line under the whole tragic event.

If you ask a judge to look at all the evidence, he should also invite new evidence and allow
for the possibility of (public?) hearings in respect of new evidence if appropriate.

This need not delay the whole review of coroner’s inquiries and public enquiries which
Gareth Williams suggested and which I strongly support.




                                   /ALUN MICHAEL
                             (Dictated by the Minister of State
                                 and signed in his absence)




JPf 128,AM
From: Gus Park
      PS/Mr O'Brien
      Room 769, QAG
      273 2742
      9 May 1997




1.    M r M ic h ^ j/ $ < ^   £*      4^
2.    Home Secretary



HILLSBOROUGH


Mr O'Brien has seen Mr Pugh's submission of 8 May 1997 and has made
the following comments:

     "Justice should be seen to be done after a tragedy such as this.
     Even allowing the Inquiry to hear publicly only new evidence and
     comments'on it would be appreciated in Liverpool. We could brief
     the press when we reopen it that our view is that the evidence is
     inconclusive, without prejudging the outcome."




                                   GUS PARK
                                                                               J-€yrOrU^-j
From: Paul Pugh                                 cc:       ~Sir"Richard Wilson
      Head o f Operational                                  Mr Boys Smith
      Policing Policy Unit                                  Mr Halliday
      Room 529                                              Miss Loudon f P b , P T \J
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                     Miss Weston ^
      Tel: 0171-273-3141                                    Mr REvans % fS f i C O
      8 May 1997                                        s ' Mr Granatt
                                                      ( . M r P Edmundson ^ O P P u
                                                          A ir Warner
                                                            Mr Owen




1. Mr Micha
                                                                  CStH
2. Home Secretary
                                                                     •v5
HILLSBOROUGH


Issue
In December a Granada television dramatisation of the Hillsborough disaster
claimed that there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the disaster. Since
then further claims have been made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
supported by local MPs and others. This submission assesses the case for a new
public inquiry; and considers whether you should make and announce a decision.

Timing

 2.    There is no firm deadline for your decision, but the outcome is awaited with
 keen interest by those involved.

 Summary and Recommendation

 3.    After the Granada programme we asked Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
 South Yorkshire Police, to provide a full report on the claims made in the
 programme. We have examined that report and the transcripts supplied by South
 Yorkshire Police, watched the video film which Granada suggested might be new
 evidence, and examined the video tapes produced by the Hillsborough Family
 Support Group. Our assessment is that there arej i o grounds for establishing a new
 public inquiry The material has also been considered bythe~DPP, and by th e
 Attorney General’s Office. None of those who have examined it consider that there is
 evidence to justify a new public inquiry, a reopening of the inquest, or the
 prosecution of individuals. But a decision not to reopen the inquiry would be a
 severe blow to the Hillsborough Family Support Groupj__whQ .believe firmlyjthatlhey
 have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice. You may therefore wish to

                                    S E C K V E T - S M M 1997
 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pAdoc
                                                                                          #


consider whether the recent representations should be further considered by officials
or independently examined. This is further discussed in paragraphs 28 and 29.

Background
4.     The Hillsborough disaster happened on 15 April 1989; 95 people died as a
result of overcrowding and crushing. There have been four separate investigations
or reviews of what happened: a public inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor; the
coroner’s inquest into each of the deaths; an investigation into police conduct
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority; and a judicial review of the verdict of
the inquest.

5.     The Taylor Inquiry was set up by the then Home Secretary immediately after
the disaster. The terms of reference were to inquire into the events and to make
recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
The Inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and received some 71 hours of video evidence from different
sources. Lord Justice Taylor published an interim report in August 1989 which set
out the causes of the disaster. He found that there were a number of causes:

          (i)         The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut
                      off access to the central pens which were already too full.

          (ii)        They were already too full becausej o - safe maximum capacities had
                     J>een laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual
                      pens^numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
                      crowd density.

          (iii)       When an influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers
                      thece^afforded less protection than they shouffi have ^
                      barrier collapsed.                                          ~—

           (iv)       The need to open gate C was because of dangerojiSLCQngestion at the
                      turnstiles. That occurred because, as both the club and police should
                     iiave^ealTsed, the turnstile area could not cope easily with the numbers
                      unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The police had
                      failed to draw up plans about how they would control large numbers
                       should they arrive in a short period.

           (v)         The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much
                       aggravated the problem, as did the Sheffield Wednesday football
                       club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.

6.     He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person, but put a significant
portion of the blame for the disaster at the door of the police: ‘... the main reason for
the disaster was the failure of police control.’ (paragraph 278, interim report).




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                              2
 #
     7.     He made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January 1990
     made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken place
     since then in safety at sports grounds and in the policing of football matches have
     been based largely on those recommendations.

     8.     The second investigation was tfee inquesUnto the deaths conducted by the
     coroner for the western district of South Yorkshire. The purpose of an inquest, as
     determined by the Coroner’s Rules, is to establish the identity of the deceased; the
     place of death; the time and date of death; and how the deceased came by their
     deaths. The inquest jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for
     the Hillsborough victims was accidental death.

     9.      The third investigation was conducted by West Midlands Police, supervised
     by the PoncrCgmplaintrAuffionty, to establish whether there were any grounds for
     criminal proceedings. The investigation also considered whether any police officer
     should be subject to disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking^
 \_ of qver 5000 statem ents, and scrutiny o talLtha-material which had previougtybeeri
     examined: The evidence was sent to the DPP, who concluded that no person
    “should be subject to criminal proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided
     that the senior officers in charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
     Superintendent^ Murray should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
     Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health in advance of a disciplinary ruling. The
j    PCA later announced that disciplinary proceedings against Murray would be
     withdrawn because the retirement of Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a
     joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
     senior officer. Murray later left the police service.

     10.     The fourth investigation was a judicial review o f the coroner’s
     proceedings. An application was made on "the grounds that the coroner wrongly
   ‘ failed to direct the jury about the verdict of lack of care or accidental death due to or
     aggravated by lack of care relating to the negligence of the police which caused the
  r disaster; that the coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care by the
     emergency services, including the police, and wrongly insisted on a cuLofLpoiot-of
 I J3ul5pm for the evidence, given that there was evidence that at least one of the
     victims was alive-after 3/L5prn; and that pressure has jaeen put on two witnesses jo
     retract their evidence about those signs of life. Having considered the conduct of
     the inquest, the divisional court ruled that none of the procedural o rtechnical points
     raised justified the nnijrt’s4ntervention. In particular, thedh/istonarcouil found that
     the cut off point of 3.15pmwas reasonable, and that the coroner’s directions to the
     jury were impeccable.

     Recent allegations

     11.   The programme “Hillsborough" was a drama documentary which followed
     three families through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme
     claimed that it uncovered new evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The
     programme was followed by an adjournment debate, instigated by Peter Kilfoyle, on
     17 December. Mr Howard in response said that he would consider all the


     f:\oppu\houVlongsub\ppO 167pd.doc                                                      3
                                                                                          #

representations and that        I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a
decision to re-open the inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the
public interest to do so. The charge has been made - it is one that I will consider
carefully - that there has been a cover up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
I shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that
evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or the
Coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would
have been different.’ (Hansard, cols. 861-2).Thej?rogramme makers, the bereaved
families, local MPs, David Sheppard, the Bishop ofTiyerpoolT and the Daily Mirror
have since been am pngJho^jM flihg for the inquiry to be reopened. The issue has
generated 48 Ministers’ cases and 12 5 7 e fte ^                         all but one of which
have been in favour of a fresh inquiry, plus about 700 printed cards supporting the
request.                                  *■--------------------------- -— —--------------

12.   There have been three broad categories of evidence put forward in recent
months:

• ten allegedly "unresolved questions” identified in the Granada programme;

• other issues arising from the programme;

• further allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
  opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, that in his view “these
  new pieces of evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


The ten “unresolved questions”

13.    The chief constable has provided a detailed response to each question and
pointed to the recommendations that TavloE-made in respect of each of the
questions. This is at Annex A - we have not included the supporting transcripts but
these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to consider
whether the Taylor inquiry reached the “right” conclusion - nor have we pursued
every possibte point of detail. We have sought to establish whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised; and whether the evidence put forward in
recent months wayavMabFe at the time of the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that
none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases not only did the Taylor inquiry consider the
questions^buTmade specific recommendations as a result.

Other allegation?

14.    Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press
release they took the form of loosely connected questions which suggested, though
did not overtly assert, that there had been a police cover-up. We also met members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it
became clear that whilst their allegations were similar to those implied by Granada
they took a more extreme form. The families firmly believe that there was a


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppOI 67pd.doc
                                                                                              4
conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midlands Police, who conducted the
investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role of the police in
the disaster. The families feel that, as a result of this conspiracy, evidence was,
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case of
the inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict of accidental death when a more
fitting verdictwould have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.

15     The Dolice were reluctant to accept any blame in the months after the
disaster, and werecriticiseTbv Tavlor for that, although they have since accepter
theirrespfmslhlnty. We have seenT however, a continuing degree of defensiveness
from some South Yorkshire officers. It impossible to understand why the families
have come to the view that they have.

16.    There are two main strands to the case put forward by the Hillsborough
families and by Granada: first questions surrounding the video tapes; and secondly
the questions surrounding medical testimony - although the latter are more directly
relevant to calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry. Detailed consideration
of specific points is at Annex B. The Chief Constable's assessment is at Annex C.
The opinion obtained by the Family Support Group from Mr Alun Jones QC is at
Annex D.

The “missing” video tapes

 17     Many of the pllegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by
 South Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of
 misunderstandings. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in
 their entirety; if these hadljeen made available aTtheoutset some of the concerns
 whicfTare now being expressed might have not have arisen.

 18.     There is confusion about two events. One set of tapes was_sM en_Qn the night
 of the disaster Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police
 control centre within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had a video
 recording facility in a separate recording suite; this was under the supervision of the
 Club and thejjplice had no control of its operation. ^Quring the night of the disaster
 two video tapes went missing from that particular room^BTe~dis(X)very of the theft
 v ^ re t^e c ^^ ^a ^n rr^e 'a n d West KMands^Police made enquiries to trace the
 person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are, still miSSing.-Qne of the
 tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown the turnstiles
 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Neither would have given a view of the
 terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were
 probably stolen by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police
 believed to be^am aglhg.^buth Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a
 key to the room and that they considered one motive for the theft could have been
 that the tapes could have shown irregularities in the way that admissions were
  handled at the turnstiles that could have implicated club employees. Ih ^e m js s in g
 tapes have been confused by some commentators, though not the families, with the
  video tapes hetd by South Yorkshire Police.                      ~



 f:\oppu\houMongsub\ppO 167pAdoc                                                       5
                                                                                        #



The police videos

 19.   Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South
Yorkshire Police might represeoLnewjria te ria l which had__npt been seen by the
Jaylor inquiry. South Yorkshire have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that
for the most part they are of no consequence showing ^ enecaLviews of the stadium
and surroundings. In the fi f^ l^ fh o u T b e fo re lh e disasteroccurred the recording is
armost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside the turnstiles. It does not show the
gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove therefore that the police
knew the extent of the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot be said to
represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability of the police, by showing
the extent of the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate
how it was that Duckenfield came to lose sight of what was happening elsewhere.

20.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that it was withheld because ITshowecT
tl^ t W e of th ^p M ^ca m e ra s - number 5 - was working when the police asserted
in evidence to Taylor and to the inquest that it was not. The significance of this
camera was that It could'Mve been used to zoom in on the central pens to show the
extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is, clear that the video evidence,
including a detailed transcript of its contents, was made available to Taylor. The
inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself given rise
to allegations which are discussed in Annex B.

21.    The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a ('~ )
matter of interpretation. The families believe that PC Bichard, the police video”
operator, misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our reading of the transcripts
suggests that he claimed the camera was not working very well; this continues to be
the police view. This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward bYJtha-police; we do not seeliny evidence that pictures from camera 5 were~
any less clear than those from anv of the other cameras. But we do not believe that
thisdivergence of view is significant.

Medical evidence and the inquest verdict

22.     The question of a fresh inquest is in law a matter for the Attorney General.
Under the Coroners’ Act 1988 the Attorney’s consent is required for an application to
the courts to order a fresh inquest. The families have also appealed to the Attorney
General to recommend a new inquest, proffering the testimony of Dr Ed Walker. He
claimed in an article in Hospital Doctor that he tended Philip Hammond whom he
says was alive after 3.15. Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. In
it, Dr Walker said of a boy whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:

           “Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He
           was of a similar age (around 12- 14 years) with blond hair. He was also in
           Cardiopulnlonary^/arrest. I I ntubated him and noticed evidence of gross
           inhalaSorTof stomach contents. He also had marked gaseous abdominal


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pAdoc
                                                                                         6
*            distension possibly indicating that he had has mouth to mouth resuscitation at
             some time.

             I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was
             also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and
             dilated throughout, and I believe he has since died.”

The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear
whether there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty, did not appear
at the time to contradict the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims
were effectively dead by 3.15. Dr Walker was_not called to give evidenGe to^he
inquest because the consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a
composite picture.

 23.    Although the Attorney is bound to consider anyJfflsh_aEplicatiqns for a new
 inquest, evidence that som eottha-deceased rng^have sundvedJ3eyondJ^15Jias^
Jiot been considered sufficient qrou n d s^ to jSQ penjthe inquegtsjnjhg_past. Jn the
Judicial review ofthe coroner’s decisiorTin NovembeF 199371-ord Justice McCowan
 found that in respect of one of the victims there was “a realistic probability - he was
 alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:           ~

              «I have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest or for merely
              quashing the existing verdict.

              If I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following
              matters would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose of a fresh
              inquest? To get a verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already
              been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault and
              paid compensation. To get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see
              no evidence to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
              all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination of the last
              minutes of their lives. I doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
              process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers of witnesses
              and lasting if       fnr            fnr not far short Moreover;T irrespective of
               whos^ fa u lt, if anyone’s, it is , the fa ^ is lh a T fo u i^ a r^ a h alf years have
              already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion of
              a mere quashing of the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would
              regard that as absolutely valueless”.

  24.     We hPiiAVA that overturning the inquest verdict is what the families most
  desire. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lostlwoTeenage daughters, amTMr Philip"
  Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster. They agreed that
  Taylor had done a aood.iob, though they maintained thatthere were aspects of the
f inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
  ing u e si verdict to be_a__gipssl£pjscarriage of justice. They strongly criticised the
  coroner’s selection of witnesses asweiT as the cut off time of 3.15 after which he
  would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce a finding
  of death through “lack of care" or “unlawful killing”. It appears therefore that their call


    f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pAdoc
                                                                                               #
       for a fresh inquiry is not so much an end in itself but a means by which they hope
       that the Attorney would consent to an application to reopen the inquest, or failing
       that, a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there
       were to be a change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure
       from the families on the Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges.

       Criminal charges
       25.     The question of prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he
       announced in September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute
       anyone in respect of the disaster. The CPS _Code-oi-Braciice sets out j he_ I
       circumstances when decisions to prosecute can be reconsidered. This includes /
       cases where there is new evidence, but thlT CPS stress that there needs to be a
       high threshold in such cases because of the principle of finality - that people should
       be able to rely on their decisions. Although new evidence could trigger a
       prosecution, the CPS have found no evidence in the recent repre~senfatlons of any
      ^ronac[oina~that would in their view justify-criminal charges. The most they believe
       thatthey have found is thatPCBichard regarded the quality of the video recordings
       less favourably than the Sheffield Wednesday video technician, Mr Houldsworth. A
       report is currently under consideration by the DPP herself; the firm recommendation
       is that the criminal investigations should not be re-opened.

       Police disciplinary charges

       26.    A further cause for bitterness among the families is that no disciplinary
       charges were upheld against any members of the police. In addition to Duckenfield
       and Murray, air other officers involved in the case have left the force 'with the
       exception of PC Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it might be argued
       that BichardVtestimony Tnayliave demorisffatecT a gloss favourable to the police
       position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short of being involved in a cover-up of the
       kindj>uggested by the families.

       Conclusipn
                       *   - «■= :


       27.    Our assessment is that there is no evidence to suggest that it would be in the
       public interest to establish a new public inquiry.

          28.    We recognise, however, that there is no likelihood that the families will
'         accept a-Home-Office assessment that there is no new evidet^e; ffiey wou Id see
          such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
      / I We have considered how to demonstrate objectivity and fairness. One option would
    v be to secure an indgpenderrTassessment o f aH ffTie^ m                         has been
    \ submitiecPn receht months. You may wish to consider asking a respected barrister
          or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
     I that has been compiled. This could be a limited exercise; but he or she could look
     | once more at the evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider
          written representations. That would only go half way towards the full public re-



       f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc                                                         8
examination of events which the families want, so would not fully meet their
concerns.

29.    A further disadvantage is that it would keep the families’ hopes alive without
real justification. I would feel happier about an independent external review if I felt
that there were anything in the representations which, if substantiated, might
suggest that it would be in the public interest to convene a further public inquiry or
that such an inquiry might achieve more than the previous investigations. But we
have seen no such evidence. On balance, I would advise you to announce a
decision now that you do not intend to establish a new inquiry.

Handling
30.     You may want to discuss the issues. Whatever decision you reach we will
need to prepare carefully for the handling of an announcement, and we will put up a
further submission at the appropriate time discussing the handling in detail. We will
need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be done,
there are a number of separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning of the
announcement, and the families who have made direct representations. We will
also need to take account of the separate roles of the DPP and theAttorney jn
 crtngiHpring the grounds for criminal proceedings or a fresh inquest. Their distinct
 statutory responsibilities mean that they may want to announce their decisions
 separately.




                                     PAUL PUGH




 f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pAdoc                                                          9
                                   mbs Chief Snjerlntendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a major
                               Sant-final cnly 21 days before the game, when he wbs         relatively
                               inexperienced at policing matches?


f         •
                           1   Mole 1-2, Duckenfield 3-4, Jackson 5-6




f                          2
                               Vfcy were there no barriers or ccrdcne to filter the crowd and prevent a
                                 build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the grcuid if, as the fens
                               insist, there were the previous year?

                               Duckenfield 7-11, Jackson 12-13, Marshall 14-15


(                              V*jy was the game not delayed, as a nuriber of police officers thought it
                               fihr»ilri have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to

                           3   get all the Liverpool flans safely into the ground before the 3 pn kick-
                               off?
                               Duckenfield 16-31, Murray 32-39. Bichard 40-41_________ ____________

f                              Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace
                                when eye witnesses, including football ccmnentatcr John Motscn, were


r                          4   aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?
                               Duckenfield 42-52



                               Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
                           C   Adi, the procedure adapted at the previous year's Semi-Final?
                               Duckenfield 53-66. Crawford 67-77, Marshall 78-79


(                              • Viy did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mlRleal the Secretary of the fK
                                ty telling him that flans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew he

                           6    had given the order for it to be opened?

                               Duckenfield 80-92, Murray 93-95, Crawford 96, Bichard 97-101,
                               Jackscn 102-103

                               fchy did it trim i an hour after the first crushing began to pull dam the
                               10 foot spiked fence Which trapped the flans, and why were the gates Which
    i.
                           7   led an to the pitch too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?

                               Duckenfield 104-108, Seaman 109-115, Hopkins 116-118, Eastwood 119-125,
                               Murray 126-129, Taylor 127, Bichard 130/1, \Jackson 132/4, Calvert 135-137
    i
                               fchy was no public address amomcement made - either informing the fens
                               as to itet was happening, asking for their help or for any medical
                               personnel at the ground to help - until 3*30 pit?
                               Duckenfield 138-143, Jackson 144-148



                               Why, t&en 42 a±ulances readied the ground, did more not get an to the
                               pitch Where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained
                               medical help?

    i                          SYMAS 149, Hopkins 150-152, Higgins 153-154, Eason 155-156



                                 Why did cnly 14 of those Who died go to hospital?
         U niversal
         OFFICE SUPPLIES
         UDIV110C
                           10    Higgins 157-159
                          QUESTION                  ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?

Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Supenntendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre. Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2
                *

Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report
275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also*brief himself.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report
 215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
 He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
 outside the ground. He has. if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
 off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
 tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
 special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
 come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
 adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
  policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such function* should be the subject
  of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
  Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                                                                                          o




                           QUESTION                 TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience, intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions m the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would anse where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 7-15. Volume 2.

                *
Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 46
46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                        QUESTION                 THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?

Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
pitch, the option to delay became more difficult Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 16-41, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been dear in the
control room.

227. Thejaith was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of tans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29
29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it
                                                                            c m 3,



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer m
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration m
deciding whether to exercise it.
                                                                                            t




                          QUESTION                  FOUR

Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4. Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings
Lane.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 42 • 52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.
         —*

245. The 20 officers detailed to the penmeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
                                                                           Q         r\' c/v\




 unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule requirea
 consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

 247. “Senior officer meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher The Inspector m
 charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
 players* tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said.

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I’d then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were dearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed. They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


Lord Justice Taylor « Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding interim
recommendation S. That provided:*

  *5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the dub is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area‘s maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 11,12 and 16
11 There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the dub and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and m
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.
12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the dub is monitoring
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.
16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
espedally those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress- and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                                                                                         "V




                        QUESTION                 FIVE

Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?

The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent DuckenfielcI did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.
The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to hi* attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down centfal tunnel.
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened. radio on talk through,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to dose tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was dosed at 2.3S pm, possibly because central pens fun.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS
Please see pages 53 • 79, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
231. Planning apart, however, it should have been dear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be dosed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
 have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

 9.   Arrangements should be made:*
 (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
 maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
 either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
 otherwise, and
  (b) to dose off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capadty is
  about to be reached.
                                                                                              \0




                           QUESTION                  SI X

Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
 he believed correct in a crisis moment.
Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

 Please see pages 80 -103, Volume 2.


 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
 98 At about 3.15 pm. Mr Graham Kelly. Chief Executive of the FA. Mr Kirton also of
 the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell. Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
 controUoom for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
 and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
 mere had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
  screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
  that's been forced: there’s been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
  later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans’
  account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had forced
  their way in.
 99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
 Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
 three dubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
 likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
 want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
  emergency operations.
                       QUESTION                   SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.
Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
indude the perimeter gates.
Mr Hopkins SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which indudes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the lask in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehide that
could have helped, they would have used it.
Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the penmeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not The treasury counsel stated ”A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capadty. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, rightly or wrongly, had been a consdous and
deliberate dedsion of the certifying authonty and they dedded that the gates should
 be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
 decision to leave the gates.
 Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
 first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the acddent unit was directed but
 would have to travel some distance, if it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
 been at ground very very quickly
 Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson's statement "that anyone who had
 considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
 realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
 point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
 lot of persuasion about that".
 When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
 Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bnng cutting
 equipment.
                                                                         Q


•
    Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
    request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
    the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Sen/ice.

    The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
    access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
    the number he had wanted to bring out.

    Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
    however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
    into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
    which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
    away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
    ’Breakin-Kif on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
    not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

    The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
    evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
    used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
    were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement1. The certifying authority issued
    a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
    should have been.


    OBSERVATIONS .
    Please see pagei 104-137, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


    Gates
    258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
    intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
    emergency The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but for
    exampiertfie collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
    had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
    since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
     brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
    empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
     If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
     alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
     radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
     that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
     minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
     available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

     264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
     standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
     spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
     number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Or Eastwood, the
Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing stnctly^i
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to alt those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was. that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes


Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i0 pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

 104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying vjctims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.


Lord Justice Taylor • Final Report

Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds “be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
                                                                                   " t

                                                             G^\a-Ba “VS crw


Cutting Equipment
205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, Irecommended that suitable and
sufficientcuttingequipment should be provided to enable spectators tobe released
frombehindperimeterfencing. Assumingtherecommended maximum capacitiesare
observed that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked’cuttingequipmentshouldnotbe necessary. Something m theseprovisions
would have togo badlywrong forsuch equipment tobe required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseenemergency.

Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 17 and 21
17 Theremustbe providedinany perimeterfenceofa pen orotherself-contained
area sufficientgatesofa minimum widthof1.1 metres toenablethatpen orarea to
be evacuated onto the pitchinthetime prescribed foran emergency evacuation of
thatpenorarea.
21 Suitableand sufficientcuttingequipmentshouldbe providedbytheclubateach
groundwherethereareperimeterfencestopermittheimmediate removal ofenough
fencingtoreleasenumbersofspectatorsifnecessary. Agreement shouldbe reached
astowhethertheequipment should be used by police,thefirebrigadeorstewards.
Whoever isto use itshould be trained to do so. Whether to use itshould be a
 decisionofanominatedseniorpoliceofficerattheground.
                                                                                  #
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made • either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help • until 3.30 pm?

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to dear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.
The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS
              *
Please see pages 138 - 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence dose to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minuter ticked past some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

 Fans
 97. Apart from the message to dear the pitch and the belated call for medical
 assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
 address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
 attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
 given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
 close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
                                                                        (   j   ^   vaJ   Z S ^   o v a   V"




the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end.
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 57
Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                                                                                              n


                          QUESTION                 NI NE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
need of trained medical help?

The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation.

Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
egress to the playing area.

Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
the pitch.

Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken oy Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.                                       *

The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.


OBSERVATIONS
Please $ee pages 149 >156, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report
296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambutances did not
arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
proved to be wrong in atl three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that H was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down.
The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69
64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
attendance.
65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should employ d medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with
any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.

   (b)    At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
those in th j police control room.
67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
of 5,000 or more.
68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

 69. A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
 match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                                                                 1‘1
                                                                         \j^P ± f t   uw    VO



                           QUESTION                  TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?

Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.
In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

 Please see pages 157 -159, Volume 2.
         ^*
 Lord Justice Taylor - interim Report
 296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
 response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
 attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
 did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
 He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
 on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
 equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
 of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
 whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
 The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
 overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is dear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
                                                                                            JU




                                                                            ANNEX B

Questions raised bv Granada and the families

The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably
to dissuade the inquiry from watching the tape) while the video technician Mr
Houldsworth testified that he had repaired the fault~on the c a t^ a trained on
the LeppingsXane end of the pitch and it was working perfectly.

This is seen to be a crucial issue bv the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an
affidavit to this effect. On the day of the match there were five cameras scanning
the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording
machines, which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the
officer controlling the video made a decision to record. PC Bichard who controlled
the videoing procedure explained in his testimony that one of the cameras had not
heerr wortfing wail hi it added~“ the quality has bsen improved- It was not upJoJtie
mark but it wgs aJhf better than it had been . We were petting pictures that is the        |j
 best way of describing it." Therefore it is not true to say thaftheTaylor inquiry was
 lecfld believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective that they were not
 worth viewing.

In cross examination during the inquest PC Bichard maintained his view that the
camera was defective and that whist it could z o o n n n -it-was--not possibleto
distinguish faciaTexpressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and
cannot distinguish any material difference in the quality of the recording which came
from camera 5 to that coming from the other cameras. This does not prove that there
was not a quality difference discernible to the police in the control box on the day. It
couRTBe arguetf though that PCTElchard was putting a gloss on the evidence in a
way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In that he was not alone.
Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the wa ^th a t officers had been
defensive and-evasive.
      ,    —-'   "N                 /'
The inquest jury andjhe inquiry afliy had the police a c c o u n t of what could be
seen from the police control box on that davjandjthe capabilities of the video
system. The faulty camera was never challenged.

 South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that wera-tbe-product of Ibeir
^recording as^ x pi^ned above. For most of the tape,the recorded material shows a
 sequence of 25 second shots from each of the five cameras. PC Bichard testified to
 the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
 record the activity at the turnstiles which is where Duckenfield considered at the time
 that the trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is
 mainlv of this area. Later parts of the footage coyer what was happening inside the
 around. A full schedule of the video footage ^rid the T a p e r themselves were
 available to tlie Taylbr inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers
  representing the families at the time of the inquest.


                                                                                      in
South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at
these tapes. The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by
West Midlands Police and contained the most relevant footage of the disaster taken
fronrTlfvangty~of--gources, including material from the BBC, from the underwater
search team who had hand held camcorders as well as from the police monitoring
equipment.

The compilation tape, which was seen by Taylor inquiry, showed the overcrowding
in the central pens. The question of whether the camera could have zoomed in nn
the crowd is a detail which does not appear to have been an issue to the Taylor
mquiry^TheTine of questioningpursued bylhe inquiry was rather that, whateveFtfie~
police claimed they had or had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem
of overcrowding. This is shown in the transcripts, for example, of Lord Justice
Taylor’s questioning of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

                 Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen
            videos and it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain, is pt] not that by
            2.50 the two wing pens at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas
            the two centre pens, if you won't have them full, were getting on for being full.
            A. Yes sir.                                                                —

          \ Q. You aaree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure
           that there was no further erewdmg-oLpensJl^nd 4. A. That there were not
           more than the number to fit in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

            Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have put those
            pens at full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were
            approaching being full.

          ‘ Q- Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd
            control. There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have
            to cut gff the inflow into those pens. A. Yes sir.”


The report was heavily critical of the police in the detail of the lack of planning and of
the decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for
the disaster:  ~~                           *                                        —

           “It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
           excellent service to the public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively
           and successfully at a large number of football games...Unfortunately their
           policing on 15 April broke down in ways already describedTand aitKough here
           were other causes the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
           control.                                    — — — -------------- —------- -

            In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must
            report that for the most part the quality of their evidence was in inverse


f: 'Oppu\hou\longsub'pp0167pd.doc
         proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables who as
         wtfnpggprwBfB alert, intelliq&nt-and open. By contrast with some notable
         exceptions the senior officers were defenst/Q-ancbevasive. Thmr feelings~QT
         grief and soifovfwere obvious^md genuine . No doubt those feelings were
         intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their
         management . But neither their handling of problems on the day nor their
         account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of
         their rank."

Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that
it w rongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.

This seems to have been an unfortunate misundeistanding. The Hillsborough Family
Support Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy of the material from camera
5 which was shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy of the tape that was
provided. This was indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police
say that the copy which was^ supplied to the iurv which they still have was not badly
duplicated and blurred. Because of the degree of mistrust the families feeTT they did
not question whether the poor quality of the video was for their copy alone but
assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South Yorkshire are sending us a
fresh copy of the version of the video which was seen by the inquest jury.

The com pilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor
material from camera no 5.

This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to
explain the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely
effectively. It does not appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape
covers the run-up to the disaster; the situation looks dangerous; there is evidence of
overcrowding. The most likely reason that material from camera 5 was not used is
that the BBC material was so much better. We do not see any evidence that
particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation tape.


Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.

One of the questions which has been raised in connection with Jhe-renewed calls for
an inquiry was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give_evidence to the Taylor
inquiry. His statement would have been available to the Treasury Counsel who was
acting on behalf of Lord Taylor. The interim reports explains:

           “The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom
           statements were or could have been taken. Nevertheless , I am satisfied that
           they were sufficient in number and in reliability to enable me to make the
           necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from
           presenting an interim report in the required time and would not have added
           significantly to the relevant evidence."



 f nnnmhnuvlonesubtaoO167od.doc                                                      12
 The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up

  The central implication of the Granada programme is that the police were, and




I
 continue to be, involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent of the
 n e p g ^e T T h t5 ~ a tte g ® forcibly made~by the Hillsborough Farniiy~Support
 Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in which he says:


        "One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way in which evidence
        presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South
        Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise
        as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West Midlands
        Police who assisted the coroner."

 This ignores the crucial point that the purpose of an inquest is not to apportion
 blame but to meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three
 limited questions - who the deceased was and when and where he met his death.

  It is certainly true that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the
 extent of his responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly
 unsuccessful in these attempts: criticism was not averted either about his
 involvement or that of South Yorkshire Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord
 Justice Taylor wrote:
                         *
         “It is a matter of regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
         Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at
         fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield under pressure of cross examination
         apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that
         apart the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to
         blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
         crush was not cause by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
         being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to
         whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and
         encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced”.

^||ou|dsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.
^PC Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording of the CCTV cameras was
 inadvertently changed to time lapse mode (producing a series of pictures rather than
 continual motion) probably by him catching the-roachine with his knee when moving
 positions within the control box. Mr Houldsworth stated that it was impossible to
 switch recording modes when the machine is already running and that the relevant
 buttons are so tiny that they aTe unlikely to be caught accidentally. It is hard, though,
 tcTsee any particular significance to this evidence, since the mode was changed
 before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the relevant
 images.

 Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were
 ‘grea!Iy~"enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day.
Houldsworth indicates that the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the
12 inches claimed by Bichard and that the monitors were capable of showing the
same information as shown on the larger screens used at the inquest. Again,
despite Houldsworth’s contradiction of Bichard’s evidence, it is impossible to attach
any significance to what amounts to a difference of opinion.

West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact
that force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime
Squad and Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious
Crime Squad, was appointed as one of the investigation team.

The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, with the approval of the Police Complaints Authority and
Lord Justice Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:

       “It was therefore decided that the investigation of the disaster and the
       gathering of evidence for this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent
       police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands
       Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me;
       he appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge
       of the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both of them”.

The PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction
with the conduct of the investigation.

 The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team would
 have rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr
 Beechey never, in fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position
 may have meant that he had certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the
 Squad. At the time of the Hillsborough tragedy, allegations had been publicised
 aBoutlhe Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14 August 1989 that the Chief
 Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police|o investigate the
 allegations against it.

 Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included.

        • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance._from
          Superintendent Beechey of the West MidlandsnPolice in his conduct
          of the inquest;

        • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken
          Liverpool supporters; and

        • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the
          disaster. The TaylorTnquIry considered the causes of the disaster and
          the inquest dealt with events up to the 3.15 cut-off point. The actions
                             en beyond that point, it is argued therefore, have
          not been publicly examined.
An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the
inquiries he should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons,
including the police. It is entirely a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and
witnesses should be heard.

Although the focus of the Taylor inquiry was on the causes of the disaster, its terms
of reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground
on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
and safety at sports events’. As such it was able to consider fully the actions of the
police and other emergency services at the ground throughout the relevant period.
Sections of the interim report dealt with what happened to deal with the disaster
after it occurred and the response of the emergency services.
           Sou th Yorkshire

           POLICE                                              Richard Wells y/>.\r. .VMtfhrouClMtr.
                                                               C h ie f C o n sta b le
           JUSTICE with COURAGE




Police Policy Directorate                        Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)           Our Ref: D&C/JML/SW CSF 15/97
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                              Date:      3 February 1997
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




 HILLSBOROUGH



 contents of the programme and to conduct further research.




 to provide the documents to you in their present form.

' volume One deals wfth video - d .n o . W « . e r ^ comment "                           Z T n S a T n d
  £ £ « £ . AtecHnttiwe documents arecommen.s from Police C o n su l. Bichard concerning
  the operation of the video cameras in question.




  on whether film from a video camera           °n      Taw|0r innuirv and a copy is enclosed for your
  Inquiry. Such a video film was miade s r t o             * the video record available from police
  information, together with another video                        available to Lord Justice Taylor. You
  sources, that day. The second video, like me f i^ w a s in w k >av*iame » ^                         of
  viuiii cee that thev did not Drov de any useful information to tne maicn coi»"a'luc
  £ dteaster and^te programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.
                                                -2-


Police Policy Directorate                                        3 February 1997


Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
documents provided, at Section Two.

Police Constable Bichard told the Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
available from the camera in question they were of poor quality although the camera was in fact
working.

There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
position. Evidence given by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
focused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the tape
enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several cameras
are used by control room personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record footage
only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclosed
video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question. Where the
reproduction is of poor quality then that is the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
ground. For your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry and included here in their original form) of these particular
tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Please see .Section One in Volume One.

Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes, it
has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for therMlnfster, David MacLean, for
TSiTlhtended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
 repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
 not the police cameras were working. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
 Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
 recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
went missing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
 locked and the alarm set When they returned the next morning the room was still locTC^ with the
 alarm stillarmecT They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
 tapes was of rto\ise whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
 the camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
 th^playing area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
 such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any intem^part of the ground.

Following the discovery of the theft .the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
made enquires to trace the person responsible. To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
that clanTieslhelposition concerning the video tapes.

A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
which he would not take any evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
call a dearly defined cut off time.
                                               -3-


Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.
A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.
Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.


         Vn o

                        vA
                            V >
MAR—
   03—
     B7 >7,** r«ON. BRUCE                           -

                                                                                                       /A m Ni^£
     ^                             The Hillaboroigh fflarf* -Apfil 1989


                                                    Opinion



         Introduction

         1     I an liked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                appropriate leg«l course to follow in the light of A w areas of fresh evidence that
                have come to light recently Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of liverpool
                Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium In Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
                cup wan beginning in April 1989. After a long Inquest, hold in April and May 1990,
                und utw between November 1990 and 2»* March 1991, vcrdicU of accidental death
                wero recorded on the victims.

         2     A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six ofthe
                bereaved fumilies, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest. The main
                complaints or these and the other families were net out in the skeleton argument
                           jn (|y» Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as AflflBl /V
                summsxy form, those main complaints were,

                2.1     The Coroner imposed in arbitrary cut-ofF point in time of 3.15, which had the
                        effect of excluding relevant evidence as to tho faiiwe to implement the “M ^or
                        Disaster Plan** promptly (paragraphs 6 and Th and ftilures to summon the
                        emergency services promptly.

                2.2     The Coroner foiled to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                        o f the 95; lie faiiod therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                        of the victims were «iive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                        medics! attention (paragraphs S i to S.12, and 7)

                 2.3    The Coroner dewtcd an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages o f his
                        summing-up on the subjcct, to the unsubetaatiated allegation that many of the
                        Liverpool supporters were under the influence o fdrink. The ropott by Lord
                        Taylor, which was *eveioly critical o f the police, had ruled out tho
                        consumption of alcohol as a cause o f the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

                 2.4    ThetCoroner exhibited W*»tow«rda the South Ywkahite authorities labia
                        sclcction o f evidence and treatment o f witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                 2.5    The Coroner foiled to leave the jury with any substantial tank to perform, in
                        directing (hem that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                        and unlawful killing.




                                                         I
M A 8-B 3-6 7   1 f ■ B2   F H O H > BRUCE   CAMPBELL   CO               ID .                                  P*<3E   3




          3        The inquest verdicts wore not qusahod. The judgment o f the Court is at Annex h
                   The Court was strongly influenced by the fact diet the lawyers originally instructed
                   for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner*! decisions (eg page 7), that
                   the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have nude a difference, or had
                   been property excluded (pages 14- 36); that the direction o f the Coroner to the jury
                   wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                   40).

          4        Since 1993, as f am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                    Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
                   that the legal xystem failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                   circumstances of death. After the !993judicial review it seemed to me that the
                   disaster would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quidly into history. Ii
                   has not In the post six months, there have been three developments which, in my
                   professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officers
                   at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                   coursc o fjustice at the inquest None o f the following matters were made known at
                   the inquest

          5        The evidence of Roaor Houldsworth. Attached Is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
                   dated 25* November 1996, attaching a statement ofM ay 1989 and supporting
                   documents, and commenting on cvidcacc given at the inquest (Annex C l Contrary to
                   the evidence presorted, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures or the
                   Upptngs Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is oorrect, video
                   tapes and M r Houldsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number o f
                   officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the worid at large in
                   Dcccmbur 1996 yhen Granada television televised a drama-documentary on the
                   disaster. (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldswonh is at AOflfiLD)

         6         The new videotape evidence. Very recently, a member o f the Family Support group
                   has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to b« those, or copies of
                  those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies are enclosed.! am
                   (old that tapes, or copy tapes, were msde available to Yorkshire Television by the
                  Sotfh Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                  Inquest 1have been shown a videotape by M r Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
                  Group in the presence o f M r Uouldsworth, M r Philip Hammond o f the Family
                  Support Group, aod Ann Adliagton o f my Instructing solicitors. T N fp e indicates
                  that poifec officers were lying, and that the pictures o f all relevant areas ofthe ground
                  were dear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrsry to ths police evidence referred to by
                  M r Houidsworth in his evidence o f November 1996. Events ta the relevant area may
                  rot, foe various reasons, have been recorded on ttpe between 2J0 pm and 3 pm. but
                  they were dearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

         7        1 have also been shown a copy o fwhat was, I am told, presented to tt»sjury. It » a
                  very badly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
                  pens shortly after 3 pm, in which Itls indeed not possible to identify individuals. *1110

                                                             2
 tope has bad interference in the picture. It appears thst this tape is a copy it several
 generations removed from either the copy'now made available to M r Hicks, or from
 (he videotape o f vrhich the new evidence is • much better copy, but it presents only
 evcitDi after 3 pm.

 The importance of th i new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
 notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest On Day 77,
 page 125. the Coroner directed thejury fAnnex BV.

“The asuewanent of the temees” is a “vary important factor" and “maybe the single
most important (actor in the whole inquest1*. "The total sum o f ovidence from the
Control Room, that is M r Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, M r Goddard and M r Bichard was
that none o f them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
caxe in the pre-3.t$pm period, regarded aa by the Coroner as Ihc critical time. I
believe that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

The evidence of Dr Ed Walkmr In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
light; see Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
appear* ■! Annex G. The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammondjunior had
“sinus rhythm and cardiac output” titer arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
Sheffield. The statement Or Walker made very shortly tfter, in 1919, shows serious
criticisms o f the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Or Walker
points out in his letter of 7 * February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
Sister. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3** May 1989 by Dr Wardrope. who w«s
closely involved in the inquest, and who requested D r Walker on 15* June 1919 to
stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Or Walker was not called
at the inquest

 It is difficult to exaggerate the significance o f the concealment of Dr Walker's
evidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court's judgment ofNovembcr 1993 the
Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
the evidence dixclocod the same patten, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
revealing remark comes from Dr Waidrope in his letter of 3* May 1989 "Almost
immediately the department was flooded with large numbers o facutely ill patients
requiring urgent resuscitation". The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
stractwttffay the Corona on an utterly different Actual assumption.

The previous inveatiyatian. One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
exculpate die South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
questions ariws as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.
 12   Conclusion. In ray view thaw new pieces o f evidence call for a full police enquiry or
       public inquiry. Exhibit* tueh ss the tapes mutt be secured and subjected to forensic
       analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
       production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. ! therefore recommend that
       this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
       Public Prosecution! for her consideration, with « full copy to the Home Secretary,
       who has expressed interest in this matter In the ta t few moatfu.

13    I hope that the Director might feel able to allow 4 senior lawyer in her oflice to meet
       two nr three o f the Family Support.Group, Aim Arlington and me to expand upon this
       advicc.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray's Inn
London WC1


3rd March 1997.                                                    Alim Jones QC
