                                                                                                                ยง
T e l e ph o n e ; 0 3 3 4 -7 2 1 1 2                               R oyal, a n d   Ancient      Golf   C lub
       T elex : 7 6 3 - 4 0
                                                                           o f   St.A nd rew s, Fife.
    Fa x : 0 3 3 - 4   7 7 5 0 0
                                                                                    KY16 9 J D
           S e c re ta ry
M. F. BONALLACK. o b e .



            Ref s        OCH/89                                       15th June 1989




            Mr R.M. Whalley
            Secretary to the Hillsborough
            Stadium Disaster Inquiry
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            London
            SW1H 9AT




            Dear Mr Whalley

                                        Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

             I apologise I am only just replying to your letter of 23rd May but
             unfortunately I have been away from the St Andrews Office and only
             returned yesterday.

            Without wishing to appear complacent we do not feel that golf has
            the same problem with crowd control as that which arises in enclosed
            stadia.   Golf Courses are large open spaces where crowds can disperse
            very readily.

             We do, of course, provide seating for up to 17,000 spectators on
             uncovered stands, and only this year we have changed all the seating
             and construction of the stands.   This is to make sure that they
             comply with the very latest safety requirements.   We are also increasing
             the number of stewards on duty on each stand.

             The one aspect which does cause us concern is the way in which spectators
             on the final hole of the Championship come from behind the ropes
             and posts alongside the fairway to join right across the final hole
             to get a better view of the 18th Green and the Prize Presentation.

             Before each Open we do have lengthy meetings with the stewards and
             the police to ensure that everyone is aware of the precautions which
             have to be taken to try and ensure that if the crowd does break,
             it does so in an orderly manner without endangering spectators.

             Yours sincerely




             M.F. Bonallack
             Secretary                                                                MFB/KD
