   HUMBERSIDE                                                               Technical Services Department
   C O U N T Y            C O U N C I L                                     Director, M.E. Pitt B.Sc., C.Eng.

                                                                            County Hall, Beverley
                                                                                                             9XA
                                                                      feu . n a tp h <Ma2eas aa.7 i892 0 M 2 - ^ 7/k
                                                                             Fax. 0482 871892

                                                                             Your Ref.
                                                                             Our Ref. 5/1/A/DJP/JMS

                                                                             Enquiries to: Hr.D.J.Price
                                                                             Ext. 3299

                                                                             Date: 27th June 1989



Dear Mr. Sweet,

5th Round F.A. Cup - Hull City v. Liverpool
Boothferry Park, Hull - 18th February, 1989

I refer to Mr. A n d r e w C o l l i n s ’ d i s c u s s i o n w i t h m y Special Projects
Engineer, MR. D.J. PRICE, at the Hillsborough Inquiry on Wednesday, 21st
June, 1989;    and your telephone c onv ers ati on w i t h Mr. Price on the
following day.

As requested, I enclose a statement from Mr. Price relating to the use of a
large  screen at P r e n t o n Park, Birkenhead,  to pr o v i d e simult ane ous
transmission of the above match.

I am unable to comment on the technical aspects of such transmissions, but
the Chairman of Hull City A.F.C., Mr. Don Robinson, will be contacting you
direct in this respect.

If there is any further information you require, please do not hesitate to
get in touch with Mr. Price.   He will be on annual leave from 14th July to
13th August, 1989.



Yours sincerely,




                       4^ - l

for E                   Technical Services




Mr. J. Sweet,
Hillsborough Inquiry Secretariat,
Committee Room 4,
The Town Hall,
SHEFFIELD.




   A ssistants D irectors:
   Client - G. Roberts (Senior); Strategy - J.F. W heeler; Consultancy - M.R. Milns; W orks - J.R. Shaw; Services - R.H. Sowerby
Statement for the Hillsborough Inquiry

My name is DAVID JAMES PRICE.      I am a Chartered Civil Engineer, employed
as Special Projects E ngi nee r   in the Technical Services De partment of
Humberside County Council.

The County Council has issued a Safety Certificate, under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975, to each of the five designated stadia within its
area, namely:-

1.    Boothferry Park (Hull City A.F.C.) - soccer
2.    Blundell Park (Grimsby Town F.C.) - soccer
3.    Glanford Park (Scunthorpe United F.C.) - soccer
4.    The Boulevard (Hull F.C.) - rugby league
5.    Craven Park (Hull Kingston Rovers F.C.) - rugby league.

My duties include liaison with the clubs, police officers and fire officers
with regard to safety certificate matters.

On the 18th February, 1989, Hull City A.F.C. played Liverpool F.C., at
Boothferry Park, in the 5th round of the F.A. Cup.       The match was "all
ticket" with a crowd capacity of 20,058, the maximum permissible under the
current safety certificate.        Of this total, the n u m ber of tickets
allocated to Liverpool F.C. was 4,367 (3,837 standing and 530 seated).

Prior to the match taking place, it was clear that the demand for tickets
from Liverpool supporters would far exceed the supply.      At a meeting at
Boothferry Park on the 8th February, 1989, the Humberside Chief Constable’s
representative expressed his concern that a large number of Liverpool
supporters without tickets would travel over to Hull on the 18th February,
1989, causing serious crowd control problems outside the stadium.   At this
stage, the Chairman of Hull City A.F.C., Mr. Don Robinson, indicated that
he was arranging for a simultaneous live screening of the match at Prenton
Park, Birkenhead, the home of Tranmere Rovers F.C.      I believe that this
initiative greatly reduced the potential for crowd di sorder in Hull.
About 5,000 spectators saw the match transmission at Prenton Park.




David
27th June,   1989.
