From: Peter Edmundson                         cc   Mr Howarth
      Operational Policing Policy Unit             Mr Omand
      Room 527                                     HMCIC
      Queen Anne’s Gate                            Mr Butler
                                                   Ms Lockyer
         8 273 2621                                Mr Pugh
                                                   Mr Bailey
                                                   Mr Owen
         30 November 1998                          Mr Russell




1.       Mr Boateng

2.       Home Secretary




HILLSBOROUGH


Issues

Maria Eagle wrote on 18 November giving details of a number of documents
considered in the course of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny which she
believes are not in the House of Commons Library. She also refers to the
decision of South Yorkshire Police Authority to provide funding in respect of
the defence costs of David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, the two most
senior officers on duty in the police control room on the day of the disaster.
Representatives of the bereaved families also raised this issue when they
approached you at the recent Police Authority Conference in Blackpool.

2.     Frank Field has requested that material considered by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith in the course of his scrutiny be placed in the Liverpool Library.


Timing

3.     Pressing. South Yorkshire Police Authority have already received an
approach from the Family Support Group. It would be helpful to respond to
the question of the funding of the officers’ defence as soon as possible, as
well as the issue of where copies of the documentation considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith have been placed.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
Consideration

Copies of documentation considered in the course of the Scrutiny

4.     Ms Eagle lists a number of documents she claims are not in the House
Library. The police statements remain the property of the South Yorkshire
Police archive, to where the originals have been returned. We will therefore
ask the force to provide copies of those statements as soon as possible.

5.     The remaining documents referred to in Ms Eagle’s letter are held by
the Home Office. Our records suggest that copies of some of the documents
referred to by Ms Eagle were, in fact, sent to the House Library. Other
documents were not copied, as they did not constitute evidence considered in
the course of the scrutiny. For example, as Ms Eagle suggests, the
correspondence from the judge to the CPS, the respective football clubs and
the PCA were standard letters informing them of the scrutiny. We shall,
however, forward copies of these documents to the Library as requested
although they add nothing to the body of Hillsborough evidence.

6.    Ms Eagle refers to transcripts of a meeting between Dr David Slater
and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. However, the judge did not meet Dr Slater,
and consequently there is no transcript. When approached in February, Dr
Slater also indicated that he did not wish copies of his correspondence with
the judge to be released.


Liverpool Library

7.    In a supplementary question to Ms Eagle’s oral question on 26
October, Mr Field requested that the documentation considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith also be placed in Liverpool library. You indicated that
you believed this already to be the case, and that you would endeavour to
comply with the request. The relevant extract from Hansard is attached.

8.      In your statement to the House in February, you undertook to make
public the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the course of
his scrutiny, other than that already in the public domain. This has been done
by placing copies in the House library, with copies of the police statements
also being sent to the Family Support Group in Liverpool. This may have led
to a misunderstanding over where copies have been sent.

9.     As mentioned above, we no longer hold the police statements, which
comprise the bulk of the documentation, as they remain the property of the
South Yorkshire Police archive, to where the originals have been returned. To
recall and make further copies of these documents will be a large, expensive
and time-consuming task.



F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
10.    It remains open to individual Members to make arrangements for their
constituents to view the material in the House library, as representatives of
the Family Support Group have done in recent weeks.

11.     Mr Field also wrote to you on 12 October on behalf of his constituent,
Mr Terence Burkett, whose son died at Hillsborough. Mr Burkett wishes to
read all the original police statements. We have not replied to Mr Field
pending clarification of your undertaking about the placing of documentation
in Liverpool library. A copy of Mr Field’s letter is attached.

12.    Ms Eagle is currently involved in dialogue with the Merseyside Police
Authority in relation to the recent appointment of Norman Bettison as Chief
Constable, and she has copied a number of items of related correspondence
to you in recent weeks. From this correspondence, it is evident Ms Eagle also
believes the documentation considered by the judge will be copied to
Liverpool Library, and you may wish to take this opportunity to clarify the
position with her also.

13.    The draft replies to Mr Field and Ms Eagle assume that you do not
wish to go further than your original undertaking. If you do, we will of course,
set the work in hand.


Funding of legal expenses

14.    Ms Eagle questions the decision of South Yorkshire Police Authority to
fund the defence costs of Duckenfield and Murray in the private prosecutions
currently being brought by the Family Support Group, and makes particular
reference to the use of public money in doing so.

15.    Both officers face charges of manslaughter in respect of two of those
who died in the centre pens of the Leppings Lane terraces. They also face
one alternative charge against each of wilfully neglecting to perform a public
duty (otherwise known as “misconduct in a public office") based on the same
circumstances as the main allegations. Duckenfield is also charged alone with
“perverting the course of justice” in that he lied about the circumstances in
which gate C at the ground was opened.

16.    The DPP has been formally requested by the defence solicitors to take
over the prosecution under the provisions of section 6(2) of the Prosecution of
Offences Act 1985, in order to discontinue the case. The case papers have
now been passed to the Director, and case conferences have taken place in
the last week. However, a decision is not thought to be imminent.

17.    South Yorkshire Police Authority have confirmed they are funding the
former officers’ defence. If pressed, they will contend publicly that provision to
do so is contained in Section 111 (1) of the Local Government Act 1972, which
enables police authorities to do anything “which is calculated to facilitate, or is

F:\Oppu\COM PLNTS\SHORTSUB\M jw-O 424 .doc
conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their functions”. The Police
Authority are also likely to cite Home Office Circular 4/1998, published by
Police Resources Unit, arguing that to allow payment to be made to officers
(either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some way
facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s functions. The circular advises
that it is ultimately for individual police authorities to decide, in the particular
circumstances of a case, whether to make financial assistance available. A
copy of HOC 4/1998 is attached.

18.     A further consideration is that the decision to grant the request for
funding was not made by the whole Police Authority, but by the Clerk and
Treasurer, under delegated powers (Sections 101 and 102 of the Local
Government Act 1972 provide for this). This can be expected to attract some
criticism. The application was supported by the current Assistant Chief
Constable, Ian Daines.

19.     I also attach a copy of a statement South Yorkshire Police Authority
propose to issue if they are formally approached about their decision. They
are likely to indicate that they see this as a test case, in that the morale of the
force could be adversely affected if these former officers, who the Authority
are satisfied acted in good faith in the course of their duties, do not receive
the Authority’s financial support at subsequent criminal proceedings. They will
contend that the future operational performance of serving officers would be
inhibited if the financial support of the Police Authority were not perceived as
being guaranteed in the event of subsequent legal proceedings.

20.     The families can be expected to highlight the disciplinary action that
was pending in respect of the two officers at the time of Duckenfield’s
retirement, and in her letter, Ms Eagle questions the use of public money in
funding their defence. In response, the Police Authority will reiterate the
above lines concerning force morale and the implications for serving officers,
and they are likely to emphasise that it would be wrong, in any case, to refuse
the officers’ request as the disciplinary proceedings did not take place.

21.     The Police Authority have also received a request from two other
officers, Trevor Bichard and Roger Greenwood, for funding in the event that
they are summonsed. Although they have not yet been summonsed, funding
has been approved in the event that they are. This does not appear to be
common knowledge at present.


Recommendation

22.    i.      That you inform Mr Field the documentation will not be placed in
       the Liverpool library, and that you invite him to make arrangements for
       his constituent(s) to view the material already placed in the House
       library. A draft reply is attached for this purpose. This would
       additionally serve as a response to his letter on behalf of Mr Burkett.

F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
       ii.     That you write to Ms Eagle, informing her that the decision on
       whether to fund the officers’ defence is entirely one for the South
       Yorkshire Police Authority, and that you will write further in due course
       with regard to the other points in her letter. The attached draft reply
       also clarifies the position as regards the location of copies of
       documentation considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the course
       of his scrutiny.


Handling/presentational issues

23.     Media interest will concentrate on the issue of the funding of the
officers’ defence costs. There is little indication of media interest to date, but
we can expect to be asked about the use of public money to meet the
defence costs of officers against whom disciplinary action was recommended
by the PCA. We can point out that it is for individual police authorities to make
decisions on the allocation of funds, and this extends to the decision of South
Yorkshire Police Authority to meet the officers’ defence costs (they have been
forewarned that this is our likely response). We can also emphasise the
Government’s commitment to reform of the discipline procedures/ill-health
retirement.




                                         PETER EDMUNDSON




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
DRAFT REPLY TO FRANK FIELD MP FOR HOME SECRETARY’S
SIGNATURE

Rt Hon Frank Field MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A0AA




I am writing by way of reply to your letter of 12 October on behalf of your
constituent, Mr Burkett, and to clarify the arrangements for the publication of
the documentary material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the
course of his scrutiny.


In my original statement to the House of Commons, I undertook to publish as
much of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith as possible.
This has now been done and the material, which includes more than one
thousand police officer statements, has been placed in the House of
Commons’ Library.


As you know, copies of the police statements have also been sent to the
Family Support Group. However, I was incorrect when I indicated recently that
the material had been or was being sent to the Liverpool Central Library
(Official Report, 26 October 1998, Vol 318, Col 3). I misinformed myself
and I am sorry for the misunderstanding. Of course, it remains open to you to
arrange for your constituent to view the material in the House of Commons
Library.


I am writing to Maria Eagle in similar terms and I am placing a copy of this
letter in the Library of the House.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
DRAFT REPLY TO MARIA EAGLE MP FOR HOME SECRETARY’S
SIGNATURE

Maria Eagle MP
House Of Commons
London
SW1A0AA



Thank you for your letter of 18 November, in which you raise two separate
issues about Hillsborough.


First, I can confirm that officials are currently obtaining copies of those
documents which you say are not in the House Library. I will write further
once these copies have been sent to the Library. I should point out, however,
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not meet Dr David Slater, and that there is
consequently no transcript of a meeting between them. Dr Slater has also
previously indicated that he does not wish his correspondence with Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith to be released, and I am sure you will appreciate we
must respect his wishes.


On a related issue, you may recall that in the debate following my oral answer
to your question on 26 October, I indicated in a reply to Frank Field that the
material had been or was being sent to the Liverpool Central Library (Official
Report, 26 October 1998, vol 318, col3). This was incorrect, and I am sorry for
the misunderstanding. Of course, it remains open to individual Members to
arrange for their constituents to view the material in the House of Commons
Library.


As you will recall, I originally undertook to ensure that as much material as
possible considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith not already in the public
domain would be published, and, apart from the few items you have raised
which we are seeking to locate and some, such as Dr Slater’s




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
correspondence, where the originator has specifically refused permission for
the material to be published, this has now been done.


The second part of your letter concerns the decision of South Yorkshire
Police Authority to fund the defence costs of the former Chief Superintendent
David Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard Murray. This decision
is entirely one for South Yorkshire Police Authority, and is not a matter on
which it would be appropriate for me to comment, or intervene.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\Mjw-0424.doc
