                                                                             O t
                                                                             if
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                             London SW1H 9AT
                                             01-273 2577/3602/2370

John M Webber Esq
Russell Jones & Walker                        Your Ref:
Solicitors                                    JMW/MIS
Swinton House
324 Grays Inn Road
LONDON
WC1X 8DH                                     Date

                                              3 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 9 October to Lord Justice Taylor in
which you raise two issues. The first concerns the request which
the Police Federation made to have separate representation at the
oral hearings in Sheffield.

As you rightly say, Mr Browne's application to that effect was
refused by Lord Justice Taylor on 15 May 1989. Both Mr Browne
and Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police, however, accepted
that there was at that stage no conflict of interest, and it was
on that basis that Lord Justice Taylor reached his decision. In
doing so, he emphasised that, should any conflict of interest
emerge subsequently, it would be open to those acting for the
Federation to make a further application for representation. He
said:-

     "You are free   to come back at any time and, of course, there
     is nothing to   stop the Federation from having someone here
     with a watching brief ..." (Transcript Day 1 15 May 1989 p.
     7 - copy attached).

No such application was made to Lord Justice Taylor during the
remainder of the oral hearings.

Your second point concerns evidence relating to the behaviour of
Liverpool fans which you say has been overlooked. Lord Justice
Taylor finds this assertion surprising. Throughout the course of
the oral hearings, he made clear that every opportunity would be
afforded to any of the represented parties to have any witness
called whom they wished. He expressed that view at the outset of
the hearings on 15 May (Transcript Day 1, 15 May 1989 p.11 F-H)
and it was reiterated on a number of occasions right to the end
of the oral hearings. If such evidence existed, it should have
been brought to the Inquiry's attention at that stage.

Lord Justice Taylor feels that ample opportunity has already been
given to present all relevant evidence, and is not prepared at
this stage to consider the matter further.




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                                    Russell                          Jo n e s & Wa l k e r
                                                                          S O LIC ITO R S




*                                                                                                                     Your R ef:
    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Taylor,
    c/o The Circuit Administrator,                                                                                    0urR,f:JMW/MIS
    The Strand^°UrtS °f JUStlC6’                                                                                        Dau 9th OCTOBER, 1989
    LONDON,
    WC2A 2LL




    My Lord,
    re:        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

We are instructed by the Police Federation of England and Wales in connection
with all legal issues arising out of the events at Hillsborough on April 15th
1989 which relate to members of the Federated Ranks.    The Federated Ranks are
those below the Rank of S u p e r i n t e n d e ^ ^ ^ ^
On the 15th May 1989, through Mr. SJetfen Brown of Counsel, the Police Federa­
tion applied to be granted the right for the Federated Ranks to be represented
by Counsel at the Hillsborough Inquiry.
Mr. Brown indicated that there was a potential conflict of interest between
Senior Ranks and Federated Ranks who were at that stage principally represented
at the Inquiry through the auspices of those representing the South Yorkshire
Council.
It had also become apparent following the disaster, that members of the Federa­
ted Ranks might be subjected to some criticisms during the Inquiry.    Separate
representation of the Federated Ranks was refused.
We remain instructed by the Police Federation on behalf of all those members
of the Federated Ranks who may now be subjected to disciplinary or criminal
investigations arising out of the incident, and thereafter in connection with
any Inquest that may be convened.
On the 15th May, when the application was made to you by Mr. Steven Brown, the
necessity for detailed representation of individual officers in potential
criminal or disciplinary proceedings had not been identified.     However, the
position has become substantially more clear since the perameters of the
wide-ranging inquiry being conducted by the West Midlands Police Force have
been clarified.
In particular it has been indicated to us that inter alia, consideration will
be given to any common law criminal offence which might be considered on the
basis of "failure to do one's duty".
                                                                         Telephone
                                                                  LONDON 0 1 8 3 7 2 8 0 8

          Swinton House 324 Grays Inn Road London WCIX 8DH Fax 01 837 294124 H our 01 837 0600 Telex 23616 Lde 202
          J M Webber T D B Taylor IJ Walker A F Whitehead RJ Turner R M Abbey IR Fletcher G C Solly WDCVBrien R A Plane PJ Davis J M PColman RCLangton
                              D R LouwJL Raskin SRaskin EJOCooper SG Ingram N’ B Holrovd J C Clarke-Williams Consultant:J C Walker
                                              Regulated by the L a v Society in the conduct o f investment business
      1                                                          Page No
                                                                           21   .




We are of the view that had this position been made clear prior to the commence­
ment of the Inquiry, that Counsel appearing for the officers would have pursued
the question of separate representation further.
In the course of our general preliminary discussions with officers of the
Federated Ranks of the South Yorkshire Police, several officers have drawn our
attention to certain aspects of the preliminary conclusions of the Interim
Report, particularly those relating to the behaviour of the visiting Liverpool
fans. There is a considerable weight of evidence available which they believe
shows a level of behaviour less acceptable than that referred to in the Interim
Report. The concern relates specifically to the extreme behaviour of certain
numbers of fans during the morning and early afternoon of the 15th April, and
the way in which this behaviour affected normal policing methods in a variety
of situations in the vicinity of Hillsborough.    There is considerable concern
that the unique problems associated with excess drinking and aggressive behav­
iour experienced on the 15th April, and ttoat"tfie'mariner"fiwhich this behaviour
caused or contributed to the disaster^ have been overlookedTS
It is the wish of the Police FederatWJtfiat"''we write to you requesting a
review or reconsideration of aspects of the evidence which relate to these
matters.



Yours faithfully,




JOHN M. WEBBER
RUSS ILL JONES & WALKER.
