E.R.                                                          fvv
                                                cc:    Mr Cogbill
                                                       Mrs Lee
                                                       Mr Hopley
                                                       Miss Wooldridge
                                                       Ms Rex
                                                       Mr Evans - C4


       Mr Goddard
       F8 Division


       BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES:   DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS


            Thank you for your note of 20 February.


            2.   Before the Instructions can be sent to Counsel, I
       think we need to be clear that we have drafting authority. I
       do not have a copy of the Lord President's reply to the Home
       Secretary's letter of 20 August (which sought authority to use
       Parliamentary Counsel to prepare a Bill in case there was an
       opportunity for its introduction in the current Session), but
       in the light of the Lord President's letter of
       14 February, I think it must be assumed that any authority (if
       given) has lapsed. I have therefore tried to add a sentence
       to the draft letter to the Lord President (sent under cover of
       your submission of 20 February) to seek authority to use
       Parliamentary Counsel for the purposes set out in that letter.
       If some such provision has not been added, I think we shall
       need to consider a further letter to obtain such authority.

            3.   Further revision may be needed to paragraph 1.2 of
       the draft Instructions in addition to the one proposed in your
       note depending on the extent of our authority to use Counsel.

            4.   I have some comments on the other suggestions in
       your note. For ease of reference I attach a copy of your note
       with the suggestions numbered.




                                                                         1
E.R.

            5.   I will incorporate suggestions 1 to 5 and 10 to 13
       in the next revision of the Instructions, although with
       modifications to remove (on stylistic grounds) the use of the
       first person in suggestion 10. As respects suggestion 11 I
       was surprised to be told the sound was not guttural, but I am
       content to accept your assurance on the matter.


            6.   As respects suggestion 6, I prefer to concentrate on
       spectators at this point of the instructions as I had referred
       to the pitch (and impliedly the players on it) earlier.


            7.   Whilst I can see the point in the suggestions I have
       grouped together as 7 if the Instructions were a public
 A     document, I prefer to be more direct in explaining a problem
       to Parliamentary Counsel in a document which is not public.
       However, I agree that the last sentence of paragraph 3.9 needs
       some expansion and for the last 4 words I shall substitute
       "whether the throwing of bananas causes offence on racial
       grounds".


            8.   With reference to suggestion 8, I do not agree that
       a hat thrown in the air is thrown at or towards another person
       or the pitch notwithstanding that it may not fall down at the
       precise point where it is thrown. I thought there was
       implicit in the offence that we had devised an intention that
       the object was aimed either at the pitch, or other spectators
       generally or some specific spectator or group of spectators. I
       think I need to deal in the Instructions with this example
       because, if I do not, Counsel is very likely to raise it with
       me. However, it was not so much an instruction as to the
       provisions the Bill should make as a comment on the way we
       think our proposals would operate. You surely do not wish
       such conduct to be an offence.


            9.   With reference to suggestion 9, I still prefer the
       boiled sweet example. Since only one third of the male
       population now smoke (and that proportion may or may not be


                                                                      2
higher amongst those attending football matches) I thought the
boiled sweet example worked better in the context of implied
consent.


     10. With reference to suggestion 14, the first sentence
of paragraph 3.21 reflected my views as a lawyer and I do not
propose to delete it. From the second sentence of paragraph 2
of Mr Evans' note of 20 February, it would seem that he also
foresees difficulties. However, I will substitute "It is
suggested" for "Those instructing Counsel are aware".

     11. I await your advice as to what we should do to the
final two sentences of paragraph 3.21 in response to Mr Evans'I
note.                                                       '


     12. In response to comments from Mr Hammond there are
two amendments I propose to make and one on which I would be
grateful for your advice.


     13.   At the end of paragraph 3.5, I propose to add:


           "Such activities might be covered by the offence of
           assault. However, that offence would not be of
           assistance in respect of the throwing of objects
           that would not cause physical injury and it is
           proposed (in paragraphs 3.7 and 3.8 below) that the
           throwing of such objects should be covered by the
           new offence."


    14.    At the end of paragraph 3.26, I propose to add:


           "In addition, the defence of "reasonable excuse" is
           liable to be interpreted differently by different
           courts (and police forces) and this uncertainty
           would undermine the clarity that Taylor had hoped to
           achieve."
                                                                       1


E.R

           15.       With reference to paragraph 3.11 of the draft
      Instructions, Mr Hammond thought that the concept of "implied
      consent" was somewhat artificial. For example, a person might
      (in a playful spirit) throw his scarf, screwed-up empty toffee
      wrapping-papers or paper darts at a friend of his. It is
      somewhat artificial to say that the friend impliedly consented
      because he probably would have preferred the things not to
      have been thrown; on the other hand, he would not be offended
      or annoyed by such conduct. You may therefore like to
      consider whether we should amend paragraph 3.11 to provide a
      person with a defence that he believed, on reasonable grounds,
      that the throwing would not cause offence.




                                                         R J CLAYTON
                                              Legal Adviser's Branch

      22 February 1991




                                                                   4
