                                                                          Mere„oeMl31:^.|2!.SOl

James Callaghan encloses a letter from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

A copy of Mr Hammond’s letter has been sent to all Members of Parliament, and this is one of
a number of resulting Minister’s Cases.

                            ? To P/S of M o f S as within




                                                                   MWard
                                                                   29 January 1997




                                                                            r        55
                                                            o Cc    r '
                        The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H ome O ffice
                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                      LONDON SW1H9AT

                                                       0 5 FEB W 971
Our R ef:   PW/97 5/2180/12
            PO 1261/97




Thank you for your letter of 10 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
1Hillsborough1, and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision, the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN

Jim Callaghan Esq MP
                         The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H ome O ffice
                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                       LONDON SW1H 9AT



Our Re f :   PW/97 5/2180/12
             PO 1261/97




Thank you for your letter of 10 January to Michael Howard,
enclosing one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
'Hillsborough', and the representations which have been made to him
by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision, the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                               DAVID MACLEAN

Jim Callaghan Esq MP
Thank you for your letter o f 10 Januarym o Michael Howard, enclosing one from Mr Phil
Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider carefully
the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it
would be in the public interest to do so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there is any new evidence;
he will also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the
verdict of the jury would have been different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the Home Secretary with a
detailed report o f all the points raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised
that he will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to
consider all the issues.
                       Olvislonolfile W lr« " $ n \ 6>7- S> l l { £ v \ ( 2-

HOME O FFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

A ddressee!------------------_-------------------.------- ---------------- -
 Name                  GKfejtvfeA ra.p                 _,—
 Address                    ^ Reference                      _______
  Tick on* b o ^
                House of Commons
        □       House of Lords
        □           Other - Insert full postal address




 L e t t e r d r a f t e d for S i g n a tu re b y l

            W   J     W U ito u                          ( Name of Signatory]


 Enclosures!




  Copies to be sent to |




                                               (Full addresses. If necessary
                            HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                 L O N D O N SW1A;(M>*.

                                                    <9         V^ L u t




                                                           k   U I . O    I




                                                                              16* M



Dear


I have received the enclosed letter from one of my constituents.

I shall be most grateful if you would give this matter your kind
a reply which I can forward to my consituent.


Yours sincerely




JIM CALLAGHAN MP
   * * :• *
                                                                    *    t . • *


       ^C/ppO®^
                                                                        'typpO®^
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group
   All Members of Parliament,


                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN

  Mr James Callaghan M.P


               to ask     your support for the campaign mounted by
  the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
  accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by
  the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
  the Hillsborough Disaster.

  You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
  . S ^ T 1;100 °n ®ecem^er 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary
   Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
  whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which '
  emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
  fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
  personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
  held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
  privately with the many family members who had travelled to
  London to be present at the debate.

 The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopefpl that the Home
 secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
 not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
 support we have received - people from all walks of life from
 right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
 their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
 However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
 have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
 take forward our quest for justice

 i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
 criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
 evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
 action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
 video- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
 witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
 existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
 was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
 Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

 ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
 the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
 inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.


CHAIRMAN                              SECRETARY                   TREASURER
T. Hicks                               „ u         .
7 Moor Lane                           P. Hammond                  Mrs. J. Traynor
Grassington                           ?! Rosei"ont Road           43 Gorsefield Road
Nr. Skipton BD23 5BD                  u ^ T ry                    Birkenhead
Tel: 0756-752345                      tTel.
                                        j- ns.  tm c r,,
                                            051-724 5771
                                                                  Merseyside
                                                                   Tel: 051-652 7503
Liverpool City Council, at an extraordinary meeting held on 19th December 1996, have
already pledged their unanimous support to the families in our campaign. With the
assistance of the City Council, the campaign is now being taken out across the country
where it is our intention to seek the support of local authorities in all areas of Britain in
response to the massive public disquiet which has emanated from the television
programme (the "Daily Mirror", for example, has received a huge response to the
petition it launched in december, on behalf of the families, supporting the call for a new
inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly indicates this is a
matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.


The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern
and to Granada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into homes and
consciences of the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television
could not truly reflect the scale of what we have been made to endure by having the
absolute grief of losing our loved ones compounded by what can only be described as
the biggest farce and cover up in British legal history. As if this was not enough of a
burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the Taylor Inquiry, have also
had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign by certain public
and media figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by blaming
them, and their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.


The "Hillsborough" television programme seems at last to have washed away the
cartload of lies about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a fair
and just conclusion about the needless deaths of 96 people. -On behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group I would now urge you to help us go one step further
and establish as a matter of public record for all time the truth of what did happen on
that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be done may the bereaved families
be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.

Yours faithfully




Phil Hammond
Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
