                                                  Fire and Rescue Service
                                                  Southfields Road
                                                  Kempston, Bedford. MK42 7NR
                                                  Telephone:                  212
                                                  Bedford (0234) 51081 Ext
                                nty Council       Facsimile: Bedford (0234) 217874


Your reference
Our reference
                   DCO/SAH                                                                  \ \t-
Please ask for
Please address     'KF
                     G              ins
                                     GIFE FBIM
                                                                                                    s
your reply to       Chief Fire Officer
Date
                   18 April 1989

                    The Right Hon. the Lord Justice Taylor
                    Royal Courts of Justice
                    Strand
                    LONDON
                    WC2A 2LL


                    Dear Lord Justice
                    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY
                    I write to you firstly in my capacity as the Deputy Chief Fire
                    Officer of the Bedfordshire Fire and Rescue Service and secondly as a
                    football supporter of long standing.
                    After the Bradford City Football Club Fire it was my responsibility
                    to review the Fire Safety arrangements at '"tnn T n w n F n n t h a i i r.luh
                    and in particular the safety of the publ M T in the main stand which
                    was and is constructed of timber. It was clear to me at the time
                    that the safety of the spectators seated in the main stand depended
                    entirely on their being able to move down from the stand (instead of
                    going back inside to make their exit) then onto the concrete
                    terracing in front of the stand and finally onto the pitch. I saw
                    the pitch as a reservoir to accommodate people if the main stand
                    caught fire. I was asked by Mr Bert Mi 11ichip, the Chairman of the
                    Football Association, my opinion about the provision of fencing
                     between the main stand and the pitch. I told him I was against the
                     idea and pointed out that if a fence was erected spectators fleeing
                     from a fire would be penned in and would not be able to get away
                     quickly enough to avoid the effects of such a fire.
                     I am pleased to say that my advice was recognised and the main stand
                     was modified to allow people to escape without the restriction of a
                   \ fence. I have always considered that the decision was correct and
                     since'the tragedy at Sheffield I am even more sure of the correctness
                     of that decision.
                      My assessment of the situation at Luton, however, was not solely from
                      a professional Fire Service point of view but also from my long
                      experience as a football spectator and my knowledge of how people
                      react in crowds.
                      I have supported Newcastle United Football Club since 1947 and it
                      should be remembered tht in the late forties and throughout the
                      fifties crowds of 50,000 to 60,000 were commonplace at football
                      matches   Indeed for many years Newcastle United held the record for
                      average attendances with 56,000 spectators. I have on numerous
                      occasions been in crowds of that capacity and whilst space was always
                      at a premium there were never any serious problems.


 Bedfordshire County Council   Chief Executive   John W. Elven,   d .l ., m.a ., l .l .m.
 The reason for this I believe lies in the fact that spectators could
mnve lateraliv    for the entire distance of the terracing. J J there
*was a n y crushing effert. the crowd adjusted itself bv m vu m siteMa^s
 o^ cfownward and occasionally any overspill went onto the small track
 Surrounding the pitch. It has never been possible to move m2 the
 terracing.
 m ow  t p m r p c are sectioned, severely restricting lateral movement
 leaving only the alternative of moving downwards. When that movement
 is also restricted by fencing, any overspill begins to create serious
 di fficulties.
 There is no doubt that many spectators prefer standing and, of
 course, an immediate reaction (or over-reaction) to the Sheffield
 tragedy is the call for all seater stadia. The fact is I think that
 the accident at Sheffield would not have happened if that section of
 the ground had not been overcrowded.
 Finally I would like to tell you of an experience my son and I had at
 Tottenham H n t c p n r 1-; fnnt.hai 1 q n imfl twn nr three seasons ago when
 th e y 'entertained" Newcastle United in a cup mat c h.
 The Newcastle fans were allocated terracing at one end of the ground
 but only about one-third of the full terrace. The rest of it was
 empty and I assume was designed to act as a buffer between the two
 sets of fans.
 Shortly before the kick-off a significant number of Newcastle fans
 came into the terrace at the rear of those who were already present.
 The passageway which ran behind the stepped terracing was at a lower
 level and so that they could see the match the surplus fans tried to
 gain a foothold on the terracing and consequently pushed those
 already standing there, which in turn had a domino effect on all the
 spectators in that area. The crowd had no option but to move forward
 because of the pressure (fencing prevented lateral spread) and a
 serious situation started to develop. I was separated from my son
 (who was 25 at the time) and I didn't see him again until we met
 outside the ground at the end of the match. Shortly after I lost
 contact with him I saw scores of Newcastle supporters climbing the
 high fence which separated the terracing from the pitch. I didn't
  know it then but my son was one of them. He had been pushed to the
  front of the terracing and the crush was so bad he had no alternative
  but to climb the fence. When he_aot onto the pitch side of the fgnce
  he was            a pni-ireman and told to climb back and into the
  rrowri. My son refused and pointed out tnai m e cerrace was too full.
  He was then threatened with arrest but he told the policeman that he
  would rather be arrested than have to go back into the crowd and
  possibly sustain serious injury. Eventually the Police opened up an
  empty section of the same terracing and my son, together with scores
  of other Newcastle supporters, were shepherded into that area. I
  would add that there was no hooliganism.
  I relate these circumstances because it was the worst situation I
  have ever experienced. It is easy to criticise t.hpJnHra and I know
  they have a difficult task to perform trying to balance safety
k against hooliganism. I think, however, that over the years they may
  have hornmp     nrp-nr.nini ed with hooliganism at the expense of
  s a f e t y . ~
There is a great difference between the normal pushing and shoving
which is a common feature of football matches and that same crowd
being in serious trouble. When scores and scores of peoples faces
are contorted through pain it has to be recognised that something is
wrong and immediate action needs to be taken. This is what I
experienced at Tottenham and that is what I saw on the television at
Sheffield.
I could go on but I know you must be swamped with advice, opinion and
the pressure to make recommendations.
I would only add that the ordinary spectator has a lot of experience
and needs to be heard.
Yours sincerely




DEPUTY CHIEF FIRE OFFICER
