                                                                                                      ©
                                                                                                       ,W ‘
                                                      QUEEN A N N E ’ S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9AT

                                                                                      ' 6 JAN 1997
                                                                                                    ’iMM
                                                cc
                                                            ks-         lOstd-GfZe-
Miss Donna Carlile                                                      S ec,
                                                           ^v~ QCsjLf c f^ -M .
                                                                  ljcn x)> \   .



                                                       £      £     h    .

                                                       KrS         A-c

                                                       ^     G vz^ct* .
                                                      Ka (£ oc U .
                                                     £/-£> cJgJd& za.

  l|< ju /l*S*
Thank you very much for your letters about the tragic events at Hillsborough in which you
called for the inquiry to be reopened. I would like to say first of all how saddened I was by
this terrible disaster and I fully understand your desire to reach a better understanding of
how it was that your brother Paul met his death. I found your letter in which you described
Paul’s cheerfulness and joy of life deeply moving.

When the Hillsborough disaster was discussed in the House of Commons on 17 December,
I gave an undertaking to consider carefully the representations that have been made to
reopen the public inquiry. I emphasised that I would not take the decision to reopen the
inquiry lightly: I would need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so.

I explained that in coming to a decision, I would consider whether there is any new
evidence, and if so, whether that evidence appeared to be of such significance that had it
been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor
inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The television programme^ “Hillsborough” made a specific allegation that a video camera
trained on the central enclose was working when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was
not the case. It was further suggested that this film might have represented vital evidence.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed me that both the video tape and the
transcript of that tape were made available to the Taylor inquiry. This is a matter that I
have promised to look into. I have specifically asked that the South Yorkshire Police
should provide me with a copy of this videotape.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to provide me with a detailed
report of all the points raised by the programme. I will consider his report carefully. I fear
that there may remain matters about which we will never be certain. In a tragedy of such a
magnitude, I feel that it is sadly inevitable, though deeply distressing, that there will be
confusion about some aspects of what occurred. What I must consider is whether a further
inquiry, if it were to take place, would be able to provide greater certainty about what
happened than we have at present.

I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as I have been able to
consider all those issues. Meanwhile I would like to offer you my deepest condolences for
your sad loss and the knowledge that my thoughts are with you and all the bereaved
families.




                                   MICHAEL HOWARD
