                                                                        PiajHj          si2 i
                                                           reference




Denis MacShane encloses correspondence from                        who is dissatisfied
with what he perceives as the lack of independence of the existing police complaints
system, on the basis that the police are investigating themselves.

The draft reply summarises the existing complaints procedures, emphasising the
supervisory role of the PCA.

                       ? To P/S of M of S as within




                       MWard
                       23 September 1997


                     fts.   O '* -   LA.   cXj-fcV,

                                                         bct   m




                                                                         S'S'
                                                                                m i n
                                                                         H ome O ffice
                                                                       QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                        LONDON SW1H 9AT




    Denis MacShane Esq MP                             Our Ref:    PW/97 5 /2 1 8 0 /7 4
    House of Commons                                              PO 1 6 2 1 8 /9 7
    LONDON
    SW1A OAA




                                                                                      m     f -




    Thank you for your letter of 3 September to Jack Straw , enclosing
^   correspondence from Ij                                                        about
    the accountability of the police.

    The               Police Complaints Authority has responsibility for ensuring th at
    complaints against the police are properly investigated. It has considerable
    powers at its disposal. In the more serious cases, it has the right to supervise
    the police investigation, with the power to approve the investigating officer and
    direct the course of the enquiry.

    The police are required to send the report of every complaints investigation to
    the Authority for its consideration. The Authority can call for further information
    and ultimately direct th at disciplinary charges be brought against the officers
    concerned. It will also write to the complainant about the outcom e of his or her
    complaint.

    About one third of all recorded complaints are resolved informally without the
    need for a full investigation. Where an investigation is undertaken, about
    8 per cent of cases in England and Wales are found to be substantiated.

    I appreciate                  concerns that the complaints system is not wholly
    independent because it relies on the police them selves investigating complaints.
    I believe th at the procedures involving the Police Complaints Authority do allow
    for complaints to be fully and fairly investigated but w e will certainly look at any
    w ays in which to build confidence in the complaints system .

    The Police and M agistrate's Courts Act 1994 provides a framework for the
    setting of objectives and monitoring the performance of the police. The Act
    gives the Home Secretary the power to se t key objectives for policing. These
are supported by performance indicators so th at the forces' performance can be
assessed. Alongside the national objectives police authorities will se t local
objectives targeted at issues th at are a particular local problem. These local
objectives are se t by the police authority after consultation with the chief
constable and the local community.

Both sets of objectives and performance indicators are published in the police
authority's policing plan. Then after the end of each financial year the police
authority publishes a report which includes an a sse ssm e n t of the extent to
which the local policing plan has been carried out. These m easures are designed
to improve the accountability of the police, particularly to local communities and
create a partnership approach to policing betw een public and police.




                                ALUN MICHAEL
Thank you for your letter of 3 September to Jack Straw, enclosing correspondence
from                                                        about the accountability of
the police.


The independent Police Complaints Authority has responsibility for ensuring that
complaints against the police are properly investigated. It has considerable powers at
its disposal. In the more serious cases, it has the right to supervise the police
investigation, with the power to approve the investigating officer and direct the course
of the enquiry.


The police are required to send the report of every complaints investigation to the
Authority for its consideration. The Authority can call for further information and
ultimately direct that disciplinary charges be brought against the officers concerned. It
will also write to the complainant about the outcome of his or her complaint.


About one third of all recorded complaints are resolved informally without the need
for a full investigation. Where an investigation is undertaken, about 8 per cent of cases
in England and Wales are found to be substantiated.


I appreciate ]                concerns that the complaints system is not wholly
independent because it relies on the police themselves investigating complaints. I
believe that the procedures involving the Police Complaints Authority do allow for
complaints to be fully and fairly investigated but we will certainly look at any ways in
which to build confidence in the complaints system.


The Police and Magistrate's Courts Act 1994 provides a framework for the setting of
objectives and monitoring the performance of the police. The Act gives the Home
Secretary the power to set key objectives for policing. These are supported by
performance indicators so that the forces' performance can be assessed. Alongside the
national objectives police authorities will set local objectives targeted at issues that
are a particular local problem. These local objectives are set by the police authority
after consultation with the chief constable and the local community.
Both sets of objectives and performance indicators are published in the police
authority's policing plan. Then after the end of each financial year the police authority
publishes a report which includes an assessment of the extent to which the local
policing plan has been carried out. These measures are designed to improve the
accountability of the police, particularly to local communities and create a partnership
approach to policing between public and police.
                          Olvlslonol Flla Rcfaronco        w hi- dagbh-g.
HOME O F F I C E
M I N I S T E R S C A S E D R A F T R EPL Y

Addressee
 Marne                    ^ J U ^ c   (v>?

 Address                          Reference
  r i c k o n * box

                      House of Commons
          □           House .of Lords
         □            Other - Insert fu ll postal address




  eiler drafieO for Signature by

                                                           (Name of Slqnolory

Fnciosures




 1 o o l e s l o be s c n l t o




                                             ( T u l l o d d rcs scs, If n e c e s s a ry '
                                H O U SE OF COM M ONS
                                    LONDON SW1A OAA

                                                                              3 September, 1997
The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP,
Home Secretary,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
LONDON.
SW1H 9AT




Dear Jack,

I have enclosed a copy o f a letter that I have received from my constituent, I


              Iis a highly successful local businessman who has in the past publicly expressed
his concerns about police accountability. I should be grateful for a reply that I can send to ] □
I         I
Yours sincerely,                                                        /


                                                      l   i   n    y        < 5 7

Denis MacShane M P.

                        \
  A




               Mr Denis MacShane
               Member of Parliament for Rotherham
               House of Commons
               London
               SW1A0AA


                                                                                       27 August 1997
                                                                                     Our ref: BA/LRS


                Dear Denis


                I read with some interest a precis of the South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable’s
                Annual Report.

                14tells me there were 473 “Complaints Against the Police” only 1% were upheld (say


                They are expecting us to believe that 468 complainants were wrong and only 5 were
                correct. This simply is not credible.

                Then again, it is the Police investigating the Police so is this dubious and biased result
                unexpected?

                Will you please press for some independent body to be set up to sort out this wasteful
                and dishonest situation. After all, the Police have a monopoly. OFFER, POUNCE,
                OFFGAS and OFFWAT all work after a fashion. Why not OFFPOL?

                Seriously, with the average Police Officer costing in South Yorkshire over £44,000 in
                salary alone (figures from report), I do not believe that this money is being expended
                wisely and for sure the Police should be accountable to someone or something. At the
                moment they are untouchable and under perform all day every day as they wish.


                Yours sincerely




         (f     Chairman




                  ; IBS
                                               HOT DIP GALVANISING                                                  COROt

APPROVED ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR                           TO BS 729                                      C orgi R agitto rad G a t Fitter
               Mr Denis MacShane
               Member of Parliament for Rotherham
               House of Commons
               London
               SW1A0AA


                                                                                      27 August 1997
                                                                                    Our ref: BA/LRS


               Dear Denis


               I read with some interest a precis of the South Yorkshire Police Chief Constable s
               Annual Report.

               It tells me there were 473 “Complaints Against the Police” only 1% were upheld (say


               They are expecting us to believe that 468 complainants were wrong and only 5 were
               correct. This simply is not credible.

               Then again, it is the Police investigating the Police so is this dubious and biased result
               unexpected?

                Will you please press for some independent body to be set up to sort out this wasteful
                and dishonest situation. After all, the Police have a monopoly. OFFER, POUNCE,
                OFFGAS and OFFWAT all work after a fashion. Why not OFFPOL?

                Seriously, with the average Police Officer costing in South Yorkshire over £44,000 in
                salary alone (figures from report), I do not believe that this money is being expended
                wisely and for sure the Police should be accountable to someone or something. At the
                moment they are untouchable and under perform all day every day as they wish.


                Yours sincerely




         if     Chairman




                                              HOT DIP GALVANISING                                                   CO R O f

                                                         TO BS 729                                      C o rgi R egistered G a s Fitter
APPROVED ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR
