                                             DICKINSON
EQUITY & LAW HOUSE
47 CASTLE STREET
                                                  ~       &CO                          TELEX: 627327 HILDIC G
                                                                                       CABLES: HILLDICK LIVERPOOL
LIVERPOOL L2 9UB                                                                       DX 14153 LIVERPOOL
                                                  SOLICITORS   ■   NOTARIES            FAX: 051-227 1352
TELEPHONE: 051-227 3151




.                            .                                                 .       YOUR REF
The Treasury Solicitor
The Town Hall
SHEFFIELD                                                                                      PWJ.KEL.
                                                                                       0UR r e f
                                                                                               1860-002
                                                                                       DATE
                                                                                            16th June 1989



Dear Sirs
                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - PART II

     We enclose herewith six bundles containing our clients'
recommendations for Part II of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.                                                        You
will see that each bundle contains an Index and Schedule of
Appendices.

     We should be grateful if you would pass these to the Clerk to
the Inquiry upon our behalf.

                                                  Yours faithfully,




                                              HILL DICKINSON & CO.




                                 R O Y G . HILL
J .D . GREGSON                   PETER JACKSON                 DAVID WAREING       LO NDON ADDRESS       THIS FIR M IS REGULATED
A N TH O N Y HARDING-HUBER       RICHARD M ARTINDALE           JOHN WOLFE          IRONGATE HOUSE       B Y THE L A W SOCIETY
M A RTIN G. HILL                 JOHN M A XW ELL               ASSOCIATE:          DUKE'S PLACE         IN THE C O N D U C T OF
JOHN HULMES                      DAVID SWAFFIELD               ANNE DOBIE          LONDON EC3A 7LP      INVES TM BNT BUSINESS
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' ASSOCIATION

            TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY
             INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                             LIST OF APPENDICES

1.    Original handout information sheet
2.    The Wembley dossier.
3.    Liverpool City Council Ticket Allocation Report.
4.    Intermediate Treatment Fund Proposal
5.    The Ombudsfan Initiative.
6.    Football Family Face Report.
7.    Football Fans against Hooliganism.
8.    Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Government
9.    Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Football League
      Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Football Association
      Miscellaneous correspondence FSA/Professional Football
                                                 Association
10. FSA Response to I.D. Card Working Party.
11. Minutes of Meeting at Lancaster Gate 5/10/88
    with Appendices;
      (a)   Application Form
      (b)   Publicity Outlets
      (c)   Rules and Constitution
      (d)   Europe Statement
      (e)   FSA Cup Final Ticket Allocation suggestion.
12.   Minutes of Meeting at Lancaster Gate 23/2/89.
13.   FSA Research Paper for "First World Congress ofScience
      and Football", April 1987.
14.   Sample Minutes of London Branch FSA/Police Liaison Committee-
15.   Report on 50% Membership Schemes.
16.   Miscellaneous Documents.
                                  INDEX

Contents
Introduction
History of the Association

                                 Part I
(i)     Existing Stadia
(ii)    Fencing
(iii)   New Stadia/New Funding
(iv)    Late Arivals
        Delayed kick-offs
(v)     Crowd Control
        (a)   Policing
        (b)   Stewards
        (c)   Supporters
Introduction


The loss of ninety five lives at Hillsborough on the 15th of April,
1989, throws into high relief the past failure of those charged
with the task of administering football to deal effectively with
the many problems which beset the game. However, some of those
          fijivv.\v\cxA^
problems psminrtfr far beyond the boundaries of the world of
football. In particular, the chronic hooliganism attached to our
national sport (often closely associated with racist undercurrents,
territorialism and a general xenophobia) is in part clearly the
product of complex social and historical circumstances outside
football's purview.   The position has now been reached where those
faced with the task of policing grounds have to remember and
reflect the problems of ground safety and public order.
Regrettably, but quite clearly, and probably for reasons which we
concede are understandable, the tragedy at Hillsborough was in part
caused, and in part exacerbated, by the attitude of police to this
problem (see the evidence of P.C. Birchard Day 19 am Page 61 (c)).
We feel that far too much emphasis was placed on public order with
almost a total disregard for public safety.


However, football and its supporters can do much more than
they have to help find solutions.   The sport has a huge purchase on
the hearts and minds of those very groups within the football crowd
who are potentially troublesome - but the game's administration has
so far utterly failed to co-opt the vast majority of ordinary, well
disciplined fans into a campaign to alleviate its problems.    By
seeking proper representation for football supporters, the FSA
hopes to begin that process.    The granting to this Association of
full representation on the Hillsborough Inquiry is the most
significant step in that direction in one hundred years of
professional football.   The FSA wishes to record its debt to Lord
Justice Taylor for providing the opportunity for fans to make a
significant contribution to this Inquiry and, therefore, to the
future direction the game will take.


History of the Association


The Association was born in August 1985 following the Heysel
Stadium Disaster in May of that year.    The Association was set up
as a result of a desire amongst supporters to gain a voice in the
corridors of football power.


Five founder members approached the media with the germ of an idea
and the Organisation was launched nationwide.    It was decided to
adopt a federal structure with regional branches to reflect the
views of local supporter communities.   The Association now has 17
branches around the country, from Glasgow in the north to
Southampton on the South Coast.    It has flourished in predictable
areas, London, Merseyside and Manchester and has attracted over
8,000 individual members.    The recent innovation of affiliated
membership has brought in substantial additional members.


The present structure of the Association is such that it is run
nationally by a National Executive Committee (NEC) consisting of 5
officers, (elected at Conference) including a Chairman, Treasurer
and Secretary, together with one representative from each of the
branches.   The NEC meets every other month whereas each regional
branch will meet once every month during the extended football
season of August to May.    Each branch is run by a Committee elected
by the local members.


The Organisation exists entirely on voluntary contributions and
membership fees, the current annual fee being £2.00.     With the
exception of its(temporarily) full time Campaign Co-ordinator Rogan
Taylor, all of its officers both nationally and locally are
voluntary part-time workers.


Since 1985 there has been much for the Association to do.     Each of
the branches has dealt with regional matters, liaising and taking
up issues within the branch's particular locality.     The Appendices
     9


hereto are an attempt to reflect as many of the nationwide
activities of the Association as possible.    The documents show the
Association's attempt to put forward its own views on the game's
inherent problem - the Football Fans against Hooliganism document -
App. 7; They catalogue the Association's concern for safety and
fairness arising from the F.A. Cup final at Wembley in May 1986 -
App. 2; Two years later the Association's lead was followed by the
Liverpool City Council's Trading Standard's Department - App. 3;
The Association has corresponded and met with those having power
and authority in the world of football - Appendices 8,9,11 and 12.


The FSA's submission to Lord Justice Taylor is in two parts,
mirroring the Inquiry.     In Part I, the Association will make
recommendations concerning topics which arise directly out of the
tragedy at Hillsborough. These include:


(i)    Existing Stadia
(ii)   Fencing
(iii) New Stadia/New Funding
(iv)   Late arrival at Matches/Delayed Kick-offs
(v)    Crowd control at football.


Part II will include:


(i)    Membership Schemes/Supporter Responsibility - including
       attitudes to crowd misbehaviour.
(ii)   Football's Administrative Structure
(iii) Representation for Football Supporters




                               PART I


(i)    Existing Stadia


       Many of the football grounds in England are highly
       unattractive and poorly served venues.   Substantial numbers
       of them are located in run-down, urban centres and they
       reflect the general decay and underinvestment of many
       decades.   There is very little point or incentive to spend
       time in such stadia except between 3 p.m. and 4.40 p.m. when
       a football match is in play.
The question whether existing stadia should be     required only
to provide all seating accommodation receives, from a clear
majority of football supporters, a resounding "No" in reply.
The FSA is not aware of any evidence to suggest a link
between reduced hooliganism and all-seater stadia; in fact,
some of the worst examples of crowd misbehaviour in recent
years have originated precisely from the seated areas (Luton
v Millwall 1985 - Crystal Palace v Birmingham City 1989).


There does not appear any reason either to think that
standing on terraces is intrinsically unsafe.     The most
significant factors affecting safety on terraces appear to
be:


(a)   The total numbers allowed in terrace sections coupled
with their distribution.
(b)   The presence of frequently sited and appropriately
strong crush-barriers.


(c)   The provision of safe and quick exists forward onto the
pitch, sideways and at the rear in case of emergency.


(d)   The behaviour of the fans on the terraces


(e)   Satisfactory policing and stewarding.


(f)   Appropriate segregation.
In certain circumstances, terracing is safer than seating.
For example, terracing is more quickly evacuated in an
emergency.


As well as providing many fans with the close companionship
arid "atmosphere" that they enjoy, standing on the terraces is
also of course comparatively cheap - often half the price of
a seat.   Any forced process to move football "up-market" via
a requirement for   all-seater provision might cut off a
substantial number of the young and/or less well off
supporters from the game.    This latter group represents a
significant proportion of the game's traditional support over
the last century - the permanent 'sponsors" of football.
Further, it should be recognised that, for a large number of
the young, male fans (especially those drawn from inner-city
areas), football sometimes represents the sole, abiding
source of feeling of belonging to a group associated with
success and achievement.    To cut off such people from the
game, by out-pricing it beyond their reach, would be
short-sighted and unjust.


Many football supporters think that crowd attendance figures
for individual matches are manipulated either upwards or
downwards, depending on the circumstances of the home club.
(On occasions, the communication of attendance figures for a
game are greeted with roars of laughter amongst the crowd
attending.) However, for safety reasons alone much tighter
controls on counting fans entering a ground may be required.
When terracing is split (as at Leppings Lane) by radial
barriers into "pens" a_ system which monitors individual
pen totals is necessary to avoid the kind of harsh crushing
which fans unfortunately have accepted as normal for a long
time. Although it is perhaps worth mentioning that such
matters are already provided for in the Green Guide.


Most pen-terracing is at the "visitors" end of a ground for
purposes of crowd control.   Facilities at the "visitors" end
are consistently the poorest in the stadium; the view of the
game from it, persistently the worst.    Yet, such areas are
often run as unashamed "profit   milking" exercises by clubs,
some of whom operate a two-tier pricing structure which makes
it more expensive to stand as a "visitor" than as a
home-supporter. (We understand that the Football League have
prohibited this practice following their 1989 A.G.M., as a
direct result of FSA representations).


Entry into grounds for "visitors" is generally less efficient
and comfortable than for home supporters. Crushing both
inside and outside football grounds is an experience so
common to away-supporters that it has become an expected part
of the day out.   One of the most frequent comments from fans
after the disaster was to the effect that "it could have
happened to any of us - we've all been in situations where we
thought serious injury might occur".
                                 - 8 -


       Often there seems to be too few turnstiles to effectively
       accommodate in-coming supporters.   Obviously, the exact
       number of travelling fans is not entirely predictable,
       however, with improved liaison with supporters (see Part II),
       and an    enforcable requirement for a minimum number of
       turnstiles per thousand fans, conditions could be much
       improved.


       Finally, the use of signs and other methods of conveying
       information to football supporters (both home and away)
       outside grounds is usually poor or badly organised.    Along
       with the segregation of away fans, the increasing designation
       of "family enclosures" and "Members Only" areas have
       recently served to confuse supporters even further.



(ii)   Fencing



       As far as we know, no pitch invasion in England has ever
       resulted in loss of life.   We consider that   the kind of
       fencing which existed at Leppings Lane is totally
       unacceptable.


       However, with some reservations, this Association     recognises
       the current need for some kind of   barrier which prevents
       supporter-encroachment onto the pitch, whilst ensuring that
       in the event of emergency fans can find quick access forward.
Though supporter representatives were not invited recently to
France to look at the "swing open fences11 installed at Nimes,
we feel that such fences installed in English grounds would
probably not solve the problem.   We understand that these
fences release under a certain pressure and we suspect that
French supporters stand well back from them in ordinary
circumstances.   In contrast, at English games, often the fans
are normally pressing on the front fences and would trigger
their release (by accident or design) too regularly.   In
addition, it is not clear that, in circumstances like those
at Hillsborough, "swing fences" would have opened in time to
save lives.


Any barrier preventing easy encroachment onto the pitch needs
to work in combination with effective stewarding. One can
imagine a barrier that would prove difficult to surmount if a
steward were blocking access, but easy to surmount with the
active assistance of stewards and/or police.   Regular and
frequent breaks in the barrier are also required to ease the
problem of emergency evacuation, but which could be
effectively blocked by stewards under normal circumstances.
There should be no spikes or other anti-personnel devices on
fences.   Their presence at many grounds is an unmistakable
sign of the loss of balance between safety and security.


At Watford F.C. there is a small barrier at the end of the
terrace, beyond which a "no mans land" strip lies leading to
a bigger and more difficult barrier preventing unwanted
access to the pitch.   Such a system whereby there is a line
beyond which fans cannot go except in emergency, followed by
a more difficult to surmount obstacle, seems an attractive
solution.   However, we are unsure how practicable this might
be at the wide variety of stadia in England.


Whatever kind of barrier the Inquiry might recommend, we
would suggest that it should not (as so many existing fences
do) make viewing the game difficult, and that such a barrier
need not apply:


(a)   In front of a "family11 or "Members Only" enclosures.


(b)   In front of designated disabled supporters areas.


(c)   Possibly other areas.   (Many football clubs with
reputedly less than perfectly behaved groups of fans - e.g.
West Ham United - have had no fences at all and no pitch
invasions). Every opportunity to put supporters "on trust"
and to make them responsible for self-discipline should be
taken.   The imaginative use of tannoy systems (perhaps manned
by supporter representatives) at potentially troublesome
games might help considerably.
(iii) New Stadia/New Funding


     The capacities of football stadia have shrunk drastically
     following the Ibrox disaster in 1971 and the subsequent
     imposition of safety regulations limiting attendances.
     However, overall attendances at football matches in the
     Football League have increased (for the first time since
     1945) for the last three seasons running.   In addition, the
     potential audience for "big" games (cup and derby matches,
     promotion play-offs, top of the tables games etc) has
     increased even further.


     Clearly, there is a need for new stadia with large
     capacities (in excess of 75,000).   In the immediate term,
     therefore, we propose the building of three new regional
     stadia sited in the Midlands, the North West and the North
     East.


     These new venues could be used to host cup Semi-Finals,
     European games (if and when English Clubs return to European
     competition) and big local derby matches where the clubs
     concerned can recognise that demand for the game will far
     outweigh the supply.   In that sense, these stadia might be
     styled "overflow grounds" and would initiate supporters into
     the experience of watching their clubs play in "greenfield"
     localities with much improved facilities and access.     We
     appreciate that a combination of "stick and carrot" may be
     required because of the possible loss of home advantage to
     clubs.
It would be acceptable to supporters that such new stadia be
"all-seater" but only with the proviso that admission costs
to certain areas were kept at a guaranteed (low) maximum to
avoid moving costs beyond the reach of many less well-off
fans. (Such a system operates, for example, in Milan where
the local authority owns the San Siro Stadium and insist
that a certain percentage of the capacity be retained at a
reasonable price.)


The new stadia would also represent a major regional
resource for other sporting activities and leisure pursuits.
We would not like to see such stadia used for "forced"
re-location of football clubs but rather as    beginning the
process of weaning supporters away from the old urban venues
to which so much affection is attached despite their poor
facilities.   It is only by persuading fans to relinquish old
attachments that ground-moving or sharing will succeed.
Recently, Charlton Athletic7s attempt to "re-locate" seven
miles away at Crystal Palace's Selhurst Park (a move made
without any consultation with supporters prior to the
decision) failed completely after a sustained,
supporter-led (and FSA supported) campaign to return to the
"Valley" ground.     If re-location were successfully negotiated
with a club's supporters, it would be important to show that
any profits made from selling the old stadium/re-developing
etc, remained in the club to its long term benefit.
The potential funding for new stadia and other improved
facilities for football involves issues so complex that it is
very difficult for a voluntary organisation with few
resources to address them properly.   These issues lie outside
the immediate experience of most football fans.   It does,
however, seem fair to expect the punitive "Betting Levy Tax"
to be either reduced, so that very substantial sums of money
become available (perhaps through the Football Grounds
Improvement Trust) to invest in the game, or the Government
be committed to return a percentage of the tax annually.
Perhaps financial incentives could be made available for
improvements affecting safety and comfort inside and outside
stadia.


A combination of local authority/public/private funding might
be possible, though initially new facilities might have to be
run at a loss (in return for their "service to the
community"). European Community funds for improvements might
be available also.   Whatever the sources of money, the
rationale for spending it is plain: for a considerable number
of people in this country, football is an enormously
important and rewarding game.   It originated here and it
plays a vital role in communal life throughout Britain, but
especially in those "run down, urban centres" suffering
chronic environmental and social decline.   Contributing
directly to the redevelopment of those areas in particular is
an urgent and worthy task.
                                 - 14 -



(iv)   Late Arrival at Matches/Delaved Kick-offs


       It is a general trend that supporters are arriving later and
       later at football grounds.   There appear to be a number of
       contributory factors:


       (a)   Consistent delays on motorways and other major roads due
       to weekend repair work.


       (b)   The experience of travelling on "football specials"
       (trains) or coaches is highly unattractive.    Supporters feel
       to be "in custody" for the whole day.   Consequently, every
       one who possibly can uses private transport.


       (c)   There is no alcohol on sale inside most grounds.
       Often, public houses in the vicinity are also closed.     Some
       fans, therefore, are constrained to drink in pubs at a
       considerable distance from the ground (and under pressure of
       time).   Possibly , the new licensing hours also tempt
       supporters to remain longer than previously.


       (d)   Police tactics have consistently operated to delay the
       arrival of (particularly) away fans.    This could be a
       deliberate policy on one interpretation of the Standing
       Orders of the South Yorkshire police.
(e)   Tickets for big games do not assist in so far as they
advise ticket holders to arrive at what may be considered by
some to be a late time.


(f)   Football grounds have become increasingly unattractive
places to spend any lengthy period of time inside before a
match.


Clearly, it is important to encourage supporters to reverse
this trend towards late arrival.       In particular, it is
especially necessary to target away fans to arrive earlier.
So far, ideas about "pre-match entertainment" (invariably
generated without any input from supporters) have tended to
fall flat.     Much more direct incentives to come early for
games are required.       Possibly along the lines of:


(1)   A free programme for early arrival.


(2)   Financial incentives, perhaps the issuing of vouchers
giving discounts for subsequent matches.


(3)   The general improvement of what is available inside
grounds, including:


      (a)    Convenient sites for buying a ticket to the
             next game.
      (b)    Magazine stands selling "Fanzines" (supporter
            produced magazines).
      (c)   A Betting Shop facility?
      (d)   Availability of a variety of food and drink,
            including alcoholic drinks.
      (e)   Creche facilities.


(4)   Playing women's and/or youngster's football matches
prior to the featured match.


Delaved Kick-offs



There are good reasons why persistant delays to kick-off
times are undesirable.    Supporters may begin to rely on
delays; kick-off times may be manipulated for a club's
advantage in promotion or relegation situations.


The FSA is, however, concerned that recent policy
(pre-Hillsborough) appeared almost to rule out entirely the
option of delaying a kick-off.     The evidence given to the
Inquiry by the Police would appear to be of the effect that
before a kick-off can be delayed there must be "an
identifiable incident" such as a motorway accident,
regardless of the safety of those in and around a ground.
Possibly, pressure from television companies may influence
decisions - a danger likely to increase in the future.
Though unsure of the practical implications, we suggest,
(a) That there is a Senior Police Office specifically
designated to give permission to the Referee to delay a game.


Crowd Control at Football Matches



Policing


The task of policing crowds from 1,000 to 100,000 attending
football matches in Britain is no easy one. Though the vast
majority of football fans are easily controlled and usually
good-humoured there remains a significant minority of fans
either actively seeking or over-ready to respond to
provocation.    This Association recognises the scale of the
task facing the police throughout the football season.


The supporters' experience of policing at football is very
patchy.    Some police forces seem much better than others.
There is undoubtedly a feeling that, as a football fan, one
receives a distinctly lower level of ordinary politeness and
civility than otherwise.     It seems that supporters are often
considered "guilty until proved innocent" and it sometime
proves a considerable shock to people who start to attend
football matches to find themselves automatically treated as
potentially violent thugs.


The evidence of Mr Hicks at this Inquiry illustrates
perfectly a situation many fans experience.     If Mr Hicks
cannot draw a civil word from a senior police officer, one
may imagine what it is like if you happen to be young, male
and dressed in jeans and training shoes. The FSA has sought
in a small way to initiate better liaison between police and
supporters (see Part II), but the requirement for a serious,
ongoing, dialogue between fans and police needs underlining.
In our view:


     (a)   There should be regular meetings of police -
     supporter liaison committees, operating at a regional
     level and involving both   senior and junior police
     officers.


     (b)   Prior to particular, "big" games, supporter
     representatives and police should liaise in good time to
     deal with any foreseeable problems, or new intelligence.


Where police and supporters expect large crowds to turn out
for a game, a conscious effort needs to be made to     work
together in the forming of proper queues outside turnstiles.
Supporter-representatives equipped with loud-hailers could
play a useful role - given the pressure on police to ensure
public order.    It is vital to begin the process of
queue-formation at an early stage.   Once established, queues
generate their own discipline because it is in the direct
interest of everyone in the queue to keep order, prevent
"queue-jumping" etc.
Once queues are formed, it becomes possible for police to
filter out non-ticket holders (if it is an all-ticket game)
at a point well back from the turnstiles.   It is also easier
to identify the small groups of non-ticket holders who will
remain apart from the queues hoping to pick up spare tickets.


Alternatively, and where the geography of grounds allows for
it, a police cordon set up some distance from the ground and
through which only ticket holders can pass will avoid the
possibility of non-ticket holders congregating close to
turnstiles.


Once inside the stadia, supporters (and not only supporters,
it seems) are often confused about the specific areas of
responsibility allocated to either police or stewards.    We
suggest that the division of responsibility should be made
much more clear. The vital role of controlling the "packing"
of terraces (and of sealing them off when full) would be best
performed by the police because they naturally carry a
greater authority than stewards.   It appears to many
supporters that crushing itself has been relied upon as the
main force to make crowds "find their own level" on terraces.


Such a policy is palpably dangerous and utterly
unacceptable.
                         - 20 -


Stewardinq


The role of the stewards is poorly defined and badly paid.
They occupy an awkward space somewhere in the "no mans land"
created by the triangle of police/club/and supporters.      A
considerable effort needs to be made to re-define the
stewards' role and to communicate that role to supporters, so
that it is clearly understood.


We suspect that the relationship between many clubs and their
stewards is unsatisfactory.     Channels of communication
between clubs and stewards are probably often confused or
unused.   It seems surprising that, as yet, football stewards
have no organisation of their own to represent their views
and improve their pay. Stewards are largely, at heart,
football supporters. The FSA is now looking at the
possibility of developing close contacts with stewards, with
a view to establishing an FSA (Stewards) Branch, so that they
may be more properly represented and more closely allied to
the fans they must deal with.     Better organised stewards will
contribute towards better organised football matches.


Supporters


The role that football supporters themselves might play to
assist in crowd control is, as yet, undiscovered territory.
In England, around 6 million different citizens attend at
least one football match a season; One and a half million of
them may be styled "regular supporters". These people
represent an enormous - and currently untapped - resource to
assist football in solving some of its more intractable
problems.


Over the past fifteen years, many supporters have become
almost "institutionalised" by the rigorous monitoring and
policing of their every move.     They are given no
responsibility for their actions and, unfortunately, some
fans appear to feel no responsibility for their actions.     The
FSA recognises that supporters must take a much greater
responsibility upon themselves for their own behaviour and
for the behaviour of others around them.    As supporters, we
have come to tolerate the kind of behaviour amongst fellow
supporters that we would not tolerate in any other situation.
This message must be broadcast by supporters to supporters
and it must be acted upon.


We suspect that the average age of fans at football matches
has been dropping consistently over the last twenty five
years due to the increased number of youngsters and children
attending.   This situation places a considerable number of
older, more mature fans almost "in loco parentis" - but
supporters have signally failed to exercise this potential
role. Recently, however, there are signs that the general
body of adult supporters is beginning to take more
responsibility upon itself.     The FSA, for example, has
occasionally organised vocal action to drown out racist and
abusive chanting.   The emergence of this Association itself
and the flourishing of over one hundred and twenty
supporter-produced "fanzines" (selling between them a million
                            - 22 -


    copies a season) are also clear indications that the will to
    get involved and to take responsibility is growing fast.
    Just how to tap that desire and utilise it to good effect is
    dealt with in detail in Part II of this submission.




«
ORIGINAL HANDOUT INFORMATION SHEET
                                                                       |               f ^ ^ r j ie ff%
k hi Hfe it W >" W * '! fee'll!Iiifet ^ y > r IB W                               l * . || kbir%d»




      H ie Football Supporters’ Association cares for the game o f football.
      Its members are the genuine supporters who follow the game for the game’s
      sake and who wish to preserve it for future generations to enjoy.

      H ie aim o f the F.S.A. is to achieve representation for its members in all areas
     o f the game where currently their interests are com pletely ignored.

     This includes such basic m atters as ground safety and com fort.
     It includes involvement in decisions about where ‘prestige’ and international
     games are played.            '- 'n        A                 " ‘
     It includes involvement irndtxisions ab o u t tickiet allocations for these games.

     In pursuing these aims, the F.S.A. will act on behalf o f its members irrespective
     o f which club, league, national o r international assoaation may be involved.

     H ie F.S. A. will reclaim the game for its members by using its strength — the
     membership itse lf                        *


     Wc will not allow any further alienation o f the game’s traditional followers -
     ordinary people who use football a t all levels as a recreational pursuit — by
                                     V ''" '   -   * - v '   <

     fanatics who see it as a d u ty to resort to violence to uphold allegiance to a
    particular club o r team, o r those who see football as a platform to reflect
    their own individual pow er o r wealth.


    The F.S.A. will take on the task o f restoring football to its rightful owners —
    You, the Supporters.




                             JOIff US!
THE WEMBLEY DOSSIER
                                                 •• THE WEMBLEY DOSSIERS "


Introduction

The FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION is the only nationwide organisation that
ordinary supporters are welcome to join, regardless of club or national alle­
giance, and through which their views can be expressed.

There are, at present, eleven branches of the F.S.A. throughout Britain. The
regional branches invite all supporters in their given area to meet together
regularly to debate topics of common interest and develop mutual ties.

Following the F.A. Cup Final between Everton and Liverpool at Wembley on Hay
10th 1986, the F.S.A. received hundreds of letters and telephone calls from
football supporters detailing complaints about a variety of matters concern­
ing that match. Below is a list of the main points raised and the following
pages are a selection of letters which evidence them. The dossier concludes
with a brief analysis of the major problems and provides suggestions for
ways to overcome them in the future.

P o i n t s r a i s e d by t h e l e t t e r s

1.        The Cup Final ticket allocation issue.
2.        The "black market" in tickets.
3.        Poor liaison between Police and Wembley Stadium stewards.
k.        Bad policing - though some supporters praise police efforts.
5.        Dangerously inadequate forward-planning and organisation of
           entry into and exit from Wembley Stadium.
6.         Corruption amongst some turnstile operators; failure to remove
           tear-off portions; failure to collect or check tickets leading
           to dangerous overcrowding inside the ground.
7.        Extremely poor provision for disabled supporters.
8.        Views blocked by Television camera gantries.
9.        Praise for good behaviour by and goodwill from supporters.
10.       General dissatisfaction with Wembley Stadium, its location,
           toilet facilities* provision of refreshments etc.


                THE F.S.A., 59, OAKWOOD RD„ IIALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 IXD
From:   Mrs.   B. Boardman                          34, Garside Grove
                                                    Wigan

My son, aged sixteen and his seventeen year old   friendobtainedgenuine
tickets from Anfield for G block at Wembley.

As you are aware, you have to go through two sets of turnstiles at the
stadium.   They passed through the first gate easily but when they tried
to enter the second a policeman took their tickets from them saying they
were not genuine. They argued of course. The policeman said if the
back of the ticket turned pink when he rubbed it with a pen or pencil it
would prove they were not genuine.   This he did.   The tickets turned
pink and my son and his friend were thrown out.   They tried to return
but were thrown out again. The policeman, by the way, would not return
the tickets. My son would not give up and found a police van with
C.I.D. officers in it. He told a C.I.D. officer his story and luckily
this man believed him. He then took the boys back to the turnstile and
told the same policeman to let them in.

They originally tried to get into the ground    at 1.00p.m., by the   time
they did get in it was well after 2.30 p.m.

All I can say is there is obviously something very wrong.




From:   M.S. Prince                                 28 Blenheim Avenue,
                                                    Litherland, Liverpool

West Upper Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00.
Turnstile G, Entrance 68. Ticket No. 479.

I am a shareholder at Liverpool Football Club and am writing about the
trouble I had at Wembley.

I was with a few friends in the chaos at the entrance to G block and
after pushing and shoving for about half an hour I finally went through
the turnstile.  As I was coming out of the other side the police grabbed
me and told me that my ticket was a forgery.   As I picked up my ticket
from the Club Office I knew full well that it was genuine.   The police
would not listen to me and I was bundled out by three or four of them,
getting my face smashed into a turnstile on the way. My lip was split
open and my nose is still sore now.  I managed to get back in straight
away, but I'm sure you will hear of people in similar circumstances who
did not get in at all.  I know what a job the police and officials had
with forgeries, but I'm sure that if tickets had been checked at the
bottom of the steps it would have been a lot easier for all concerned.
From:   Mrs. Smith                              16A, Springfield,
                                                Liverpool


I was at Wembley with my mother and daughter aged 6, for the cup final.
Ve got to Wembley at 2.30 p.m. and made our way to G gate. We stood
back and watched in horror the people stretched the width of the gate.
They were being held back but I saw two people go under the barbed wire,
they then let people go in still pushing, then a lot of people went up
to G gate but were sent back by the police. At that point I said to my
mum "did you see that policeman kick that lad in the back?" Every time
the gate was left by the police crowds were running up to storm the
gate, it was horrible.  I later found out that some people were
receiving first aid on entering through that gate. There were still
people trying to get in well after kick-off which is all wrong,
especially when some fans paid double the face value for tickets.   It
leaves a lot to be desired about the whole organisation of this game.
From:   Mr. G. Walker                                  Liverpool


I was one of many who arrived at the bottom of the steps at G block. At
2.00 p.m. after being pushed up and down the steps which became very
dangerous, I'm an O.A.P., extra police arrived also mounted police.
They held the fans back at the bottom of G block to ease the pressure
going up because fans at the top were being crushed and trampled on.
When I managed it to the top I was pulled to the turnstile by the police
which I was thankful for after the ordeal. That was at 3.10 p.m. (1
hour and 10 minutes!!).

Fans paying £9.00 and £25.00?   NEVER AGAIN.

Ve were then met with a notice in two foot high letters, "Toilets not in
use". When you went in the tide was in, DISGRACEFUL!    I have been to
Wembley six times, but no more, thank you.  It was a disgrace to the
people responsible for the great day of the season it should have been.
From :   Mr. B. Jones                            112 Rosslyn Street,
                                                 Liverpool 17


I will comment on the fiasco at G gate.  I started to queue at 2.15
p.m., fully expecting to be in by 2.30 p.m.  I was greeted by the sight
of crowded stairways. On reaching the concourse leading to the
turnstiles there was no apparent sign of movement.

Special Constabulary men were called in and did their best to control
the crowds but there were too few radios for inter—communication.

Several young children were in distress and had to be lifted onto
shoulders for safety. Pick-pockets had a heyday. There were many fans
who could see the potentially lethal situation and appealed to police to
hold the fans back. During this time there was still no movement
through the turnstiles.

Luckily some mounted police came to the bottom of the stairs and
relieved the pressure off the crowd. The police did their best.
Without that police presence I am convinced there would have been some
serious injuries and it would have been put down to "Liverpool thugs
again. O.K. there were one or two the worse for alcohol, but the
authorities could at least get their side of things sorted.  I finally
got a place on the terraces at 2.55 p.m.

I was not altogether looking forward to the 'Wembley Experience' as the
ground is well past its best. The facilities are spartan and the
building is a shambles. The surrounding area resembles a shanty town
and must be a nightmare for the police to patrol effectively.    We
approached the ground from Wembley Central Station, this led us into a
nightmare bottleneck through what looks like a bike-shed.   I agree that
we need a new stadium, purpose built in its own grounds, with a station
that does not resemble a stalag marshalling yard.   Wembley Central must
be the worst station I have ever encountered.   I am a Liverpool
supporter and bear no sour grapes, but why should the 'cheery, cheeky
scousers' have to put up with this disgraceful organisation.
To quote some fans coming out “They couldn't run a Zingari League
match".
From:   Mrs. D. Alexander                           3 BiHinge Crescent,
                                                    Blackbrook,
                                                    St. Helens

My friend and I were disgusted with the arrangements for getting in to
Wembley. G block where we were was terrible.    I thought both of us were
never going to make it to the top of those steps.   It was appalling and
could have been a disaster, plus the fact that many people were trying
to get in without tickets.  We were crushed and gasping for breath in
the pushing and pressure.

Wembley wants demolishing and a new stadium built altogether, as it is a
disgrace. Dirty toilets and dirt everywhere.

We are not going to Wembley again under those conditions trying to get
through the turnstiles.  It's about time the F.A. and all concerned got
about building a new place with more modern turnstiles for us to get
into.

Anyway we are not goi9ng to the Charity Shield, we are boycotting it
altogether.  I don't know why it can't be played at either of
Liverpool's or Everton's grounds.

Wembley is just a stunt for the F.A., to make money considering the
expense we had to get there, especially from the north.

I hope you will be able to get a lot done with other people contacting
you.  I and my friend will back you all the way.
From:   C.J, Langley                             8 Shrewsbury Avenue
                                                 Aintree, Liverpool

My brother and I had tickets for block G and spent 20 minutes (2.00 p.m.
to 2.20 p.m.) in a suffocating crush in the 10 yard gap between the top
of the steps and the turnstiles. This was certainly the worst
experience I have had in 20 years of watching football matches;
children and women were crying and none of the men looked too happy.   If
anyone had fallen to the floor (fortunately this was nigh well
impossible because of the press of bodies) I do not think they would
have survived.  With the Brussels disaster in everybody's minds, panic
was only just below the surface; the barriers and walls of Wembley must
have had a severe test.

I must emphasise that there was absolutely no misbehaviour - the cause
of the crush was the total lack of crowd control. People at the back of
the crowd coming up the steps could not see the crush at the front and
thus added to it. A few policemen at the top of the steps could have
prevented everything, however, there were none.  Inside on the other
hand there were dozens! All doing absolutely nothing and deaf to the
requests of myself and others to go outside and do something useful,

I am not sure exactly who my protest should go to, but I hope you can
pass it on for me.

From:   Jim Johnston                               51 Kenmare Road,
                                                   Wavertree, Liverpool

My ticket was for entrace G gate 64.  I arrived at the stadium at 2.15
p.m. and headed straight for turnstile G. There was already a large
crowd filling the staircase leading up.  It was impossible to tell what
was happening at the top, but the general story was that no-one was
being allowed in because of an injury, and/or forged tickets. Several
mounted police were present and they attempted to block the staircase at
the bottom. They did not seem to know what was happening, but kept
saying “You'll get in eventually". Naturally, more people kept arriving
and the crowd grew.

At 2.50 p.m. after minimal movement on the G staircase, I decided to try
F, where I waited only a couple of minutes before getting in. When I
reached gate 64 inside, there was no-one on duty so I went straight up.

I'd passed G on the way and saw several checks going on and slow
turnstile movement.

Long after the match I chanced to meet an old acquaintance who had been
a steward during the game. He told me that he didn't know what the
problem had been.

Obviously there was a gross lack of efficient organisation on the part
of Wembley authorities and the police.  It is not a ground that I wish
to visit again.
From:   Peter Bradshaw                             20 Wallace Avenue
                                                   Huyton, Merseyside

Whilst I was extremely lucky to be able to go to Wembley Saturday, I was
horrified at the incident outside Turnstile G before the game.

Me and my father had arrived at the Stadium at approximately 2.20 p.m.,
and we joined the queue. There were two mounted policemen at the
turnstile, who were turned sideways towards each other, and because of
the large volume of the waiting crowd the horses started kicking. This
caused, as you can well imagine, many people to run out of the way, and
obviously tempers flared, so the police rode the horses out of the crowd
and stood at the back near the parked television vehicles.  People were
very slow at getting into the ground, people became impatient and some
started pushing through to the front.

The situation was starting to become out of control and the police
decided to charge into the crowd in a feeble attempt to stop the chaos.
People tried to scatter, the children and women and certain men screamed
and I got rammed between the wall and one of the horses.  I have to be
truthful and say that for one split second I thought I was going to die.
My dad said the same thing after the match.

This continued for another 10 minutes, until eventually we managed to
drag each other up to the turnstile itself.   In the madness, the ticket
collector managed to tear off not only my ticket stub but also half my
ticket, so I now have precious little in the form of a decent souvenir.
Anyway, we arrived inside the ground at 2.55 p.m., just in time to
savour a fragment of the pre-match atmosphere.

With hindsight, the police and ground officials did absolutely nothing
to halt the crush before the game and I think the blame lies with the
disgraceful allocation of tickets.  If at least 45,000 of either side's
supporters had received tickets in the proper manner, there wouldn't
have been half the trouble before the game.

Ve were lucky,too, in that we only received chest pains from the crush,
but if somaone had been taken seriously ill whilst in the crowd, very
little could have been done to help them.

It would be nonsense for the authorities to say that it was the crowd's
fault, There is pushing and shoving to some extent at Anfield on a
normal Saturday and the police control the crowds adequately then, so
why in God's name they couldn't do so at Wembley is anyone's guess.

I am not in favour, though, of building a Wembley of the North since all
the atmosphere of the event would be lost. But, something should be
done about a situation which could easily have turned into another
Heysel disaster, and I shudder to think that I could have been part of
it.

If it wasn't for the quality of the game and 3-1 scoreline, I think
Saturday's Cup Final would have put me off football for ever.
From:   P. Yung                                    112A, Stamford Road,
                                                   Southport

I approached G entrance at 1.30 p.m. The crush during the approach was
worrying.   (What time were the gates opened?). Immediately after
handing in my stub and getting through the turnstile, my main portion
was inspected. Others before and after me got through without
inspection.

I got to enclosure 68. There was lots of room to begin with but it just
filled and filled,   I began to get frightened.  Injury and even death
were on my mind.   About 2,20 p.m. the crush was so bad I would have left
the enclosure if I had been able to. Women in the aisles were crying,
also a man. Men were straining to usher the women into the sides of the
aisle and into the barriered area. There was no room for them.     G68
seemed to be far more affected than the enclosure to my right.

At kick-off the crush was at its worst and I ended up forced against a
barrier, there was no space ahead of me to duck under.  When Liverpool
scored the crush was repeated but more intensely. The barrier flexed
and the terracing, though made of concrete, bounced like a dance floor.
I fought my way to the left hand side of the barrier and got my foot
onto the barrier support.  I raised my body, the idea being that a
crushed leg and pelvis was better than a crushed chest.  I hoped
Liverpool wouldn't score again. They did and the foregoing was repeated.

I would estimate that there were four times the safe number of people in
enclosure 68.

There was a man on a catwalk above the spectators, what was his
function? They seemed to turn their backs on the situation below.   If
they weren't there to report on crowd control they should have been and
recording it.

Why do the F. A. persist with their allocation rules? Does it need
something drastic to change their "bury the head in the sand" attitude.
Surely the demands of the supporters of the finalists should be
satisfied.  If by a certain date there were tickets remaining then let
these be distributed elsewhere, at least only neutrals would then be
buying them. Hopefully then any spivs would be stuck with tickets.

Forgeries for G block were public knowledge.    The ineffectiveness of
Wembley and the police was there for all to see.

I fully agree with the call for a new stadium   and in the   meantime more
effective measures for future Wembley finals.
From:   Austin Fearns                             22 Beech Close,
                                                  Kirkby, Merseyside

I thought I would relate my experience at Wembley on paper in case it
helps to improve things.

My ticket was for turnstile D, entrance 9, my son's for D.10. We got
into the queue at 1.45 p.m. at the top of the stairs.  We didn't move
forward for ages and I thought they had closed the gates for some
reason. Then people at the back, down the stairs a few yards, started
to get edgy and started pushing forward.  In minutes we were packed like
sardines on the plateau from the top of the stairs to the turnstiles.

My son, 17, and much slimmer than myself, was pushed forward and was
ahead of me and for the next 35 or 40 minutes we were just jammed in the
crowd watching youngsters, teenagers, climbing the walls and getting
through windows and over the barbed wire on top of the turnstiles.   It
seems that the turnstiles were open, but people with no tickets at all
were trying to pay the gatemen and walk in, people with forged tickets
were trying to get in and both were being turned away, so it was utter
confusion as people were trying to get in and trying to get out!

Two policemen were leaning against the wall on the plateau chatting,
meanwhile two fans wearing the same favours behind me were threatening
each other because of pushing. Children were crying, they were
terrified, women feared for their safety and for the children and more
than once the Brussels wall was mentioned, which didn't help.

I have often been in huge queues at Goodison and our 'bobbies' have no
trouble, they just seem to ride up and down on horseback and tell us to
stay in single file .... it works!!

We could have been formed in a queue at the bottom of the stairs and
kept in single file, and a bobby or two, maybe with a Wembley steward,
could have checked the tickets and just let the 'good' ticket holders go
up the stairs.  We knew about forged tickets at least a week before the
game.

The cause of all this stems from the F.A. and their method of allocating
tickets. They seem to think that people who work on a Saturday running
football clubs or playing football, and get paid to do so, should be
entitled to tickets before the people who pay the wages and put
themselves out at their own expense!  The first mistake they make after
that is to just deliver 25,000 tickets to each competing club.... I have
been supporting Everton since I was 10, I am now 50, but I have a
saying. “Show me a player who has played in a Cup Final and I will show
you a so-and-so who has made money from the fans who pay his wages".

I remember last year's queue for semi-final tickets at Goodison.  I
started queuing at 3.00 p.m. although they did not start to sell until
6.00 p.m. The queue went along Goodison Road and around to the Stanley
Park end and it was raining heavily.  I thought then, why doesn't Mr.
Kendall put his team on a bus and drive around Goodison <1 wouldn't want
them to get wet as well!) and say to them, “Look at these people ... a
                              l o.




lot of them on the dole, they will stand in the rain for three hours to
go to Villa Park to help you to get to Wembley.... Do you still want
over 100 tickets each?"




From:   Brian Sefton                              43, Plimsoll Street,
                                                  Edge Hill, Liverpool


My friend and I were having a drink in a club two tube stops from
Vembley.  In view of there being so many forgeries floating around we
decided to get to the stadium early.


Ve arrived at 1.45 p.m. and proceeded to queue at the bottom of the
steps leading up to turnstile G. Ve were on the gangway at the extreme
left of the steps.   At about 2.00 p.m., we had not moved a yard. Then a
policeman, whom I did not hear asking me to move, struck me once across
the head. Whereupon I turned around and I asked him why he had struck
me. He said he wanted me to move, which was impossible because of the
crowd. Then he hit me again so I soon found a space to move into so as
to let him pass.   At 2.30 p.m. we were still only half way up the steps
when the snails-pace ground to a halt. Vhen we asked why we were told
by a policeman that somebody had died and they were trying to get the
body back down the steps.   I have since found out, from friends, that
the police had shut the turnstiles because of forgeries and that the
story of the death was a complete fabrication.   Ve eventually got into
the ground at 3.10 p.m. very angry and upset.

My other friend had gone to turnstile H. He queued up until 2.40 p.m.
when the police opened the gates and let everyone in, reasoning that
there were so many forgeries to sort out from the real tickets that they
had given up, Please find enclosed a genuine Cup Final ticket No. 1583
(Turnstile H, Vest Upper Standing Enclosure), unused. He was not asked
to produce this ticket at any time whatsoever, even when he had to go
through the gate into the 58 Vest upper enclosure.
From:   David Walsh                               25 Grange Park,
                                                  Maghull, Merseyside

I would like to add my experiences of the Cup Final 'fiasco'   concerning
the scenes outside Wembley before the match.

I was with, a group of friends arriving at the ground at about 2.30 p.m.,
admittidly rather late but after being held up en route. We all went to
D turnstiles and found that there were about three thousand people at
the turnstile alone, most of them probably didn't have tickets. Judging
by what I witnessed when I finally reached the turnstile, they didn't
need one anyway. All of my friends and myself went through the
turnstiles without even having to show our tickets.   I still have mine
completely intact.   I would not blame the turnstile operators for what
happened because how could they turn anyone away without a ticket with a
few thousand people behind him pushing like mad? I would instead blame
the police for, to my horror, there was one policeman for the whole
block of turnstiles, and he was telling everyone that they wouldn't get
in! He said that the gates were locked because there were too many
people without tickets.   I said I did have a ticket and went past him as
he was trying to stop me. Then I saw in fact that the gates were open.
What was this policeman trying to do? Cause a riot? Turning people
away with tickets when people without were climbing over railings and
into windows (as seen on T.V.).

To cap it all I saw the official attendance put at 98,000, surely a lie?
I thought the white horse would have to make a comeback after seeing the
scenes outside.



From:   Mrs. Joyce Wilson                         29 Mornington Avenue,
        Mrs. Barbara Holt                         Crosby, Liverpool

We arrived at Wembley Stadium at 2.00 p.m. Our seats were in H block.
Due to the crushing around the turnstiles we eventually reached our
seats at 2.45 p.m.

We were among the first to leave at the end of the game, but found that
the police had barred the way out to the left. Consequently the crowd
surged forward towards the railings opposite. There was crushing of a
terrific nature, the crowd round us tried to help but there was little
they could do. However, we were lucky as they managed to get my friend
and I through a gap in the railings and up onto a grass verge. We have
both felt the effects of this crushing since.
From:   Mr. M. Pennington                           39 Vest Oakhill Park
                                                    Old Swan, Liverpool

Seat Ticket <2 £25. 00
Turnstile D, Entrace 2, Row 24, Seat 229.

Please find enclosed the strip portion (to be given up) of my ticket.
Ve arrived at the turnstile at 2.20 p.m. having four seats together at a
cost of £25.00 each obtained through the Everton 500 Club, of which we
are members.

It was absolute chaos, in fact we almost gave it up, however, when we
eventually got to the turnstile the steward demanded the complete ticket
of which two of the party only got back the narrow strip, which of
course should have been retained by them. Ve tried to argue but because
of the chaos we were just pushed through the turnstile.  The police
didn't want to know.

This led to further confusion in our minds because we still had to get
through another gate and we didn't know whether they would accept the
narrow strips or not. However they did, much to my relief.   The time
was now 2.58 p.m.

Ve arrived at our seats only to find that one was occupied.  (Seat 229).
Ve demanded to see the occupier's ticket, and lo and behold, to our
amazement he produced the other half of the ticket!  This matched up
with the enclosed strip. Give this lad his due, he didn't argue, but
muttered something about a tenner, so we can only assume that he passed
£10.00 over the turnstile. Vhat puzzles me is how he beat us to our
seats.

Just to fill you in on our backgrounds, I am 65 and a retired
Engineering Project Manager. The others consist of a woman of 60 who is
manageress of a wages office, an insurance broker and a part-time
teacher.  I hope this information will help and we all wish you all the
best in your efforts to help the ordinary supporters.
From:   Mrs. S. Reeves                              Hougoumont Avenue,
                                                Waterloo, Liverpool

At 2.15 p.m. I was outside H block with my son and daughter where we had
arranged to meet my other son, and go in at H and G blocks.  Ve then
tried to get into G block where most of the forged tickets were for.

There was quite a crowd who were all pushing forward but were kept back
a little by police on horseback.   Eventually we got to the steps. Then
the trouble started. The police pushed us back saying people were
getting crushed up front and that there were casualties.   Ve couldn t
get back because of others behind us pushing forward.   I was rather
upset because one policeman spoke to us in such a bad manner.   He said
"I've told you to get down them bloody steps, now get down those bloody
steps". He then pushed me.    I panicked a bit as I thought my son was
going to hit him but he kept his cool and told the policeman to go down
the steps himself and explain to those at the back what the problems
were. He just ignored this plea and went on shouting.    He wasn't a
young policeman but one that certainly gives the police a bad name.    I
was distressed but a couple of very nice young policemen let us duck
under a barrier to where there was less pushing. Eventually we got to
the turnstiles and through.   It's a wonder many people were not injured.

Vhen we made our way to the upper standing enclosure, what a carry on!
I've been on the Anfield Kop a few times but it was nothing like this.
People were nearly standing on one another's heads. Ve couldn't see
much of the game. As soon as half time came my daughter and I just had
to get out and we saw the rest of the game on television in a
refreshment area.

Ve spoke to some stewards who told us that the problems started when the
police took over from them checking for forged tickets.  They were so
incompetent that they let people with forgeries in and people with
genuine tickets were thrown out. Ve heard that one young chap with a
real ticket came back four times before being let in. The stewards said
they had never seen it quite so bad, and I felt sorry for them because
they were getting abused for something not their fault.

Anyway, it was better to watch the game on 'telly' in safety rather than
endure the conditions inside.  I have been to Vembley many times and
always been safe, but this time was quite another story and I was rather
frightened.

 I thank you for your concern and hope the F.A. finally take notice.
From;   Mr. P.. Jones                                      SPn^iM? gaa&s
I was at H entrance at about 2.00 p.m. and before I realised it there
was an almighty crush of people. This was not helped by the lack of
progression through the turnstiles seemingly because there were a number
□f people trying to gain entry without tickets, the turnstiles being
closed and people turned away.

It was, however, impossible for these people to turn away because of the
crush of people which was increasing as the game drew nearer.   I and
others around me pleaded with policemen inside the ground, behind the
railings, to take some action to relieve the pressure of the crowd but,
I am sorry to say, we were completely ignored.  I spoke to a couple of
people later on who said they did not even give their ticket in. I
assumed from this that the gates were eventually opened to anybody just
to relieve the crush.

I would add that I am a 35 year old male, and I was terrified.  I'm
surprised there were no serious injuries amongst the women and children
and the elderly involved in the crush.

I wish you luck in your campaign for a new stadium.



From:   John Pinnington                               10 Kennford Road,
                                                      Croxteth, Liverpool

My first complaint is the terrible state of the approaches to H
entrance.   It was just like a railway without the tracks and caused
quite a lot of discomfort to try and walk, especially for female
supporters.

The second complaint is the lack of organisation regarding people
entering the stadium. No police or stewards to form queues. This was
at 2.00 p.m. After a lot of pushing and shoving I got in at 2.20 p.m.,
getting in without having to hand in my ticket or even show it, and I
know of many people who also walked into the ground without handing in
tickets at G and H entrances.  After settling into my chosen place, I
noticed a young lady who was very distressed. She had lost her shoes in
the crush outside H entrance and her feet were badly cut and bruised
after being trampled on.

As far as I am concerned Wembley Stadium is no longer the right venue
for very important football matches, Cup ties or Internationals. As far
back as 1950 I was campaigning for both Liverpool and Everton not to
spend money on ground improvements but to examine the possibility of
building a super stadium for them to share, where every facility for
supporters were available, no parking problems, a railway station on
hand and a good roadway from station to stadium cutting out interference
with traffic.   If this had been built we wouldn't have had to play this
Cup Final at a disgrace of a ground.
From:   Brian Burrell                                   601 Cherry Lane,
                                                        Liverpool 4.

My ticket was for Turnstile H, entrance 56, lower Vest standing
enclosure. Following the advice printed on the ticket I reached the
turnstile at 2.05 p.m.  In this area was a V.P.C. who was so crushed by
the crowd that she couldn't use her walkie-talkie to summon assistance.
Nearby was a P.C. mounted on a piebald horse.   I formed the opinion that
his contribution to crowd control was minimal.   Had he been sited at the
foot of the turnstile steps reducing the number of people climbing up,
then his presence would have been useful rather than ornamental. At
2.45 p.m. I entered the enclosure and was amazed to see a significant
police presence seemingly unoccupied.  I was left in no doubt that
happenings outside the ground weren't their concern.

I agree unreservedly that chaos and incompetence was obvious approaching
the turnstiles. However, building a new stadium catering for supporters
needs would not improve conditions outside without proper crowd control.




From:   Mrs. Ann McVerry                               37 The Beechwalk,
                                              v        Knotty Ash,
                                                       Liverpool

Re the Wembley nightmare, I feel I should tell you that my husband, my
15 year old nephew, a friend of ours with leg trouble and I were trying
to get into the stadium at H block entrance about 2.00 p.m.   I have
never been so frightened in my life with all the crowds pushing. There
was no organisation whatsoever.  I felt that I was about to be
suffocated and would never ever go through that ordeal again. The
problem was not helped by the mounted police going through the crowd.
Having got in after a terrifying 20 minutes we got to H 63 entrance and
our friend and myself gave up after the kick-off as we could see
absolutely nothing and sat outside the stadium for the whole of the
match, not being able to bear the thought of going through the same
experience getting out as we had getting in.

If this letter helps in any way to get a new national stadium I will be
absolutely delighted.
From:   Len Allen                                     14 Bower Road,
                                                      Voolton, Liverpool

My son and I had tickets for the Cup Final, entrance H. My son is 26
and I am 56. Ve arrived in front of the H turnstiles at 2.10 p.m.
There were no orderly queues, just a seething mass of people and there
was no option but to join the crowd. Within seconds we were being
squeezed, pushed and shoved from all sides. The mounted police sensing
the dangerous position, particularly with the people at the front nearer
the actual entrances, moved their horses to form a horizontal line. The
idea was clearly to allow the position for some 12 yards in front of the
turnstiles to ease, before letting more people through, hopefully in
organised lines. This failed and within five minutes chaos reigned
again and the horses were withdrawn. Youngsters were crying and being
lifted onto shoulders while near the turnstiles several foot policemen
did very well to shield a man who had fainted and fallen to the ground.

I am 6' 2" and weigh 13te stones, but I was out of breath and dishevelled
when I finally got into the ground at about 2>50 p.m. My son had got in
several minutes before me through a different gate and waited for me.
It is not the first time I have been squashed and pushed at a football
match but it is the first time I have been frightened for my own and
others’ safety.

There was no bad behaviour but I am sure that people arriving from 2.00
p. m. onwards and seeing no orderly arrangements to enter the ground
panicked ever so slightly and became afraid they would not get in.   In
an effort to ease the position my turnstile operator just waved me
through and did not take my ticket.




From:   A Nichols                                       1 Acorn Close,
                                                        Sandiway,
                                                        Cheshire

I was disgusted with the struggle I had to enter Wembley and with the
seat I was allocated.

I had to get from the coach to J/K Entrance 36.  I started at 1.30 p.m.
At J/K it was a solid mass of bodies. This was quite an ordeal for a
man my age (65).  It took a great deal of pushing and shoving to get in.

I wasn't happy with my £20.00 seat either, Row 29, seat 46. Whilst it
was nearly opposite the centre line a stanchion blocked my view of the
goal to my left.   I could see the rest of the field but the
camera/commentator gantry completely blocked the view of the Royal box
for the presentations.

I would suggest that a new stadium be built in the Birmingham area
giving most fans an easier and cheaper journey.
From:   David Matthews                            Flat 3, 32 Percy St.,
                                                  Liverpool 8

(Letter sent to Liverpool F.C. and copied to F.S.A.)

Having enjoyed a great day out at Wembley last Saturday, I do not wish
to sound a sour note, but writing as one who experienced the chaos at
the Heysel Stadium I have to say that in my experience the lack of crowd
control at Gate H, Wembley Stadium, both before and after the match was
a dangerous disgrace and it is a near miracle that nobody was badly
injured or worse.

Before the match there were too few policemen on duty to form orderly
queues - just two policemen on horseback it seemed and only one in front
of the turnstiles. The crush was stifling as I entered the ground at
about 2.35 p.m. Later I believe the gates were opened to relieve the
crush - which was then transferred inside - certainly two men behind me
still had their tickets. During the game it was dangerously crowded
inside, especially in and around the aisles, which should be left free,
but leaving that on one side, to say nothing of the terraces which
bounced under the jubilant crowd, after the game the crush to leave was
even worse. The few police on duty seemed to want to prevent the crowd
from turning right - the natural exit - and a crush formed up against
the perimeter railings which many people climbed to escape. Once we had
entered the slip road to the right the pressure eased but before that
things were getting out of hand. There were children crying and even
adults struggling to keep their feet and it was a miracle nobody went
down.  I still can't understand why this was allowed to happen. The
police response was little more than to shout "stop pushing", I ask you!
Luckily no-one appeared to be hurt but it must have been a close thing
and I would ask you to forward my concern to the relevant authorities.

(Liverpool F.C. forwarded this letter to the Football Association).

From    Mrs. E.M. Bailey                           5 Talbot House,
                                                   IForthgate,
                                                   Hartlepool

My son and friend went to the Cup Final at Wembley. Their tickets were
for the ground, (Liverpool end). Unfortunately they were swamped by a
crowd of supporters swearing, pushing and kicking everyone in sight
after they had broken through the turnstiles at the back.   It was so
terrible that my son and friend thought it safer to come out and watch
the match on the television at the hotel.  It was very disappointing for
them as we had travelled down from Hartlepool especially for the match.
To go all that way and get in to Wembley then have to come out on
account of hooligans, they decided on coming out, they said, to save
their lives, they were all bruised on their ribs and back because of the
crush.
From:   Gillian and David Bennett           220 Princess Drive,
                                            Vest Derby, Liverpool

I have been watching Liverpool since the age of 12 and am now a twenty
year old female living in Liverpool.  I was fortunate enough to receive
a £6.00 ground ticket for the first all Merseyside F.A. Cup Final
through having a Season Ticket for the Spion Kop.  I was looking forward
to this memorable day.

I travelled down to Wembley with my brother, who is a Liverpudlian and
my boyfriend, who is an Evertonian. We were enjoying the day until the
moment my boyfriend left to go to.entrance A in the Everton end, and we
approached entrance H, our allotted entrance. This was at 1.45 p.m.,
approximately. There were a great deal of fans around but there seemed
to be no movement at all into the ground.  We joined the end of the
queue and immediately began to be pushed this way and that. A certain
amount of pushing I can stand but this was chaotic. There was a sudden
surge forward and everyone was in some discomfort. What followed next
was due to lack of organisation and unfortunately, poor policing. A
mounted policeman lacked the ability to control or restrain the crowd,
who only wished to get in to see their teams. People were appealing for
help but there was none.  Instead of moving the crowd away from the back
a mounted policeman just turned the horse around and waded in. Many
people were distressed by this time and children were receiving a great
deal of pushing. People began to realise that they were not going to
get in at this turnstile and many began to leaye until some order could
be restored. My brother and I left the crowd at this stage and stood
back in the distance. We had planned to wait 10 minutes before kick-off
or so, but the general concensus seemed to be that we would not enter
the ground until around half-time!  At this time I was extremely
distressed, knowing that the teams were on the pitch and we were still
outside. There were frantic attenqpts by fans to enter the ground.
Flags were tied together and thrown from a window 60 feet up. This was
an entrance for some risking their lives to get in. People's lives were
at risk at this stage, two ambulances arrived on the scene, but there
was still much pushing and shoving.

It was 2.55 p.m. when we approached a policeman and asked to be allowed
in through another gate. We finally entered through block J and were
told to go to gate 60. We reached there and were then told to go to 59,
then 58 and finally we entered an overspill section (which was nearly
full also). From here we managed to see the game.   It was 3.10 p.m.

What I could not understand is how officials allowed or did not foresee
these scenes happening. Why does Wembley not have separate entrances
for people with youngsters? Surely this "national stadium" should set
an example to the 92 league clubs! Why were there only 2 mounted
policemen and why were police dogs brought into the crowd? And why were
fans not prevented from joining the queue until the chaos had died down?

Although I had a great day, it was marred by these events and the
knowledge that I could have easily missed the game.
From:   Mr. K. Harding                              15 Heathfield Close,
                                                    Litherland,
                                                    Liverpool 21

I would like you to pass on this letter of complaint regarding the
entrance fiasco at the F. A. Cup on 10th May 1986. I paid £9.00 for a
safety fence view seat and had to enter the stadium via turnstile 'G'.
I arrived at the said turnstile at 2.20 p.m., allowing myself 40 minutes
to enter the stadium and find my seat. On arriving at turnstile 'G', I
was greeted by mounted police and police with dogs, I was told by a
mounted policeman not to go on to the stairs as it was too packed, but
to wait a minute. Whilst myself and hundreds of other people were
"waiting a minute" as he put it, other people were coming in at the side
of what was supposed to be a queue and just pushing their way in and the
police just let this happen.

At approximately 2.35 p.m., I was allowed onto the steps leading up to
the turnstiles, at this point the pushing got worse as one policeman
stood in the middle of the crowd and said that it was no use pushing, as
the gates had been closed, which only made matters worse.

When I eventually made it to the turnstiles, the feelings of people
around me were running so high, that I feared that there was going to be
another 'Heysel Stadium' at Wembley.

I eventually made it to my seat at 2.54 p.m. and at 3.15 p.m. people
were still streaming into the ground.

I have since spoken to various other people who were at the Cup Final
and who experienced similar and in one case worse experiences. One such
person is Mr. John Corless of 16 Ashton Road, Rainhill, who, along with
his brother, had taken his son to Wembley for the first time, they also
had to endure 'G* turnstile, but their situation was worse because they
were in the upper standing enclosures and their pen in particular was so
overcrowded, that at one point Mr. Corless watched the match without his
feet feeling the terraces as he was suspended in the air by the people
around him. Also Mr. Corless said that when Liverpool equalised and
everybody was jumping up and down, he could feel the terracing moving
beneath him.

In nty opinion what should have been a great day for everybody at the
match was spoilt by bad police work, an old-fashioned stadium that is
completely inadequate for staging major games of this importance and the
short-sightedness of the Football Association in their ticket
allocation.
                              2.0




From:   P.   Wilson                                   18 East Meade,
                                                      Maghull, Merseyside

I arrived at Wembley at 12,30 p.m. and got inside the stadium without
too much difficulty.  It was however, quite a different story coming
out.

After leaving the exit gate at J & K area we got stuck in a very large
crowd of people trying to get back to the car parks at the front. Just
past G & H exits, crowd conditions became very crushed and quite
frightening.  I was particularly concerned^for the safety of my 8 year
old son and I was having difficulty holding on to him. Forward movement
eventually stopped although the crowd behind us kept moving and the
situation was, in my opinion, very dangerous.  It was only the common
sense and discipline of many other adult supporters that avoided
possible tragedies by helping both myself and others with children from
being crushed or trampled and with their help we eventually got clear of
the crush.

The apparent cause of this quite dangerous crowd congestion was it
seems, caused by a line of police who prevented movement from G,H,J and
K exits back to the car parks and thus caused a large crush. The police
made no attempt at organised crowd control but merely aggravated the
problems caused by large numbers of people in one place.

The police just stood and watched this crush and they should be made
aware of what seemed like incompetence if a future tragedy is to be
avoided. One can imagine where the blame would be placed if anyone were
to be killed or injured.



From:   T.K. O'Brien                             3 Mersey Avenue,
                                                 Maghu11, Merseyside

Vest Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00
Turnstile H, Entrance 61, Ticket No. 952.
Ticket stamped on reverse WEST BROMWICH ALBION F.C.

Enclosed is a Cup Final ticket for which the price paid was £50.00.
This ticket was bought outside the stadium at 2.15 p.m. on the day of
the match. As it is printed West Bromwich Albion, I feel something
should be done.
From:   Mr. R. Postlethwaite                         17 Hillcroft Road,
                                                     Wallasey, Merseyside

I have been an Everton season ticket holder for the last 20 years along
with my mate, Mr. G. Woods. This year he received a seat ticket and I a
£6.00 standing ticket. Because I couldn't get a seat we decided to swap
and stand together, with disastrous results!

We are both pretty fit although I am 61 and he 58. We were in the
ground at 1.15 p.m. to get a good view and settled down for the pre-
match build up. After 2.00 p.m.      the place began to     fillup so we had to
stand to keep our places on the big steps. By 2.30 p.m.  we were three
deep on each step and getting pushed all over the place.

The aisles by this time were packed solid with people trying to force
their way in and by 2.45 p.m. we were being battered by grown men
fighting to get onto the steps. The fact that there was no room to
breathe, let alone move, didn't seem to matter to them, they just pushed
and used their elbows and fists to get you out of the way. By this time
I'd gladly got out and gone home    if    possible, my pants were coming down
and I couldn't even move my arms    to    pull them up!

My view of the match had gone - I only wanted to survive and get out,
but it was totally impossible to even move, until Everton scored and i
was carried bodily forward down the steps and eiided up on the floor
trying to force my way up through the bodies to regain my feet. Luckily
a young chap grabbed me under the arms and hauled me up. Even at half-
time I couldn't get out or go anywhere.

Eventually the match ended without going into extra time.... Thank God!!
I was able to struggle my way through to the steps out with my mate.     We
were both soaking wet with sweat and steaming visibly from our clothing.
The fact that the steps behind us were awash with urine all        the waydown
didn't matter a damn, we were free and out in the fresh air        again,
that's all that mattered.

I've been to Wembley with Everton many times, always in a seat, I'll
never go again though to stand if it means never going again ever.

After all that, our coach didn't get out of the car park until 7.00 p.m.
then crawled for 3/4 hour to the Ml. Why can't we have a Stadium in
Birmingham?

And at Wembley it was one big rip-off.   £1.10 for a hamburger, just
bread and a sausage, no other filling.

Fo, I don't believe I'll ever go to Wembley again, I'm beginning to hate
the thought of going to Wembley as a Stadium.   As much as I      love myteam
and like to believe it stands for "Football",  the way it was on that day
I won't forget in a hurry.
From:   S.L. Spiers                               (no address included)

I arrived at 2.15 p.m. There was a large crowd at J and K blocks with
over 100 deep trying to get through 12 turnstiles, no barriers to
separate queues and a few police taking no action.  I entered the
stadium at 2.35 p.m.

It then took me 10 minutes to get to my seat, row 27 at the top of the
stadium with no direct aisle to any exit.

Coming out of the stadium, on the path outside there was severe
crushing.  It seemed to be caused by the two flows of people meeting in
a space that was far too narrow. Although there was a line of police
horses they were taking little action.  I was pushed across the path
into the metal railings, the bar type ones.  I ducked to go through the
railings, there was another huge surge in the crowd and I finished up
rolling down a grass bank. Other supporters stopped me going into a
line of railings and picked me up.

At the Merseyside Milk Cup Final, five of us, including two children met
the same crushing at exactly the same spot. Because of this I did not
hurry to leave the stadium hoping that most of the congestion would be
over.




From:   Mrs. J. McQuillan                            28 Springfield,
                                                     Liverpool


Forth Terrace Seat Ticket @ £9.00
Turnstile G, Entrance 74, Row 6, Seat 105

Believed to be issued to an 'agency' in Preston and bought for £50.00 on
a Preston - Euston train.

My son was approached on the train down to London and asked if he had a
ticket. He said no. Later on the journey a man out of a party of six
or seven asked him if he wanted to purchase one, he jumped at the
chance.  I was very wary about forgeries but it looked real and handed
over £50.00.  It was for G gate.

I have also spoken to a man who paid £30.00 for a £25.00 ticket that had
Bradford City F.C. stamped on the back.
From:   J . Crowley                                 10 Church Hill,
                                                    Wroughton, Wiltshire

My reason for writing is to say that I am pleased that you are making a
formal protest about arrangements at Wembley for the Cup Final.  It was
the worst overcrowding I have been in, if animals had been treated like
this the R.S.P.C.A. would call it a scandal.

My wife, having paid £6.00 for her ticket, never saw a ball kicked and
spent the entire game uninjured, but seated in the first aid post and
bears witness to the many injured supporters brought in for treatment.

I soldiered on but took a week to get over the bruising! The
authorities may ask what comparisons do we make. Well, we both attended
the West Brom Final in '66 and from the terraces watched the game in
comfort.  I stood in the same place before the War for the
Huddersfield/Preston final and was quite comfortable. Even allowing for
forged tickets, I am convinced that the numbers for personal safety were
greatly exceeded.  I am delighted that you are raising the matter, for
too long the average supporter has been treated shabbily.  I might add
that a 14 year old relative of mine, having got through the turnstile,
found the gate to his section closed because it was full.

It was adding humiliation to injury to lose after being a goal up but
one redeeming feature about the day was the carnival spirit and the good
behaviour of the police, who seemed to appreciate as much as anybody the
prevailing goodwill.




From J . Hough                                    60 Berkswel1 Road,
                                                  Morris Green,
                                                  Liverpool

North Stand Seat Ticket @ £20.00
Turnstile F, entrance 79, Row 19, Seat 9

I paid £50.00 for this £20.00 ticket outside Wembley Stadium at 1.30
p. m. on Cup Final day.

The tout was originally asking for £120.00 before I bargained M m down.
From:   Mr. G. R. Diamond                          18 Wentworth Close,
                                                   Ainsdale, Southport

I enclose a copy of a letter my brother has already sent to the F.A.

We are both ardent Liverpool fans and he and his son used our allocation
of tickets to go to the game. His letter expresses his feelings about
what went on.

We wonder however, why a filtering system is not used to prevent those
without tickets from approaching the entrances? There were plenty of
warnings of forged tickets and the 'ready money' people are always in
evidence.

This of course brings us to the disgraceful ticket allocation system
which leads to these situations. The shortage of tickets plays a big
part in people milling around Wembley and eventually to a breakdown of
security which leads to the spectacle of fans swinging like monkeys high
above the ground, as witnessed on T.V. One day there will be fatalities
in and around this Stadium and once again we will have the politicians
expressing their horror as they did after Heysel and Bradford. That is
why we think the problems should be addressed to both the football
authorities and politicians who are so quick to condemn the game, yet
offer no solutions to its problems.
                                              N.
We wish you luck in your struggle for a better deal for football fans -
it will be hard but a worthwhile one.


From:   Mr. G. Hopwood                                 38 Lloyd Drive,
                                                       Greasby, Wirral

East Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket @ 366.00
Turnstile C, Entrance 17, Ticket Ho. 466
Ticket stamped on reverse, LONDON FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

Although I hadn't obtained a ticket for the match, I travelled down to
London on the Friday evening. At approximately 11.30 p.m., on the
Bayswater Road, after asking passers by, I was approached by four men
who said they could sell me two tickets. The tickets had to be
purchased together and the price was £50.00. As I was desperate, a
friend and I paid the money, £25.00 for each £6.00 ground ticket.

As you will agree, this black marketing is exploitation of genuine fans
and must stop.   I therefore enclose my ticket stub and hope that you can
use it to bring this practice to a swift end.   If you could return it it
may be useful for next year!!!

Finally, I must mention my disgust about the allocation of spaces for
disabled people.  It is totally inadequate for some people whose only
pleasure in life is football, to be turned away from an event such as
this.
From:   Mr. C.S. Leaf                              27 Little Moss Hey,
                                                   Stockbridge Village,
                                                   Liverpool

I would like to tell you of my own experience at Wembley along with my
sixteen year old son who is confined to a wheelchair.   My son and I are
season ticket holders at Anfield and so were eligible for the Cup Final
at Wembley. We were kindly issued with a pass to go right into Wembley
by car, but unfortunately our car developed a fault and so we had to
travel by coach. Qui— irtckets were allocated for a place on the Flame-
Stand and as this was our first time at Wembley we encountered numerous
problems on arrival there. This stadium, to say the least, was never
built with handicapped people in mind as I soon discovered.   First,
there were lots of steps we had to use with the wheelchair, which
created more than its fair share of difficulties as I had no-one else
with me to help. Secondly we could not find any stewards to ask
directions for the Flame Stand.   I asked numerous people including lots
of policemen where it was but none of them were able to help me.
Anyway, I walked right around Wembley with my son before I found the
Flame Stand but this turned out to be the last straw because the only
place left for my son was behind a six foot square of scaffolding which
was cordoning off a huge London Weekend television camera man. This
almost completely blocked my son's view of the match as all he could see
was the goal ends on either side of the pitch.   I couldn't begin to tell
you how upset he was about it as this was his dream shattered. Anyway,
I would like to say that these complaints are not for myself, but to
ensure someone can help prevent it happening to someone else in the
future.




From:   Everton Shareholder                  (Name and address supplied)

A travel agent in Regent Street, Douglas, Isle of Man was openly
informing callers to their premises that they could get Cup Final
tickets at x 10 face value.

One chap I heard of actually had to pay £80.00 for a ground ticket five
days before the game, although that is not confirmed.

Then, 3 - 4 days before the game an Everton supporter complained to
their higher office (perhaps their parent company) and, apparently, the
Isle of Man office was then informed that their ticket "offer” had to
cease forthwith.

Whereas to certain supporters this black market is their only hope of a
ticket, it is nevertheless disgusting in view of the many week-in, week-
out fans who were unable to get into Wembley.

I hope this will be of help.
   From:   R. Diamond                                50 Monkseaton Drive,
                                                     Whitley Bay,
                                                     Tyne & Wear

   Letter sent to :     The Chairman, F.A.
                        c.c. Minister for Sport

   I    wish to draw your attention to what I would describe as serious
~— overcrowding in G/68 West Upper Standing Enclosure, Wembley Stadium on
   Saturday 10th May.

   The conditions within the enclosure were appalling, particularly when
   one considers that I was in the national stadium watching the football
   event of the year.  If animals were subjected to this sort of treatment
   they would at least have the protection of the R.S.P.C.A. Perhaps the
   authorities consider those who throng the terraces as something less
   than animals and therefore do not require such protection.

   When one considers that these deplorable conditions were happening
   within fifty yards of the F.A. officials and only one year after the
   Bradford and Belgium disasters it makes me wonder whether officialdom
   has learned any lessons at all.

   The reasons for the overcrowding are complex and range from an
   inadequate stadium to insensitivity in the distribution of tickets and
   poor control by turnstiles and stewardship.  If attention is not given
   to these points make no mistake - there will be a disaster at Wembley.

   It is for this reason I am copying this letter to the Minister for Sport
   and my local MP to be recorded against the possibility of further action
   should it become necessary.




   From:   Anonymous

   North Stand Seat Ticket @ £20.00
   Turnstile F, Entrance 77, Row 20, Seat 28

   "Sold to me by touts in the Crest International Hotel for £50.00".

   Ticket stamj>ed on reverse COVENTRY CITY F.C.

   (telephone number of purchaser available).
From:   J . Harvey                                20 Dereham Crescent,
                                                  Fazakerley, Liverpool

Re the Wembley nightmare. My friend, daughter and myself took well over
half an hour to get from the bottom of the steps to the top to A
Entrance, turnstile 23.

It was disgraceful the amount of people trying to get into that entrance
with forged tickets and some even without tickets.

Why was it not possible to have police in the crowd on the steps
checking tickets, once inside the stadium there were plenty of police.
Twice we had ours checked, once as we came through the turnstile and
again by a policeman and a steward at the entrance to the staircase
inside the ground.

Once up there it was even worse, we could not get through the crowd. We
complained to a steward whose reply was "It’s all you scousers with
forged tickets!" How can this be when we.had our tickets checked twice?
He then said we would have to push our way through the crowd as we were
blocking the exit.

Just before kick-off about fifty or sixty fans came up the stairs saying
that they had been moved by the police into our section because there
wasn’t room in other parts of the ground.

When Everton played Liverpool in the Milk Cup, we walked in half an hour
before kick-off with no problem.  Also, in view of the games against
Watford and Manchester United where there were no problems, why was it
not possible to organise things better?

On the train coming home i spoke to two young Liverpool fans who had
tickets and didn't even get in to see the game. Also another friend
said he had trouble getting into his section of the ground, J block.
From:   Mrs. K. A. Libson                       46, Rockbourne Avenue,
                                                Voolton, Liverpool

2 x Forth Terrace Seat Tickets @ £9.00 each.

Turnstile D, Entrance 2, Row 13, Seat 217.
Turnstile D, Entrance 2, Row 13, Seat 218.

I answered an advertisement in the Liverpool Echo which stated
•Executive Coach Travel to Wembley, meal with wine on outwarth“and return
journeys with Cup Final Ticket for £75.00‘. When I rang the telephone
number I was told that £75.00 was for a ground ticket, stand tickets
were £110.00 I went to Manchester to a public house called the Egerton
Arms, Gore Street, Salford. While waiting to see the person selling
tickets I was talking to two men who told me that this happened every
year, that the person selling the tickets was called Donnelly and he had
no trouble getting tickets for any major football match. When I met
this person he told me that the price had gone up to £135.00.   I said
that I had' only brough £220.00 so he said O.K., he would let me have
them at the original price. He then brought out a manilla envelope
stuffed full of tickets.

On the day of the match the coaches were to pick us up at 9.00 a.m.
After numerous 'phone calls they finally arrived at gone 9.30 a.m. They
were not executive coaches, there was no wine because we were told it
was banned, the meals were pre-packed salads consisting of a slice of
wet boiled ham and a limp lettuce leaf. As they were handed out they
were given back untouched!

The person sitting next to me at the match told me he was worried when
he heard about all the forgeries so had taken his ticket, bought from
the sang source as mine, to Everton's ground and asked them to check it.
He was told that he couldn't have come to a better place to have it
checked as it was one of their own quota!!
From:   Mrs. V. Jones                             14 Sprakeling Place,
                                                  Boot1e , Merseysi de

2 x North Stand Seat Tickets @ £20.00 each.

Turnstile F, Entrance 76, Row 14, Seat 13.
Turnstile F, Entrance 76, Row 14, Seat 14.

Tickets stamped on reverse OLDHAM ATHLETIC F.C.

My brother lives in Hertfordshire and works in London. He obtained the
enclosed tickets from a Company Director of a firm in London which he
visits in the course of his job. He was offered these tickets for
himself and his son for £100.00 each which he realised was many more
times their worth, but was so desperate to see the game he reluctantly
agreed to pay.

he's not a rich man but in my view a silly one. Nobodyshould   pander to
these greedy sharks by paying what they demand. He said that£25.00
tickets were going for up to £1,000. The mind boggles as to who would
pay such a price, or could afford to, but obviously there is plenty of
money around, especially in London!

I would dearly like to see this stopped once and for all. Loyal fans of
both teams were unable, as we know, to obtain tickets.  What incentive
do they have to keep attending matches? The ticket distribution is a
disgrace. You will notice that the tickets were issued to Oldham
Athletic and it would be interesting to know who made the most money
from them!
From:   Mr. B. Evans                                     56, Croxteth Avenue,
                                                         Litherland, Liverpool

East Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00.
Turnstile C, Entrance 16.
Ticket stamped on reverse BIRMINGHAM COUNTY F.A.

Please find attached a ticket that I bought on Friday 9th May outside
the Regent Palace Hotel in Piccadilly, London, for £45.00. The tout who
sold it to me wanted £60.00 at first, as that was the going rate, he
said. He was a small fellow with glasses who had a Brummie accent (if
you see the back of the ticket it says "Birmingham County Football
Association"), so to me it is obvious that these tickets never reached
their true destination because he had an envelope full of tickets that
were in pristine condition, hardly touched, as if he had just got them
from a club.

Good luck in trying to rid these vermin from the game!



From:   G.W. Dale                                       13 Ewart Road,
                                                        Liverpool 16

North Stand Seat Ticket @ £20.00.
Turnstile E, Entrance 8 6 , Row 19, Seat 13.

I bought this ticket in London on Cup Final day for £50.00.          Good luck
in your quest for a better deal for genuine supporters.

Ticket stamped on reverse MANCHESTER UNITED F.C.



From:   Steven Sumner                                   69 Manica Crescent,
                                                        Fazakerley, Liverpool

Vest Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00.
Turnstile H, Entrance 56.
Stamped on reverse PRESTON NORTH END F.C.

I have enclosed my ticket stub which you will see comes from Preston.            I
had to pay £50.00 for it. I bought it from two guys from Preston -
pretending to be Evertonians!

I would like to think that the ticket could be tracked down to a player,
and he then made to pay for it.

I have also heard two stories (from reliable sources) that (a named
player) was chosen to dispose of Everton t i c k e t s . T h i s makes me so
angry. Best of luck to you.
                                31




From:    Paul Kelly                             12 Brook Drive,
                                                Great Sankey, Warrington

South Terrace Seat Ticket @ £9.00.
Turnstile B, Entrance 25, Row 7, Seat 18.
Ticket stamped on reverse MANCHESTER COUFTY F.A.

Forth Terrace Seat Ticket @ £25.00.
Turnstile F, Entrance 73, Row 22, Seat 75.
Ticket not stamped.

Both of these tickets were used on Cup Final day but the tear-off
portion was not removed by turnstile operators. One ticket, although
certainly genuine, had forgery written upon it by an official at
Wembley!


From:   Mrs. D. Halliwell                       35, Graburn Road,
                                                Freshfield, Merseyside

East Upper Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00.
Turnstile D, Entrance 10.

Please find enclosed my son’s ticket which he was not required to
produce at any time on admission to Wembley!
From:   Mrs. D.M. Chambers                         33, Lee Vale Road,
                                                   Lee Park, Liverpool

On Saturday 10th May 1986 myself, my husband, my sister and my brother-
in-law travelled to Wembley with the Liverpool Development Association
Trip for Lottery Ticket Agents. The journey was tiring, but enjoyable,
and after being slightly delayed having to stop at the Watford Gap
Service Station (most other Stations not allowing Football coaches) we
travelled on to Fulham Football Club, where a meal had been arranged for
the four coaches in our party. After having a most enjoyable meal and a
couple of drinks we travelled from Fulham to Wembley.

We arrived at Wembley later than planned, but in good time to get into
the Stadium before the kick-off. Getting into the Stadium was the
problem. My husband and myself had tickets for Block G and the other
two members of our family had tickets for Block H. We parted at the
bottom of the steps at Entrance G and arranged to meet up later in the
Coach Park.

As my husband and I were walking up the steps at Entrance G, there were
a number of fans coming down saying that there were only a few
turnstiles and that they could not get in (this in itself was causing a
problem. As people were trying to go up the steps a large number of
fans were trying to come down - whether because they had forged tickets
I do not know). We carried on up to the top of the steps and onto the
flat concrete surface in frontof the turnstiles.

After lunch the weather became quite warm.   I was wearing a Liverpool T-
shirt with a sweatshirt over it. The crowd started to swell and before
I knew I was surrounded by six footers, unable to move and practically
unable to breathe. At one stage I had to take off my sweatshirt,
accompanied by comments in typical Scouse humour!! But this was no joke
at all, it was very frightening and a number of people were panicking.
Being just over 5 ’ 4", surrounded by six footers and.unable to move is
no fun.   I was being pushed from side to side, my husband also being
pushed as he was trying to shield me.   I must add though that Liverpool
and Everton supporters are quite the gentlemen when someone is in
distress.

There were men with young sons, who had to haul them onto their
shoulders to keep them away from the pushing and shoving of the crowds.
Vhat worried me was that if one person fell, everyone would fall, and
what would have resulted would have been Heysel Stadium all over again.

Finally, bedraggled, bruised and close to fainting I reached the
turnstiles and entered the Stadium.  Once inside the Stadium I
rearranged myself, and tried to get my breath back, when suddenly fans
started to try to force the concertina-style gate to the right hand side
of the turnstiles. Our entrance, I think it was 6 8 , was at the side of
this concertina-style gate and it was a case of running for your life
before the gates and the crowds came flooding in. Their efforts were in
vain this time, but after watching the match on video, I noticed the
gates at Entrance G were forced at some time during that afternoon and
fans went flooding in. The fans were everywhere, trying any way they
could to enter the Stadium - they were on top of the turnstiles trying
to break the barbed wire to get over into the ground and scaling the
walls, aided by fans already in the ground.

The Police were altogether outnumbered and in my opinion quite incapable
of coping with such a large crowd; a handful of police at each entrance
was of no use at all. There would not have been any of the overcrowding
at the entrances if some proper organisation had been arranged prior to
the Final. Why was it that the Stewards were inside the Stadium - they
would have been of more use outside, arranging orderly lines up the
steps and into the turnstiles. Surely, on such an important sporting
occasion a lot more Stewards could be employed for just one day — say
men who are out of work, and perhaps extra police brought in.

Once we were settled into our standing positions in Entrance G, we
watched an enjoyable game of football and the fans were a credit to the
whole of Merseyside, but I really do think more thought must be put into
another fixture of this scale.

I swore on 10th May 1986 that I would never go to Wembley again, but
having thought about it, it just boils down to bad management on the
part of Wembley and the F.A. Having been to Wembley a number of times,
this was the worst experience we have had. Hopefully, the problems can
be solved before the next meeting of "Merseyside".

ITO ONE EVER WANTS TO SEE THE HEYSEL TRAGEDY ALL OVER AGAIN.
 Conclusion


From the evidence presented in the foregoing letters, there sire five major areas
 where substantial changes need to be made:
 1.   The ticket allocation system
2.    Police - steward liaison
3.    Corruption at turnstiles
      Facilities for disabled supporters
5.    General amenities provided atWembley       Stadium


Each one of these points can be dealt       with individually.

1.    It is clear both from the selection of letters included herein and in the
view of the vast mass of football supporters generally, that the F.A.’s ticket
allocation system for Cup Finals at Wembley Stadium is the single, most signif­
icant factor underlying most complaints, (pp 7. 8 , 9 , 19, 2^, 26). The number
of tickets allocated to supporters of the competing finalists is frequently in­
sufficient to include many of those who regularly attend those club* s Football
League and Cup matches. Consequently, the forging of tickets ( made easier by
the fact that all Wembley tickets look alike year after year), the desperate
fans without a ticket of any kind intent on entering the Stadium, and the now
perennial "black market" for tickets are all direct results of the persistant
under-allocation doggedly pursued by the Football Association. There is one
obvious and simple way to either alleviate or totally eliminate these problems;
SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASE THE TICKET ALLOCATION TO THE COMPETING FINALISTS.

Under the current system, the F.A. allocates 51% of tickets to the two finalists.
However, almost 80% of the remaining tickets are allocated to 1st and 2nd divis­
ion clubs and the various County Football Associations. This is too large an all­
ocation. It is apparent from the evidence of tickets bought on the black market
that the majority originate from that source (pp 2 0 , 2 2 , 2 3 , 2^, 25, 2 6 , 2 8 , 2 9 ,
30, ~y\.). Some tickets also originate from players with the competing clubs, but
we accept that that is a matter outside of the F.A.'s direct control.

There can be little doubt that the current allocation system, despite occasional
minor modification, was designed for a pre-television age and therefore, stands
in need of restructuring. The F.S.A. suggests that a minimum of 7C$, but better
still something in the order of 80^£ of all available tickets be shared by the
competing clubs in future. This would still leave up to 29,kOO (based on 7C^ of
current capacity of 98,000) for the F.A. to distribute between clubs, County
F.A.'s, F.A. Council representatives etc. Such a change would almost certainly
eradicate the problems caused by forgeries, the black market and ticket-less
fans. This kind of positive action, sympathetic to the desires of ordinary fans
would also generate a lot of goodwill and thus help promote the fundamental
changes in attitude required to combat football hooliganism.


2.   The liaison between the police and Wembley stewards on 10th May 1986 was
obviously poor, (pp 6 , 13, 1*+» 1?» 18 , 26 , 27, 33»)» Wembley Stadium’s method
of recruitment of stewards requires considerable improvement. There were many
examples (e.g. the Doran brothers featured on T.V.AM shortly after last year's
final) of supporters who found it frighteningly easy to be hired as stewards.
It seems that a number of seperate and un-coordinated organisations have been
responsible for Wembley*s security, increasing the likelyhood of poor liaison
between stewards and police. One single body should assume responsibility.

There were numerous examples of bad policing, (pp 7» 10, 1 3 , 1 5, 1 8, 19* 20.).
Many of the individual police officers outside the stadium were not equipped
with personal radios and consequently were unnable to inform supporters of the
problems occuring at turnstiles. The crowd crushes outside G and H blocks in
particular, where many supporters experienced much distress, were caused in
part by the failure to provide explanatory information. People will behave
patiently under stress if they understand that there is a problem and are ass­
ured of its solution. As it was, no assurances were given and many supporters,
some having paid large sums to purchase black market- tickets, were on the edge
of panic at the prospect of failing to enter the stadium at all.

Further problems were created when inexperienced police officers took over the
inspection of tickets from   turnstile operators, (pp 1, 10, 13). This lead to
holders of genuine tickets   being barred from entry. The     difficultiescreated
by forged ticket-holders being rejected at turnstiles, from where it was almost
impossible to retreat into the crush behind, could have been largely avoided by
forward planning. It was common knowledge weeks before the Cup Final that certain
blocks (especially G and H) had been targeted by forgers. If either informed
police or Wembley stewards   had been placed early at the     bottom of the steps
leading up to the turnstiles in order to filter out    the    more obviousforgeries
(and those without tickets), orderly queues could have been formed and main­
tained. Clearly there was wholly inadequate preparation by the Metropolitan
Police and Wembley Stadium Limited.   If the latter recruit stewards at 11.00am
on the day of the match, as evidenced by the Doran's story, there is little
time to instruct them properly. Given the activities of various modern terrorist
organisations* the stadium's security can only be deplored.


3.   The persistance, year after year, of corruption at the turnstiles has very
dangerous consequences in terms of overcrowding, (pp 10, 11, 12, 16). Unfortun­
ately, Wembley's turnstile operators are renowned for their readiness to accept
what can only be described as a bribe. Sone operators retain tickets and re-sell
them later, as per Mr. Pennington's experience told on page 12. Wembley Stadium
Limited must recruit a better, less corrupt staff, perhaps by offering higher
remuneration for their difficult and onerous responsibility.


k.      The facilities for the disabled spectator at Wembley are nothing short of
a disgrace, (pp 2k.) A mere twelve wheelchair places are available out of the
near 100,000 capacity. If Wembley is to remain considered as our "National
Stadium” it should provide at the very minimum 100 wheelchair places, given
that about             of the population are registered disabled. For those few ( very
few ) who are lucky enough to secure a place on the designated platform, a
decent view of the game is then not guaranteed. On 10th May 1986 a London Week­
end T.V. camera gantry was placed directly in front of the wheelchair platforml
(P 2 5 . )


5.     The a m e n i t i e s and r e fr e s h m e n t f a c i l i t i e s a t Wembley a r e poor and g r o s s l y
i n a d e q u a t e , (p p 3» 4 , 5* 2 1 , 2 5 ) • I f r a p id and s u b s t a n t i a l im provem ents a r e n o t
f o r t h c o m in g , t h e ' F . S . A . i s happy t o recommend t h e s u g g e s t i o n made i n a number
o f l e t t e r s (p p 7* 8 , 1*f, 1 5 , 16 ) , t h a t a new n a t i o n a l sta d iu m be c o n s id e r e d ;
one owned by t h e n a t i o n and n o t a p r i v a t e e n t e r p r i s e , b u i l t t o s a t i s f y t h e n e e d s
o f t h e m a ss e s o f o r d in a r y p e o p le who s u p p o r t and fund many d i f f e r e n t s p o r t s .


On 10th May 1986 there could quite easily have been a disaster in human terms
either outside the stadium in the crush approaching many of the turnstiles, or
inside in areas of extreme overcrowding. Fortunately, serious injury to any
person was avoided this time, although many suffered severe bruising and much
distress. There can be little doubt, as many correspondants point out, that the
basic good humour and friendly rivalry of Merseyside supporters rather than any
effective organisation by the F.A., Wembley Stadium Limited or Police, prevented
another football catastrophe. Under similar conditions in the future and where
the opposing supporters may not so readily integrate, will lady luck smile quite
so pleasantly? And, if she doesn’t, WHERE WILL THE BLAME BE LAID?
LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL TICKET ALLOCATION REPORT
                                                                   Peter Mawdsley d c a m i t s a
   LIVERPOOL                                                       Chief Trading Standards Officer
                                                                   6 2 Great Crosshall Street
                                                                   Liverpool
                                                                   L3   2AT
                                                                                051 227 1811
                                                                  Telephone:    051 227 4984   E xt:


                                                                                embargoed
                                                                                10.00 AM
                                                                                28th July. 1988



                   CUP TICKET_REPQRL SHOWS 'WIDESPREAD ABUSE' OF F.A. RULES
  A report condemning the Foothaii            ^•
  has been made public in Liverpool                                               ^   the Cup Pinal



                                                              lnf°rmati0n « ■ " “ « - - Wembley
 ticJi|t and up to £185 for a £30 seat.°me      ^   ^    t 0 P3y Up to £80 for 311 £8 standing

 The report names 12 first
 Football Associations whose stamps appear^ToJTt * 3 C®ta^ogue of League Clubs and County
 had paid inflated prices.       PS appeared on tickets for which fans told officers toey

Councillor Hannah Folan. who chairs r,-.
Committee said, "The system is grossly Jn?°ir         n o S r ' " 'S„Consumer Protection Sub-
organisations who don't really want them f o r k J              ^     61ng given to clubs and
prices back in the hands of g e n u S e s u ^ t e r f ^ ^     “Se 311(3 they end UP at s k y ^ L
in the first place."        g           supporters to whom they should have been allocated

 The report estimates that up to 15 080        t•
above the 25,000 tickets allocatedto the c £ l L " O f c T fanS 3ttended the final over and
  ave had to pay inflated prices for their tickets d e ^ t        °f th6Se 6Xtra fans w i l 1
every home game this season. I f s a huge M p - o J f " sa d Co                 haV6 Seen
                                        6    p 011* said Councillor Folan.
Trading standards officers al<;o        ^ ^■
Wemb*     „ith touts beaten up L Y S a ^ % * £                    ? Vl°l m t        °“‘^ e
that^gregation arrangements failed as large numbers of *lcketlefs fa"s. They also claim
f ° r ^ . Wimbledon end.                   g numbers of Liverpool fans obtained tickets

The r e p o H highlights the large numbers of + h l. * ^
source. Clubs or associations who fail to t i t l u f°Und.to carry            stamp to identify their
standards officers were surprised to finri n -i--Pi            tickets breach F.A. rules. Trading
            the serial numbers of 450 tickets f o / t h e ^ ^ 6a^ ing the Wimbledon stamp and have
councillor Folan added, "This is the most comnrph                       k original sources,
m d shows widespread abuse of F.A. rules      If                r6P°rt comPiled °n this subject
‘bout the interests of genuine supporters it wil] ° ° tba11 Association is seriously concerned
   s bl^tant profiteering."         PP°rt^ s it will change the system tohelp cut d o j ^ nC6rned

he report calls for:-
  more tickets for the two finalists-
  average home league attendances t o ’be taken into a
  these tickets;                           taken into account when deciding the split of
  all tickets to be stamped with their ini-Mai
  disciplinary action against t h o s ^ b r e S ^ l . r ^ s .

                                                                       cont:-
                                      - 2 -

 The Football Association's policy has also been reported to the Director General
 of Fair Trading as being in breach of the Fair Trading Act as it acts against the
 economic and safety interests of fans.

Merseyside clubs Everton and Liverpool have both indicated that they will be writing
to the Football Association to call for more tickets for the finalists and for an
'average gate' system of distribution.


                                        ENDS



NOTES FOR EDITORS
-   A collection of more than 100 F.A. Cup Final tickets is available for photographs
    by arrangement with Mr. Mawdsley.

-   A copy of the full report is attached, or available as above



CONTACTS
Councillor Hannah Folan, Chair, Consumer Protection Sub-Committee, Liverpool City Council
051 227 1811

Peter Mawdsley, Chief Trading Standards Officer -
051 227 1811 (Work)
051 632 3853 (Home)

Robin Croft, Assistant Chief Trading Standards Officer -
051 227 4984                \
                                _L I   v e r p o o l     c i t y       c o u n c i   T.



                                    _THE ALLOCATION OF F.A. CUP FINAL TICKETS

                                Report by the Chief Trading Standards Officer


        INTRODUCTION
1,      For a number of years there ha<? h<=<=n
        Football Association in respect of its allocation of                       ^   policy of the
        leads to a shortage amongst the suooort^! f                tickets for the F.A. Cup Final
        cannot obtain tickets at face value from thp f T ^ 1, ??        competing teams. Fans who
        then forced to pay inflated prices to " c k i t L         allof f ™ to their club are often
        final.                      P    63 t 0 tlcket a n c l e s and touts in order to attend the


       officers at "Liverpool City                        and.Wimbledon trading standards
       shortages and excessive          ontickets    A g a l ^ ^ T 1* ^           t 0 ticket
       Trading Standards Department commenced an investigation in ^aCk^ OUnd *he Council's
       extent of the problem and its effect on                       attempt to gauge the
      jpf that investigation.                        6rS”        report details the results

       F.A. ALLOCATION POLICY

       as f o l ^ ! ' 0^   that ^      appr°ximate allocation of tickets for the F.A. Cup Final is

                     Finalists
                     County Football Associations                  S ’000
                     Overseas Associations                             ’ 500
                    First Division Clubs                            5 000
                    Second Division Clubs                                nnn
                    Third Division Clubs                               ’,nn
                    Fourth Division Clubq                             ’Ann
                    Non-League Clubs                                1*500
                    F.A. Council Representatives                    l ’ ?50
                    Football Association                           2*000
                    Wembley Stadium                                   ’
                                                                        500

      These figures are based on a nominal ground capacity of about 96,000. for Vte„bley Stadium


                         aS ™ u ™ e ^ ^ i S 1 h
     S / ^ i ^ l V n o l d                        ee
                                                   tStar% a U “ ated ^        associations
     that there is an equal allocation to the clubd i W°i 1”    sts‘ xt should also be noted
     taken of the average n ^ b e r of 4 - r ^ “                                         is


     the considerable d i f f e S n c e ^ r t h ^ ^ J e r a ^ e ^ ^ e 6! 8 ^ hjfhlighted this year because of
     Liverpool F.C. attracted an average of about 40                                     °f ^   tW° finalists.
     Wimbledon F.C.'s average home gatf was less t h ^ 8 0 ^                                  —    ", whereas
     approximately 25,000 tickets to each club l e f t ^ nA+ ^ .               Theucurrent Policy of allocating
     tickets in Liverpool and a possible s u r p L ^


     regular supporters following S e ^ e s p e C t i J e ^ e M ^ t h             aCCOUnt of the numbers of
     at Wembley this year it was apparent that considerabl^                   t ^   S6aSOn' Fr°m obse™ations
     final than the 25,000 tickets^llocated^o S e cl"b ^ T t ™                           fanS attended the
     exact number of Liverpool supporters insidP                      ^         dlfflcult to estimate the
     between 30,000 and 40,000. This would mean that b ^ C                     t
                                                                             ^ easonable estimate would be
     supporters obtained tickets originally                      e ^ r e 5 ; 000 ^    15’°°° L i ^ P° 01 “ ‘
 EVIDENCE GATHERING
 In order "to establish some estimfli-^ ^-p j_i__ ,
 value trading standards officers from Liverpool c[tv&r                   zourc^- of tickets sold above face
 information line to receive evidence f r ^ p p o r t ^                 “ 'a d i t L “P ‘ i* * 1 telePh°ne
                                                   cers.                in addition, a team of 16 officers
                                                      -   2   -




          travelled to Wembley on the day of the final to question a sample of fans outside the
          ground. It is believed that this was the first time such information has been sought
          from supporters at Wembley Stadium.

       INFORMATION RECEIVED
  8.   The information received by trading standards officers at Wembley Stadium and via the
   ... telephone information line in Liverpool is detailed at Appendix A . It may be summarised
          foil ows :—

               a)   Number of allegations of overpriced tickets received         - 566
               b)   Allegations by persons willing to give names and addresses   - 313
               c)   Highest price for £8 standing ticket                         - £80
               d)   Highest price for £30 seat                                   -£185
               e)   Average price of an £8 ticket                                - £36

         It is estimated that officers at Wembley Stadium were able to make a very general enquiry
         of somewhere between 5% and 10% of fans, or 5,000 to 10,000 people.

  9.     STAMPS ON TICKETS
           It is understood that Football Association rules require all Football Clubs    andCounty

      •   Football Associations   to place their stamps on F.A. Cup Final tickets allocated to them.
      ••• Appendix B to this report lists details of those clubs and associations whose stamps
          appeared on tickets for which supporters indicated to trading standards officers that
          they had paid prices over face value.   It may be summarised as follows

              a)    Number of Football Club stamps on allegedly overpriced tickets        - 38
              b)    Number of County Association stamps on allegedly overpriced tickets   - 18
              c)    Approximate number of allegedly overpriced tickets bearing NO STAMP   - 300
              d)    Number of tickets in current possession of trading standards officers  -110

10.      It was noted that of the 300 tickets observed bearing no stamp to indicate their
          source, many were to sections^f the stadium which may'have been allocated to
          Wimbledon supporters.    It is hoped that the Football Association will check the serial
         numbers of all tickets    to indicate their initial allocation source in order that it
         might be established if any clubs or associations are breaking F.A. rules. The Football
         Association will also be requested to establish how many unstamped tickets identified
         as being sold on the unofficial market trace back to original allocations to the F.A.
         themselves, F.A. Council Representatives, Overseas Associations and Wembley Stadium.

 H ^ ^ I n those cases where a ticket bears an origin stamp the Chief Trading Standards Officer
        has written direct to the club or association concerned requesting that they establish
        the person to whom the relevant ticket was originally supplied and advise him if they
        can indicate that the ticket was, in fact, correctly used. It is hoped that all clubs
        and associations involved will cooperate and identify any individuals found to have been
        breaking F.A. rules or profiteering at the expense of genuine football supporters.

      FORGERIES
12.   A further problem at the Cup Final this year was that of forged tickets. Many fans
      approached both trading standards officers and police officers to check the validity
      of tickets they had purchased from unofficial sources. Many examples of forgeries
      were seen. All forgeries appeared to be printed with the same gate and entrance number
      which enabled police and Wembley officials to deny fans with forged tickets access to
      the ground. It was apparent that the shortage of tickets for the game provided a
    ■ potentially lucrative market, particularly amongst Liverpool fans, for the forgers.
      Many fans had paid inflated prices for forgeries.

        SAFETY IMPLICATIONS
13*     Trading standards officers at Wembley observed very large numbers of Liverpool supporters
        with tickets for the end of the stadium allocated to Wimbledon fans. It is likely that
        many of these tickets will have been allocated originally to Wimbledon Football Club and
        therefore will have reached Liverpool supporters through unofficial sources. To the
        credit of both sets of fans there was no trouble inside the stadium but this situation
                                                                                         cont
                                                         - 3 -

               did lead to a breakdown of segregation procedures which could have had very serious
               consequences.

    14.     Trading standards officers did observe a certain amount of violence outside the stadium.
            At least four ticket touts were seen to receive severe beatings. There were also two
            attempts by supporters without tickets to storm the gates. This led to some violent
            scenes and serious confrontation with the police as they tried to repel the charges and
            restore order. This violence certainly represented a serious risk to the general safety
            of fans queueing or walking around outside the stadium. Virtually all the violence
            observed outside the stadium was ticket-related. Much of this violence may have been
            avoided if more tickets had been allocated to supporters of the participating teams.

             LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
    15.      Under Section 2 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 the Director General of Fair Trading has
             a duty to keep under review any commercial activity which could involve practices which
             adversely affect the economic or safety interests of consumers. A copy of this report
             will be passed to the Director General of Fair Trading with a request that he examine
             the Football Association's current ticket allocation policy which he may deem to be in
             breach of the Fair Trading Act in which case he could ask for that policy to be amended.
          g 2 h e Chief Trading Standards Officer believes that this report helps identify that policy
          ^ ^ s having a very serious adverse effect on both the economic and safety interests of
             many football supporters. Should the Football Association be requested to amend its
            policy by the Director General and fail to do so, it could be forced by Government Order
             to make appropriate changes.

    16.    It is not illegal under UK law to sell tickets for sporting events, pop concerts
           theatres etc at prices above fact value. It is illegal in certain other countries and
           certain cities in the United States.   In New York, for example, a licence is needed to
           resell tickets as a business activity. All tickets must be printed with their price
           and a maximum premium (about 2 dollars) at which they can be resold. It is an offence
           to sell at more than the price plus the premium. Regulations prohibit licensed resellers
           of tickets from buying tickets Gather than from the event promotors or other licensed
           resellers and records must be kept showing details of all transactions. There is no
           doubt that similar regulations introduced in this country would severely curtail the
           activities of ticket touts at a variety of events and lead to many more tickets being
           available to fans at, or close to, face value.

           SUMMARY
17.        a) Almost half the tickets for the F.A. Cup Final are not allocated to the clubs
               competing in the final;

           b)    There is an equal split of tickets between the finalists and no account is taken
                 of average home league attendances;

           c)v The present allocation policy can lead to a shortage of tickets amongst the
               supporters of one or both finalists;

          d)     The F.A.'s allocation policy can result in many supporters having to pay inflated
                 prices for tickets;
i

          e)     The safety of supporters can be put at risk by the present ticket allocation policy.
                 Virtually all the violence outside Wembley Stadium this year was ticket related and
                 segregation arrangements inside the ground failed due to large numbers of tickets
                 at the Wimbledon end coming into the possession of Liverpool fans;

          f)     Ticket shortages amongst supporters can provide a potentially lucrative market for
                 ticket forgers and many examples of forgeries were seen at this year's final;

          g)    Liverpool trading standards officers received allegations from 313 people who stated
                they had bought their tickets above face value and were prepared to give names and
                addresses to the officers.  A further 247 general allegations of over-priced tickets
                were also received;

                                                                                         cont
                                                    - 4 -

       h)   Officers have observed tickets in the possession of Liverpool supporters bearing
            the stamps of 56 Football League Clubs and County Associations to whom they were
            originally allocated by the F.A. Approximately 300 tickets bearing no stamps were
            observed in the possession of Liverpool fans;

       i)   The Chief Trading Standards Officer believes that the F.A.'s present ticket alloca­
            tion policy falls within the remit of Section 2 of the Fair Trading Act 1973 and
            could be held to be operating against the economic and safety interests of consumers;

       j)   The sale of tickets at prices above face value is not illegal under current UK law.
            Some countries, however, do have legal restrictions on ticket touting.

18.    Despite all the considerable difficulties in obtaining information from the large crowds
       at Wembley Stadium, the number of reports of overpriced tickets and the wide variety of
       ticket sources indicated from club and association stamps leads to the conclusion that
       there is widespread abuse of Football Association rules. The present system of alloca­
       tion leads to large numbers of tickets ending up in the possession of persons to whom
       they were not originally allocated.

ig^^The sale of F.A. Cup Final tickets above face value is nov; almost institutionalised.
  ^Rixamination of the large numbers of newspaper advertisements offering tickets shows how
     many tickets are being passed on by individuals or organisations to whom they have been
     officially allocated. It is clear that some people are profiteering at the expense of
     the football supporters who cannot get a ticket from the allocation to their club.

       RECOMMENDATIONS
20.    In order to reduce the unofficial market in Cup-Final ticket sales and thereby help
       protect the economic and safety interests of supporters, the Football Association are
       requested, upon receipt of this report, to consider:-

             a)   a review of the ticket allocation policy with a view to providing more
                  tickets for the suppoi^ters of the two clubs participating in the final;

             b)   taking into account the average home league attendances of the final­
                  ists when apportioning tickets between them;

             c)   requiring all tickets to be stamped with details of the clubs,
                  associations or organisations to which they are allocated, without
                  exception;

             d)   with the aid of ticket serial numbers provided in this report,
                  conducting an enquiry to establish how the tickets came into the
                  possession of individuals apparently unconnected with the sources
                  to which they were originally allocated;

             e)   taking disciplinary action against those found to be in breach of
                  F.A. rules;

             f)   publishing their own report on the results of investigations and
                  enquiries made as a result of this report.

        OTHER ACTION
21      This report will also be submitted to the Director General of Fair Trading under Section
      • 2 of the Fair Trading Act 1973, to the Minister of Sport and to all Liverpool Members of
        Parliament.



July, 1988
:?•     TICKET       FACE            PRICE        TICKET STAMPED
        NUMBER                                                           COMPLAINANT
                     VALUE           PAID                                                                   TS REF.

1       62H513        £8 .0 0          £70
2                                                                           Mr. P. Smith, Stockport           W/CB
        55H959        £8 . 0 0         £15        D.C. FA
3                                                                           Mr. S. Turton, Liverpool          W/HF
        67G1369      £8 .0 0           £15
4                                                                           C. Waitt, Liverpool               W/CB
        54H1503      £8 .0 0           £40
5                                                                           Mr. Kaif, Liverpool              W/CB
        20B240       £8 .0 0           £20        Bristol Rovers FC
6      07D1118                                                              I. Goodman, Liverpool            W/CB
                     £8 .0 0           £20        Northamptonshire FA
7      16C522                                                               Mr. Armitage, Bambury            W/CB
                     £8 .0 0           £20
8                                                                           Mr. N. Hunt, Stoke               W/NJ
       63C1893       £8 .0 0          £22.50
9      09D977                                                               B. Beacall, Felixstowe           W/NJ
                     £8 .0 0          £40
0                                                                          D. Brown, London                  W/NJ
       09D938        £8 .0 0          £40
1                                                                          D. Brown, London                  W/NJ
       61H209        £8 .0 0          £25         Southampton FC
?      61H210        £8 .0 0                                               Mr. Kelly, Skelmersdale           H/L
                                      £25
3      64G1008                                                             Mr. Kelly, Skelmersdale           H/L
                    £8 .0 0           £20
4      62H1081      £8 .0 0                                                Mr. N. Walker, Northampton        H/L
                                      £50        Hertfordshire FA
       61HI52       £8 .0 0                                                Mr. P. Kearney, Liverpool        H/L
                                      £40        Sheffield Wednesday FC Mr. Quinn, Liverpool
      57H821        £8 .0 0           £27.50                                                                H/L
      57H822        £8 .0 0                                                Mr. Stannardky, Merseyside       H/L
                                     £27.50
      53JK464       £8 .0 0                                               Mr. Stannardky, Merseyside        H/L
                                     £30
      51JK567       £8 .0 0                                               Mr. A. Edwards, Netherton         H/L
                                     £30         Reading FC               Mr. Nolan, Liverpool              H/L
      51JK568       £8 .0 0          £30
                                                                          Mr. Nolan, Liverpool              H/L
      14C1771       £8 .0 0          £40
      09D944       £8 .0 0                                                Mr. P. Donnelly, Liverpool        H/L
                                     £55
      54H1234                                                             S. J. Pitt, Stockport             H/L
                   £8 .0 0           £35
                                                                          Mr. Barrett, Huyton              H/L
      54H1235      £8 .0 0           £35
                                                                          Mr. Barrett, Huyton              H/L
     54H1236       £8 .0 0           £35
                                                                         Mr. Barrett, Huyton               H/L
     54H1348       £8 .0 0          £35
     56H106                                                              Mr. Barrett, Huyton               H/L
                   £8 . 0 0         £35
     56H109                                                              Mr. J. Quinlan, Bolton            H/L
                   £8 . 0 0         £35
     68G1559                                                             Mr. J. Quinlan, Bolton            H/L
                   £8 . 0 0         £25
     61H350        £8. 00
                                                                         Mr. Lumley, Liverpool             H/L
                                    £25
     17C584       £8 .00
                                                                         Mr. Lumley, Liverpool             H/L
                                    £30         London FA
     52JK676      £8 . 0 0                                               Mr. D. Humphries, Liverpool      H/L
                                    £30         Sirssex County FA
    21B117                                                               Mr. J. Dodd, Moreton             H/L
                  £8 . 0 0          £40         Southend United FC
    21B118                                                               Mr. J. Jones, Chester            H/L
                  £8 .00            £40
    64G1263       £8 . 0 0
                                                                         Mr. J. Jones, Chester            H/L
                                   £25
    67G1263       £8 .0 0                                               Mr. J. Richardson, Liverpool      H/L
                                   £25
    10D516        £8 . 0 0                                              Mr. J. Richardson, Liverpool      H/L
                                   £25          Liverpool FC
    24B750        £8 . 0 0                                              Mr. A. Birch, Liverpool           H/L
                                   £20
    54H283        £8 . 0 0                                              Mr. K. Miller, Liverpool          W/HF
                                   £35
fp54H150                                                                L. Thornber, Crosby               H/L
                  £8 . 0 0         £35
    58H182                                                              L. Thornber, Crosby               H/L
                 £8 .0 0           £25
    13C1262      £ 8 .00                                                D. Martindale, Wallasey           H/L
                                   £12
   09D1447       £8 .0 0                                                Mr. J. Peover, Liverpool         H/L
                                   £40
   54H130        £8 .0 0                                                Mr. Bickerstaff, Bootle          H/L
                                  £35
   S4H1461       £8 .0 0                                                Mr. B. Hannan, Wirral            H/L
                                  £57.50
   52JK142       £8 .0 0                                               K. Pearman, Hertfordshire         H/L
                                  £50          Stoke City FC
   54H1046       £8 .0 0                                               Mr. Slevin, Bracknell             H/L
                                  £30
   07D346        £8 .0 0                                               J • Rathe, Braintree              H/L
                                  £50.00       Leyton Wingate
   23A907        £8 .0 0                                               Mr. Wareing, Prescot              H/L
                                  £40          Liverpool FC
   23A908        £8 .0 0                            "     II           Mrs. Gerard, Liverpool            H/L
                                  £40
  24B1026       £8 .0 0                                                Mrs. Gerard, Liverpool            H/L
                                  £60          Shropshire FA
   51H1294                                                             Mr. McGowan
                £8 .0 0           £25                                                                    H/L
  61H1295       £8 .0 0                                                Mr. I. Thwaite, Liverpool        H/L
                                 £25
  13C109        £8 .0 0                                               Mr. I. Thwaite, Liverpool         H/L
                                 £40           Liverpool FC
  58H958        £8 .0 0                                               Mr. Goddard, Liverpool            H/L
                                 £30
  54H990                                                              A. Pilley, Tidbury
                £8 .0 0          £45                                                                    W/HM
  54H991        £8 .0 0                                                'The Football Fan' London        W/CB
                                 £45
  58H185        £8 .0 0                                                'The Football Fan1 London        W/CB
                                 £50
  58H184                                                              M. Fry, London                    W/PN
                £8 .0 0          £50
  58H1961      £8 .0 0                                                M. Fry, London                    W/PN
                                 £40
                                                                     A. Fowler, Hull                    W/PN

                                                                                                        cont:-
           TICKET        FACE            PRICE     TICKET STAMPED           COMPLAINANT                     TS REF.
NO.        NUMBER        VALUE           PAID

 j61         58H1960       £8 . 0 0       £40      Liverpool FC               Mr. A. Brown, Hull             W/PN
  62         54H839        £8 . 0 0       £45           _
                                                                              G. Cornish, Cambridge          W/PN
  63         58H1286       £8 . 0 0       £60           _
                                                                              K. Galvin, London              W/PN
  64         52JK235       £8 . 0 0       £45           _
                                                                              Mr. Maloney, Merseyside        W/SB
  65        54H947         £8 . 0 0       £75           _
                                                                              H. Breue, Norway               W/CB
  66        22A653         £8 . 0 0       £10       Liverpool FC              C. Williams, Birkenhead        W/CB
  67        51H351         £8 . 0 0      £30                   _
                                                                              Mr. Doogan, Northumberland     W/JC
  68        55H467        £8 . 0 0       £35        Hereford United FC        M. Dodsworth, S.Yorkshire      W/DA
  69        23A1578       £8 . 0 0       £25        Liverpool FC              Mr. Hayes, Jersey             W/DA
  70        54H202        £8 . 0 0       £60                  _
                                                                              T. Bird, Newport              W/PN
  71        62H405        £8 . 0 0       £30                  _
                                                                             Miss M. J. Fagan, Birkenhead W/HL
  72        09D559        £8 .0 0        £45        Liverpool FC             Mr. G. W. Jones, Hounslow      W/RDC
  73        09D308        £8 . 0 0       £45                  If  II
                                                                             Mr. G. W. Jones, Hounslow      W/RDC
  74        54H1346       £8 . 0 0       £35                 _
                                                                             Miss K. Majid, New Malden      W/JC
  75        54H1344       £8 . 0 0       £35                 _
                                                                             Miss K. Majid, New Malden      W/JC
  76        09D1129       £8 . 0 0       £50                 _
                                                                             Mr. C. Harrison, Chester       W/PG
 77         17C375        £8 . 0 0       £25        London FA                Mr. McHugh, Liverpool          W/DA
 78         64G708        £8 . 0 0       £45                 _
                                                                             Mr. M. Williams, Holywell      W/PJM
 79    ^09D408            £8 .0 0        £45       Liverpool FC              Mr. Brady, Kirkby              W/MOD
 80    W09D450            £8 . 0 0      £45                  tf  II
                                                                             Mr. Brady, Kirkby              W/MOD
 81        26B34         £8 . 0 0       £30                  n   ii
                                                                            Mr. Lee, Liverpool              W/MOD
 82        12C101        £8 . 0 0       £45                  _
                                                                            Mr. J. F. Reardon, Liverpool W/MOD
 83        12C98         £8 . 0 0       £35                  _
                                                                            Mr. Reardon, Liverpool          W/MOD
 84        09D906        £8 . 0 0       £45        Liverpool FC             Mr. M. Price, Ipswich           W/MOD
 85        54H566        £8 . 0 0       £30                 _
                                                                            Mr. Jones, Birkenhead          W/MOD
 86        21B885        £8 . 0 0         £9                _
                                                                            Mr. Partington, Rock Ferry     W/MOD
87         23A903        £8 . 0 0       £50                 _
                                                                            G. Williams, Liverpool         W/PG
88         57H1065       £8 .0 0        £40                 _
                                                                            P. Ventre, Rainhill            W/PG
89         09D1111       £8 . 0 0       £50        Liverpool FC
90                                                                          J. Roberts, Ellesmere Port     W/HM
           07D269        £8 . 0 0       £60                 _
                                                                            Mr. Mansen, Birkenhead         W/MOD
91         62H1085       £8 . 0 0       £30       Hertfordshire FA          M. Rainford, Bootle            W/MOD
92        08D401         £8 . 0 0       £20       Chelsea                  Mr. Everett, Staines            W/MOD
93         12C681        £8 . 0 0       £20                 _
94                                                                          P. Smith, Ellesmere Port     W/MOD
          17C1003       £8 . 0 0       £50        London FC                V. McDiarmid, Hextable         W/CB
95        61H45         £8 . 0 0       £35        Sheffield Wednesday FC J. Mansell, London              W/CB
96        61H44         £8 . 0 0       £35                  II       II
                                                                        ” C. Mansell, Wirral             W/CB
97        17C624        £8 . 0 0       £75        London FA                P.   Tummins,  Liverpool      W/CB
98        17C625        £8 . 0 0       £75             ti   ii
                                                                           P. Tummins, Liverpool         W/CB
99     ^3C256           £8 . 0 0       £20                 _
                                                                           N. Clough, Liverpool           W/PG
DO        16C537        £8 . 0 0       £20                 _
                                                                           M. O'Neill, Harlow             W/PG
HI        07D819        £8 . 0 0       £80                 _
                                                                           J. Ford, London               W/PG
32        08D417        £8 . 0 0       £30                 _
                                                                           E. Cairie, St. Albans         W/CB
33        08D418        £8 . 0 0       £30                 _
)4                                                                         E. Cairie, St. Albans         W/CB
          61H583        £8 . 0 0       £40        Watford FC
)5                                                                         J. Roberts, Alfriston         W/CB
          51H586        £8 . 0 0       £40                 II II
                                                                          J. Smith, Alfriston             W/CB
)6        59H559        £8 . 0 0       £20                 _
)7                                                                        R. Walker, Blackburn            W/CB
         9D903          £8 . 0 0       £45                 _
                                                                           I. Urquhart, Bristol          W/CB
)8        66G582        £8 .0 0        £35                 _
                                                                          M. Watson, Alcester            W/CB
>9       66G584        £8 .0 0        £35                 _
 0                                                                        Mr. King, Bidford on Avon      W/CB
         12C323        £8 . 0 0       £75        Blackburn Rovers FC
 1                                                                        S. Constantine, Kirkby         W/HM
         12C830        £8 .0 0        £60        Leeds FC
 2                                                                        T. Constantine, Liverpool      W/HM
         55H421        £8 .0 0        £15        Hartlepool FC            P. Williams, Cumbran           W/HM
 3      •10D490        £8 . 0 0       £60        Liverpool FC
4                                                                         J. Smith, Liverpool            W/HM
         62H74         £8 .0 0        £25        Everton FC               I. Taylor, Liverpool           W/HM
 5       65G356        £8 .0 0        £35                 _
                                                                          A. Cross, Liverpool            W/HF
6        12C373        £8 .0 0        £45                 _
                                                                          C. Sankey, Mansfield           W/HM
7        57H1176       £8 .0 0        £40                 _
                                                                         Mr. Hill, Poole                 W/HM
8        20B297        £8 .0 0        £46        Chester City FC         Mr. Wallis, Essex               W/HM
9        12C220        £8.00          £45                 _
0                                                                        P.    Andrews,  Dagenham        W/HM
         12C234        £8.00          £45                 _
                                                                         P. Andrews, Dagenham            W/HM

                                                                                                          cont
         TICKET       FACE       PRICE     TICKET STAMPED        COMPLAINANT                     TS REF
NO.      NUMBER       VALUE      PAID

 121       67G1768     £8 .0 0    £30            —                Mr. Houghton, Huntingham        W/HM
 122       67G1769     £8 .0 0    £30           -                 Mr. Houghton, Huntingham        W/HM
 123       67G1774     £8 .0 0    £30           -                 Mr. Houghton, Huntingham        W/HM
 124       67G1775     £8 .0 0    £30           -                 Mr. Houghton, Huntingham        W/HM
 125       53JK1669    £8 .0 0    £25           -                 M. Kenny, Runcorn               W/CB
 126       56H537      £8 .0 0    £20      Bedfordshire FA       "Mr. T. Hake, Runcorn            W/CB
 127      22A996       £8 .0 0    £40      Liverpool FC           S. Percy, Preston               W/HM
 128       10D1083     £8 .0 0    £40                If
                                                                  K. Phelps, Preston              W/HM
 129       12C441      £8 .0 0    £50      Crystal Palace FC      K. McMahon, Hemel Hempstead     W/HM
 130       62H1188     £8 .0 0    £25            -                J. Wadlow, Skelmersdale         W/HM
 131       62H1201     £8 .0 0    £25           -                 J. Wadlow, Skelmersdale         W/HM
 132       62H1595     £8 .0 0    £25           -                 J. Wadlow, Skelmersdale         W/HM
 133      63H1930      £8 .0 0    £60           -                 L. Rossall, Preston             W/HM
 134      07D793       £8 .0 0    £50           -                 R. Hogg, Maidenhead             W/HM
 135       12C575      £8 .0 0    £20      Huddersfield FC        M. Sheldon, Liverpool           W/HM
 136       56H262      £8 .0 0    £25           -                 D. Blackhall, Liverpool         W/HM
 137      57H747       £8 .0 0    £30           -                 L. Donnelly, Wembley           W/HM
 138      58H2017      £8 .0 0    £18           -                 G. Shudall, Liverpool          W/HM
 1 3 ^    09D1133     £8 .0 0     £50           -                 Mrs. Stone, Warrington         W/HM
1 4 ^     09D1134      £8 .0 0    £50           -                Mrs. Stone, Warrington          W/HM
 141      20B266       £8 .0 0    £40           -                 B. Higgins, London             W/HM
 142      20B274       £8 .0 0    £40           -                B. Higgins, London              W/HM
143       65G962      £8 .0 0     £30           -                P. Biddle, Hemel Hempstead      W/HM
144       51JK722     £8 .0 0     £30           -                P. Rowley, London               W/CB
145       57H819      £8 .0 0     £27.50        -                C. Haggar, Dagenham             W/CB
146       57H820      £8 .0 0    £27.50         -                C. Haggar, Dagenham             W/CB
147       09D1189     £8 .0 0    £50       Liverpool FC          R. Wilkes, Birmingham           W/CB
148       11C63       £8 .0 0    £30            -                B. Turner, Bootle               W/CB
149       21B1133     £8 .0 0    £50       Staffordshire FA      W. Rossell, London              W/CB
150       66G558      £8 .0 0    £40            -                Mr. N. Graff, Eastbourne        W/CB
151       12C537      £8 .0 0    £45                             Mr. D. Halnm, Bolton            W/CB
152       54H1502     £8 .0 0    £40                             Mr. Kaif, Liverpool             W/CB
153       20B132      £8 .0 0    £20       Brighton FC           T. Ealey, Liverpool             W/CB
154       54H286      £8 .0 0    £35            -                Miss A. Stafford, Haydock       W/CB
155       63H1154     £8 .0 0    £57            -                M. Dykstra, Liverpool           W/CB
156       62H384      £8 .0 0    £40            -                D. Jones, Chester               W/CB
157       13C1100     £8 .0 0    £40            -                Mr. J. Trainer, Worcester       W/CB
158^      64G34       £8 .0 0    £45            -                G . Haydon, Rugby               W/CB
15<A      64G35       £8 .0 0    £45            -                G . Haydon, Rugby               W/CB
160      .57H427      £8 .0 0    £25            -                G . Howard, Penketh             W/CB
161       53JK1781    £8 .0 0    £32            -                Mr. M. Hadrill, Liverpool       W/CB
162       14C1901     £8 .0 0    £15       Liverpool FC          Mr. P. Sweeney, Liverpool       W/DA
163       11C552      £8 .0 0    £20       Portsmouth FC         Mr. A. Stanymyr, High Wycombe   W/DA
164       19B562      £8 .0 0    £40       Liverpool FC          Mr. P. Thomas, Cleethorpes      W/DA
165       20B212      £8 .0 0    £45       Bristol Rovers FC     Mr. D. Tyler, Horsham           W/DA
166       07D75       £8 .0 0    £40            -                Mr. Hilary, Northampton         W/DA
167       07D76       £8 .0 0    £40            -                Mr. Hilary, Northampton         W/DA
168       20B23       £8 .0 0    £50       Aldershot FC          Mr. C. Robson, Northampton      W/DA
169       08D662      £8 .0 0    £40       Coventry FC           Mr. C. White, Liverpool         W/DA
170       57H971      £8 .0 0    £45            -                Mr. C. Relf, Cambridge          W/JC
171       63H1920     £8 .0 0    £45            -                Mr. B. Faen, Kent               W/PN
172       63H2026     £8 .0 0    £45            -                Mr. B. Faen, Kent               W/PN
173.      58H2104     £8 .0 0    £30            -                Mr. N. Hugh, London             W/PN
174       54H203      £8 .0 0    £60            -                Mr. Holbrook, Cheshire          W/PN
175       07D813      £8 .0 0    £35            -                Mr. M. Price, Ruthin            W/MOD
176       66G705      £8 .0 0    £45       Middlesex County FA   Mr. P. Fields, Oxford           W/DA
177       12C113      £8 .0 0    £40       Barnsley FC           Mr. Starr                       W/DA
178       12C100      £8 .0 0    £40            II        II
                                                                 Mr. Starr                       W/DA
179       12C102      £8 .0 0    £40            II        II
                                                                 Mr. Starr                       W/DA
180      23A1562      £8 .0 0    £70       Liverpool FC          Mr. A. Evans, High Wycombe      W/DA

                                                                                                 cont:-
   .*.F.   TICKET     FACE         PRICE     TICKET STAMPED             COMPLAINANT                       TS REF
  NO.      NUMBER     VALUE        PAID

  181         59H163    £8.00      £35               —
                                                                            Mr. S. Bentley, Rochdale        W/PN
 182          16C491   £8.00       £20       West Riding FA                 Mr. D. Ward, Nuneaton           W/RDC
 183          21B655    £8.00      £25                   —
                                                                            Mr. P. Jones, Warrington        W/RDC
 184          21B656    £8.00      £25                                      Mr. L. Smith, Warrington        W/RDC
 185          63H1959   £8.00      £25                                      Mr. S. King, London             W/JC
 186          54H1349   £8.00      £35                   —                 Mr. M. Bentham, London           W/JC
 187          57H972   £8 .00      £45                   —                 Mr. A. Reid, Cambridge           W/JC
 188          11C185    £8.00      £25                   —                 A. G. Mann, Nottingham           W/RDC
 189         67G670     £8.00      £45                   —                 Mr. I. Clarke                    W/RDC
 190          67G671   £8.00       £45                   —                 Mr. I. Clarke                    W/RDC
 191         09D1875 £8.00         £40                   —                 Mr. S. Bamforth, Doncaster       W/RDC
 192         54H270    £8.00       £45                  —                  Mr. K. Scott, Basildon           W/JC
 193         57H745    £8.00      £40                   —                  Mr. K. O'Farrell, Dublin         W/JC
 194         62H507    £8.00      £60                   —                  Mrs. P. Boothe, Tunbridge Wells W/JC
 195         11C263    £8.00      £30         Nottingham Forest FC         K. Gould, Wirral                W/RDC
 196         58H1305 £8.00        £40                  —
                                                                           Mr. Dockree, Seven Oaks         W/RDC
 197         07D91    £8 .00      £30                  —                   Mr. Golding, Liverpool          W/CB
 198         12C258    £8.00      £51                                      Mr. M. Harris, Bromley          W/RDC
 199^        12C259    £8.00      £51                  —
                                                                           Mr. M. Harris, Bromley          W/RDC
  20(^J 08D262 £8.00              £50        Charlton Athletic FC         Mr. White, Northants             W/MOD
  201        09D907    £8 .00     £45        Liverpool FC                 Miss J. Caldecott, Liverpool W/MOD
  202        17C364    £8.00      £50        London FA                    Mr. Broughall, London            W/RDC
  203        65G411    £8.00      £20        Lancashire FA                Mr. R. Foley, Liverpool          L
  204        59H52    £8.00       £20                 —
                                                                          Mr. E. Robinson, London          L
  205        51JK425 £8.00        £45        Oldham Athletic FC           Mr. G. Kelly, Liverpool          L
  206        51JK426 £8.00        £45              • <i           >i 11
                                                                          Mr. G. Kelly, Liverpool          L
  207       62H183    £8.00       £20        AFC                          Mr. K. Hughes, Liverpool         L
 208        51JK762 £8.00         £20        Cumberland FA                Mr. M. Lawrenson, Liverpool      L
 209        66G452    £8.00       £10                 *“
                                                                          Mr. M. Lawrenson, Liverpool      L
 210        16C465    £8 .00     £50        West Riding FA                Mr. I. Jarman, Liverpool        H/L
 211        15C636    £8.00      £55        Storey FA                     Mr. I. Jarman, Liverpool        H/L & L
 212        51JK1146 £8.00       £25        Hunts FA                      Mr. L. Melling, Liverpool       L
 213        07D290    £8.00      £40                 —                   Mr. D. Pierre, London            L
 214        61H1053 £8.00        £40                 —
                                                                         Mr. A. Lawrence, Huyton          L
 215        21B251    £8.00      £40        York City FC                 Mr. K. Watson, Liverpool         L
 216        21B263    £8.00      £35            H        * It .11
                                                                         Mr. D. Braggar, London           L
 217        09D981    £8.00      £30        Liverpool FC                 Mr. Duffy, Liverpool             L
 218        57H965    £8.00      £30                 —
                                                                         Mr. A. D. Gaule, Morden          H/L & L
 2 1 9 4 ) 57H975     £8.00      £30                 —
                                                                         Mr. A. D. Gaule, Morden          H/L & L
 220        57H976    £8.00      £30                 —
                                                                         Mr. A. D. Gaule, Morden          H/L & L
 221        64G1141   £8.00      £35                                     Miss D. Ambury, London           H/L & L
 222        64G1142 £8.00        £35                                     Miss D. Ambury, London           H/L & L
 223       61H436     £8.00      £50                —
                                                                         Mr. S. Longworth, St.Helens      H/L & L
 224      *15C1049    £8.00      £25        Royal Naval FA               Mr. Williams, London             W/SB
 225       77F21/25 £25.00       £60                —
                                                                         Mrs. G. A. Fagan, Birkenhead H/L
 226       01D16/190 £8.00       £30        Harlow Town FC               P. Catherall, Connahs Quay       L
227        16C1048    £8.00      £20             —
                                                                        Mr. Green, Chelmsford             W/HF
228        16C1049    £ 8 .0 0   £20               —                    Mr. Irwen, Basildon
229                                                                                                      W/HF
           09D768     £ 8.00     £45               —                    Mr. Jaechter, London             W/HF
230        54H276     £8 . 0 0   £35               —
                                                                        Mr. K. Roberts, Liverpool
231                                                                                                      W/HF
           66G658     £8.00      £50       Middlesex FA                 Mr. G. Geddes, Nantwich          W/HF
232        09D463     £8.00      £60       Liverpool FC                 Mr. J. Pilcher, Dorset           W/HF
233        09D814     £8 . 0 0   £50               H           II
                                                                        Mr. B. Fairclough, Preston       W/DW
234        18B803     £8 . 0 0   £30              —                     Mr. C. Compton, Gravesend        W/DW
235        62H165     £8. 00     £30       Everton FC                   Mr. M. Squires, Canterbury       W/DW
236        54H1151    £8 . 0 0   £45              *“                    Mr. E. Brady, London             W/HF
237        58H1665    £8.00      £50              —                     Mr. M. Varian, Cork              W/HF
^38       24B977      £8. 00     £20       Shropshire FA                Mr. R. Southern, Liverpool       W/HF
239       24B976      £8 . 0 0   £20              II          II
                                                                        Mr. M. Murphy, Liverpool         W/HF
240       16C432      £8 .0 0    £25       West Riding FA               Mr. N. Leman, Liverpool          W/PJM

                                                                                                       c o n t :-
                                                                                                          ■^   f,tl,r ,z




       . ' TICKET      FACE        PRICE     TICKET STAMPED                                     COMPLAINANT
 NO.       NUMBER      VALUE       PAID                                                                                          TS REF

  241       20B696       £8 .0 0    £20     Manchester FA                                        Mr. B. Green, Bury
  242       23A1431      £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                    £40     Liverpool FC                                         Mr. J. Lloyd, Liverpool
  243       20B204       £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                    £25     Bristol Rovers F                                     Mr. I. Johnson, Liverpool
 244        14C918       £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                    £25     Liverpool FC                                         Mr. M. Davies, Litherland
 245        51JK1134 £8.00                                                                                                        W/PJM
                                    £40                         _
                                                                                                 Mr. M. Worswick, Preston         W/NJ
  246       64G1790      £8 .0 0    £35                         _
                                                                                                 Miss B. Goss, London
 247        64G1791      £8 .0 0                                _                                                                 W/SB
                                    £35                                                          Miss B. Goss, London             W/SB
 248        18B392       £8 .0 0    £40     Liverpool FC                                         Mr. M. Rolands, Liverpool        W/PJM
 249        10D961       £8 .0 0    £40                         _
                                                                                                 Mr. V. Garrigos, Liverpool
 250        52JK461      £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                    £60     Liverpool FC                                         Mr. P. Archer, Newport
 251        61A1044      £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                    £60                         II                  fl
                                                                                                 Mr. P. Archer, Newport           W/PJM
 252        52JK462      £8 .0 0   £60                          II                  fl
                                                                                                 Mr. P. Archer, Newport
 253       14C102        £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PJM
                                   £60                          II                  fl
                                                                                                 Mr. P. Archer, Newport
 254                                                                                                                              W/PJM
           09D801        £8 .0 0   £40                          ff                  If
                                                                                                 Mrs. J. Davies, Clitheroe        H/L
 255       54H272       £8 .0 0    £35                                                           Miss A. Delaney, Liverpool
 256                                                                                                                             W/SB
           61H781       £8 .0 0    £40      West Ham FC                                          S. McCord, Northern Ireland
 257                                                                                                                             W/PJM
           61H829       £8 .0 0    £40        If                     If   II
                                                                                                G. Galbraith, N. Ireland         W/PJM
 258       16C426       £8 .0 0    £40      West Riding FA                                      Mr. A. Preston, Leyland          W/PJM
 259       12C316       £8 .0 0    £51      Blackburn Rovers                                    Mr. A. Burke, Jersey             W/PJM
 26 0 f l 23A904        £8 .0 0    £45                      —
                                                                                                Mr. P. Donovan, Kirkby           W/SB
 261       66G832       £8 .0 0    £25      Middlesex FA                                        J. Bushell, Bootle
 262                                                                                                                             W/PJM
           12C416       £8 .0 0    £40      Bradford City                                       A. Ellis, St. Helens             W/PMO
 263       61H634       £8 .0 0    £25      Watford FC                                          D. Jones, Aberystwyth
264                                                                                                                              W/PMO
           61H635       £8 .0 0    £25      Watford FC                                          D. Jones, Aberystwyth            W/PMO
265        09D1877      £8 .0 0    £50                     _
                                                                                                B. de Courcy, Chester
266                                                                                                                              W/PMO
           09D1878      £8 .0 0   £50                      _
                                                                                                B. de Courcy, Chester
267                                                                                                                              W/PMO
           09D1879      £8 .0 0   £40                      _
                                                                                                B. de Courcy, Chester
268                                                                                                                              W/PMO
          09D1880       £8 .0 0   £40                      _
                                                                                                B. de Courcy, Chester
269                                                                                                                              W/PMO
          09D805        £8 .0 0   £40      Liverpool FC                                        Mr. F. Izquierdo, Hampton
270                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          09D806       £8 .0 0    £40                      It                  If
                                                                                               Mr. F. Izquierdo, Hampton
271                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          20B513       £8 .0 0    £50      Grimsby Town FC                                     K. Park, Rochdale
272       57H864                                                                                                                W/PJM
                       £8 .0 0    £20                                                          S. Craven, Skelmersdale
273                                                                                                                             W/PJM
          52JK553      £8 .0 0    £50                  _
                                                                                               Mr. M. Woody, Lincoln
274                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          66G309       £8 .0 0    £50                  _
                                                                                               Mr. R. Johnson, Lincoln
275                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          16C477       £8 .0 0    £30                  _
                                                                                               Mr. H. Downward, Birkenhead
276                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          67G828       £8 .0 0    £45                  _
                                                                                               Mr. C. Miller, Orrell
277       12C401       £8 .0 0                                                                                                  W/PMO
                                  £40      Bradford City FC                                    Mr. P. Ramsell, Isleworth
278                                                                                                                             W/PMO
          12C406       £8 .0 0    £40                  II                      <1        II
                                                                                               Mr. J. Ellis, Swindon
279 i ^38JK177 £1 0 .0 0                                                                                                        W/PMO
                                  £30      Norfolk FA                                          D . Wentworth, Wokingham
280       38JK162 £10.00 £100                                                                                                   W/HM
                                           Suffolk FA                                          B. Morgan, Liverpool             W/HM
281 75G68/158 £1 0 .0 0           £35      Sussex FA                                           S. Mellon, Liverpool             W/HM
282       10D1315      £8 .0 0    £80                  _
                                                                                               Mr. A. Brierly, Connahs Quay     W/HF
?83 38JK13/178 £10.00            £25       Watford FC                                          Mr. Murphy, Liverpool            W/MOD
284 38JK13/179 .£10.00           £25                   If
                                                                                               Mr. Murphy, Liverpool            W/MOD
>85       38JK176 £10 .0 0       £20       Leeds United                                       Mr. Atkin, East Grinstead         W/SB
>86      64G1639       £8 . 0 0  £45               _
                                                                                              Mr. P. Bowes, London              W/HF
287      11JK225 £10 .0 0        £30               _
                                                                                              M. Killikelly, Kirkby            W/PMO
i88      06E102      £10.00      £35               _
                                                                                              Mr. D. Durkan, Enfield           W/PMO
189      06E101      £10.00      £35               _
                                                                                              Mr. D. Durkan, Enfield           W/PMO
190 50JK11/124 £10.00            £75               _
                                                                                              Mr. J. Harmer, Maidstone         H/L
>91 50JK11/125 Z10.00            £75               _
                                                                                              Mr. J. Harmer, Maidstone
?92                                                                                                                            H/L
         64G1638      £8 .0 0    £45               _
                                                                                              Mr. J. Vanbeusekom, Wembley
 93      05E94                                                                                                                 W/HF
                    £17.50       £40       Oldham FC                                          M. Frayne, Stockport
:94                                                _                                                                           W/HM
         77F30/33 £17.50         £40                                                          C. Walters, Wirral
95       85E44                                                                                                                 W/HM
                    £25.00       £50       Liverpool FC                                       Mr. Bragger, Winsford
96       77F28/28 £25.00                           _
                                                                                                                               W/SB
                                 £50                                                          Mrs. F. Walmsley, Liverpool
97       76F4909 £25.00 £100                       _
                                                                                                                               W/PJM
                                                                                              A. Pittard, Liverpool            H/L
98       63H1269      £8 .0 0    £15               _
                                                                                              Mr. B. Griffen, Leeds            W/HF
99       86E7       £25.00 £180                    _
                                                                                              S. Jones, Seaforth               W/NJ
00       86E8       £25.00 £180                                                               C. Pilnick, Seaforth             W/NJ
01       29A0425 £25.00 £150               Liverpool FC                                       Mr. McDonoghue, Liverpool        W/RDC

                                                                                                                               cont:-
,.6-F.     TICKET     FACE        PRICE   TICKET STAMPED             COMPLAINANT                 TS REF<
NO.        NUMBER     VALUE       PAID

302        36JK51     £30.00      £60            __
                                                                     Mr. Ledger, Oxford          W/DA
303        36JK52     £30.00      £60            —
                                                                     Mr. Ledger, Oxford          W/DA
304        83E10/21   £30.00      -              -
                                                                     R. Gall, Liverpool          W/PJM
305        83E10/22   £30.00      -              -
                                                                     R. Gall, Liverpool          W/PJM
306        75G152     £30.00      £60            —
                                                                     P. Archer, Newport          W/PJM
307      38JK20/185   £30.00     £150     Derby County FC            Mr. J. Hopkins, Liverpool   H/L
308      38JK20/183   £30.00     £150       "         II        It
                                                                     Mr. J. Hopkins, Liverpool   H/L
309      38JK20/184   £30.00     £150       »*        it        H
                                                                     Mr. J. Hopkins, Liverpool   H/L
310      16C443        £8 .0 0    £25                                Mr. P. Dowling, Liverpool   W/HF
311        56H987      £8 .0 0    £30            _
                                                                     S. Richards, Wirral         W/HF
312        51JK310     £8 .0 0    £30     Millwall FC                Mr. D. Gillard, Liverpool   W/HF
313        51JK311     £8 .0 0    £30            It        II
                                                                     Mr. D. Gillard, Liverpool   W/HF
  ..of.    TICKET     FACE         PRICE    TICKET STAMPED          COMPLAINANT
  NO.      NUMBER     VALUE                                                                       TS REI
                                   PAID

   314     47JK120 £17.50            £50                             Mr. Ingram                    H/L
   315     20B461     £8 .0 0       £20                              B. Burton, Gravesend, Kent    W/PMO
   316     20B462     £8 .0 0       £20                              K. Pitcher, Gravesend, Kent W/PMO
   317     66G1170    £8 .0 0       £30                              Mr. McDonnell                 W/SB
   318     65G649     £8 . 0 0      £25                              Anon                          H/L
   319     65G650     £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon                          H/L
   320     54H465     £8 .0 0       £35                              Anon                          H/L
   321     54H349     £8 .0 0       £30                              Anon                          H/L
   322     54H350     £8 .0 0       £30                              Anon                          H/L
   323     54H862     £8 .0 0       £70                              Mr. Erikson, Norway           W/SB
   324    64G1831     £8 .0 0       £50                              Mr. Ashdown                   W/SB
   325    09D1322     £8 .0 0       £40                              M r . Ashdown                 W/SB
   326    61H1170     £8 .0 0       £50                              Anon                          W/PMO
  327     17C421      £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon                         W/CB
   328    54H457      £8 .0 0       £35                              Anon                         W/CB
  329     12C523     £8 .0 0        £40                             Anon                          W/CB
  330     12C524     £8 .0 0        £40                             Anon                          W/CB
  331     49JK19     £8 .0 0        £40                             Anon                          W/CB
  33^_    58H183     £8 .0 0        £50                             Anon
  33 •                                                                                            W/JC
          63H1409    £8 . 0 0      £60                              Anon                          W/PN
  334^    60H404     £8 . 0 0      £12                              Anon                          W/PN
  335     60H405     £8 .0 0       £12                              Anon                          W/PN
  336     13C1025    £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon
  337                                                                                             W/DA
          11C36      £8 . 0 0      £15                              Anon
  338     11C37                                                                                   W/DA
                     £8 .0 0       £15                              Anon                          W/DA
  339    09D453      £8 .0 0       £45     Liverpool FC             Anon
  340                                                                                             W/DA
         09D452      £8 . 0 0      £45                              Anon
  341                                                                                             W/DA
         09D451      £8 .0 0       £45                              Anon
  342                                                                                            W/DA
         12C1073     £8 .0 0       £25     Suffolk FA              Anon                          W/DA
 343     54H408     £8 .0 0        £40                             Raymond Kealey, Ireland
 344                                                                                             W/JC
         64G18      £8 .0 0        £20                             Mark Adams                    W/PD
 345     59H942     £8 .0 0        £25                             Anon                          W/NF
 346     59H943     £8 .0 0        £25                             Anon
 347                                                                                             W/NF
         59H944     £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon
 348                                                                                             W/NF
         59H945     £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon                          W/NF
 349     52JK146    £8 . 0 0      £25                              Anon                          W/NF
 350     54H1083    £8 .0 0       £32                              Anon                          W/NF
 351     07D581     £8 .0 0       £25                              Anon
 3520k 13C601                                                                                    W/NF
                    £8 . 0 0      £10                              Anon                          W/NF
 353W    61H435     £8 .0 0       £50                              Anon
 354                                                                                             W/NF
         53JK1345 £8 . 0 0        £20                              Anon                          W/NF
 355     53JK1346 £8 .0 0         £20                              Anon
 356                                                                                             W/NF
         24B121     £8 .0 0       £38      Oldham Athletic FC      Anon
 357                                                                                             W/NF
       v24B122      £8 .0 0       £38         "      ii    ii
                                                                   Anon
 358                                                                                             W/NF
        24B123      £8 .0 0       £38         ii     ii      ii
                                                                   Anon                         W/NF
 359    24B124      £8 . 0 0      £38         ii     ii      H
                                                                   Anon
360                                                                                             W/NF
        24B125     £8 .0 0        £38         •i    ii       ii
                                                                  Anon
 361    52JK1050 £8 .0 0                                                                        W/NF
                                  £40                             Anon
362                                                                                             W/NF
        64G220     £8 . 0 0      £40                              Anon
363     64G221                                                                                  W/NF
                   £8 .0 0       £40                              Anon
364                                                                                             W/NF
        15C240     £8 .0 0       £20                              Anon
365     61H627                                                                                  W/NF
                   £8 .0 0       £20                              Anon
366                                                                                             W/NF
        66G431     £8 .0 0       £45                              Anon
367     38JK173 £17.50                                                                          W/NF
                                 £25                              Anon
368     38JK174 £17.50                                                                          W/NF
                                 £25                              Anon                          W/NF
369     07D198     £8 .0 0       £10                              Anon
370     07D197                                                                                  W/MOD
                   £8 .0 0       £10                              Anon
371                                                                                             W/MOD
        66G178     £8 .0 0       £45                              Anon
372                                                                                             W/MOD
        66G177     £8 .0 0       £45                              Anon                          W/MOD
373    67G29       £8 .0 0       £12                              Anon                          W/MOD

                                                                                                cont:-
                               r              HUCE
      NO.                                                TICKET STAMPED          COMPLAINANT
                number        VALUE                                                                            TS REF.
                                              PAID
    374           12C956        £ 8.00         £ 12      Suffolk FA
    375          12C957                                                          Anon
                                £ 8.00         £1 2                                                              W/RDC
    376          35A14/25 £3Q 00                                                 Anon
                                               £50                                                              W/RDC
   377           18B1179                                                        Anon
                                £ 8.00         £45                                                              W/RDC
   378           09D63                                                          Anon
                                £ 8.00         £25                                                              W/PJM
   379           15C381                                                         Anon
                                £8 .0 0        £50                                                              W/RDC
   380           15C382                                                         Anon
                                £ 8.00         £50                                                              W/RDC
   381           08D825                                                         Anon
                               £8 .0 0        £50                                                               W/RDC
   382           62H1183       £8 .0 0                                          Anon
                                              £30                                                               W/RDC
   383           62H1184       £8 .0 0                                          Anon
                                              £30                                                               W/RDC
   384           57H960        £8 .0 0                                          Anon
                                              £40                                                               W/RDC
   385          57H755         £8 .0 0                                         Anon                            W/RDC
                                              £40
  386           57H959         £8 .0 0                                         Anon
                                              £40                                                              W/RDC
  387           10D1084        £8 .0 0                                         Anon                            W/RDC
                                              £40
  388           54H867         £ 8.00
                                                                               Anon                            W/MOD
                                              £75
  389           13C107                                                         Anon                            W/JC
                              £ 8.00         £25
  390           17C234                                                         Anon                            W/HM
                              £ 8.00         £50
  391           11C230        £8.00          £35                               Mr. Graham, Christchurch        W/HM
  392                                                  Nottingham Forest FC    G. Staveley, Cumbria
                11C231        £ 8.00         £35            "        ii                                        W/HM
  393          09D646         £ 8.00         £35                                                              W/HM
                                                       Liverpool FC
               09D633         £ 8.00         £35            tf  II                                            W/HM
   3 9   ^     09D645         £8.00          £35                 H    fl                                      W/HM
  396          11C229        £ 8.00         £35                                                               W/HM
  397                                                  Nottingham Forest FC
               11C228        £8 . 0 0       £35             "        ii  II                                   W/HM
  398          56H433        £8 . 0 0       £25                                                               W/HM
                                                       Wrexham FC               Anon
  399          10D1451       £8.00          £12                                                               W/HM
  400          09D798        £ 8.00                                             Anon
                                            £45                                                               W/PG
  401          54H698        £8.00
                                                                               Anon
                                            £50                                                              W/PG
 402          23A1569        £8 .0 0                                           Anon
                                            £50                                                              W/PG
 403          17C1001       £8 .0 0                                            Anon
                                            £25                                                              W/MOD
 404          10D1310       £8 .0 0                                            Anon
                                           £15        Liverpool FC                                           W/MOD
 405          56H168        £8 .0 0                                            Anon
                                           £20                                                               W/MOD
 406          19B631        £8 .0 0                    "X                      Anon
                                           £50                                                               W/PN
 407          57H1651       £8 .0 0                                            Anon
                                           £20                                                               W/HF
 408          19B487        £8 .0 0                                           Anon
                                           £25                                                               W/HF
 409         62H288         £8 .0 0                                           Anon
                                           £35                                                              W/HF
410          48JK20         £8 .0 0                                           Anon
                                           £40                                                              W/HF
411          16C1077        £8 .0 0                                           Anon
                                           £15                                                              W/SB
412          57H525        £8 .0 0                                            Anon
                                           £25                                                              W/SB
413          41JK7        £30.00                                              Anon                          W/NJ
                                          £50
414          67G1360       £8 .0 0        £30                                 Anon                          W/NJ
415          67G1760       £8 .0 0        £45                                 Anon                          W/NJ
416          67G1711       £8 .0 0        £45                                 Anon                          W/NJ
417          54H802        £8 .0 0        £12                                Anon                          W/NJ
418         02D2Q/232 £30.00            £185                                 Anon                          W/RDC
                                                      Liverpool FC
919         t)2D28/233 £30.00           £185                ii       ii      Anon                          W/RDC
920         09D1252       £8 .0 0        £50                                 Anon                          W/RDC
321         27A26       £17.50                                               Anon                          W/RDC
                                         £50
122         27A27       £17.50                                               Anon                          W/PMO
                                         £50                                Anon
123         63H1925       £8 .0 0        £35                                                               W/PMO
124         63H1924       £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/PJM
                                         £35
[25         59H839        £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/PJM
                                         £35
126        20B693         £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/PJM
                                         £20
27         54H840                                                           Anon
                          £8 .0 0       £45                                                               W/PJM
28         51JK93        £8 .0 0                                            Anon                          W/PN
                                        £25
29         24B626        £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/DA
                                        £35                                Anon
30         54H1098       £8 .0 0        £32                                                               W/DA
31         54H1097       £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/PD
                                        £32
32         54H1099                                                         Anon
                         £8 .0 0        £32                                                               W/PD
33         54H1100       £8 .0 0                                           Anon                           W/PD
                                        £32
34        54H138         £8 .0 0        £35                                Anon                           W/PD
                                                                           Anon                           W/PD
                                                                                                          cont:-
REF.   TICKET    FACE       PRICE   TICKET STAMPED           COMPLAINANT          TS REF.
NO.    NUMBER    VALUE      PAID

435    54H141    £8 . 0 0    £35                             Anon                 W/PD
436    65G397    £8 .0 0    £50     Lancashire FA            Anon                 W/PD
437    56H77     £8 . 0 0   £25                              Anon                 W/PD
438    54H1567   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
439    54H1568   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
440    54H1569   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
441    54H1570   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
442    64G1508   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
443    64G1509   £8 . 0 0   £40                              Anon                 W/PD
444    12C468    £8 . 0 0   £50                              Anon                 W/PD
445    12C456    £8 . 0 0   £50                              Anon                 W/PD
446    54H281    £8 . 0 0   £50                              Anon                 W/PD
447    12C530    £8 . 0 0   £20     Huddersfield Town FC     Anon                 W/PMO
448    12C529    £8 . 0 0   £20         <i          n   ii
                                                             Anon                 W/PMO
449    62H287    £8 . 0 0   £35                              Anon                 W/PMO
450    62H288    £8 . 0 0   £35                              Mr. Stokes, Thanet   W/PMO
  FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS
                            COUNTY ASSOCIATIONS

  Division 1
                            Bedfordshire
                            Cumberland
  Charlton Athletic         Devon
  Chelsea
                            Hertfordshire
  Coventry City
                            Huntingdonshire
 Derby County
                            Lancashire
 Everton
                            London
 Liverpool
                            Manchester
 Nottingham Forest
                            Middlesex
 Portsmouth
                            Norf oik
 Sheffield Wednesday
 Southampton               Northamptonshire
                           Royal Navy
 Watford
                           Shropshire
 West Ham United
                           Staffordshire
                           Suffolk
                           Surrey
 Division 2
                           Sussex
                           West Riding
 Barnsley
 Blackburn Rovers
                           OTHER FOOTBALL CLUBS
Bradford City
Crystal Palace
                           Harlow Town
Huddersfield Town
Leeds United               Leyton-Wingate
                           A.F.C.
Millwall
                           D.C. F.A.
Oldham Athletic
Reading
Stoke City


Division 3

Aldershot Town
Brighton and Hove Albion
Bristol Rovers
Chester City
Gillingham
Grimsby Town
Southend United
York City


Division 4

Hartlepool United
Hereford United
Wrexham
INTERMEDIATE TREATMENT FUND PROPOSAL
 RECLAIMING THE G A M E :

 A P R O P O S A L TO T H E I N T E R M E D I A T E T R E A T M E N T FUN D



On       h e a r i n g o f the I T F 's c o n c e r n to a l l o c a t e small                      grants              to projects

which have                 a     •community'            emphasis,           an     interest               in        football and

designed              to        reduce        problems           of    c rime     and y o u t h f u l disorder,                    the

Football              Supporters              Association             (F S A ) wi s h e s   to m a k e              a     case     for

c o n s i d e r a t i o n for funding.

The Football                   Supporters Association                   emerged        i n i t i a l l y on M e r s e y s i d e

^thin          m o n t h s of the Heysel                tragedy.            It    originated                   from        a     small

group          of       p e o p l e wh o felt         that a muc h d e e p e r i n v o l v e m e n t                    in the game

by s u p p o r t e r s w a s           required.             The       idea      spread          quickly                and w i t h i n
     V


m onths         a       further            six r e g i o n a l   b r a n c h e s w e r e formed,            run          by      local

volunteers.                                                                                                     ~

T he F S A no w c o n s i s t s of t w e l v e b r a n c h e s                in E n g l a n d an d            S c o t l a n d with

a membership representing                           some 20,000           supporters.              W i t h i n three years

pf       its        fo u n d a t i o n ,      it has b e c o m e      the l e a d i n g v o i c e         in a r t i c u l a t i n g

the v i e w s of o r d i n a r y               fans.       It remains a v o l u n t a r y o r g a n i s a t i o n run

s olely by the m e m b e r s                 themselves.




                                                 TEL 05.1 709 0 9 9 0
                        THE F.S.A.. 59 O A K W O O D ROAD, H ALEW OO D . I iv’F ^ ^ o r      t   o r, ,
  The FS A is o r g a n i s e d             regionally         to e n c o u r a g e     all        the    s upporters of

  a    given        area       to       meet         regu l a r l y ,     hea r       expert        speakers,       disc u s s

  football          issues          and        develop         p o l i c i e s and opinion.              Traditionally,

  fans have c o n g r e g a t e d al m o s t              e x c l u s i v e l y o nly with ot h e r s of the same

  allegiance.                 Regular             (monthly)         regional           meetings          provide           the

  opportunity             for local s u p p o r t e r s of              different            (often      rival)         teams

  to     mee t      and       recognise             c o m m o n concerns.             The b r a n c h e s are named to

^piake      c l e a r t h e i r n o n - p a r t i s a n na t u r e        - h e n c e the      'Merseyside',            'West

 Midlands           bra n c h e s ,        etc.        T h s F S A is designed,               therefore,        to reduce

 some       of      the       inter-club               tensions            which           underpin        probl e m s      of

 hoo l i g a n i s m .

 B r a n c h e s a r e f o u n d e d by the h o l d i n g of a p u b l i c m e e t i n g to give local

 supp o r t e r s        t h e c h a n c e to h e a r a b o u t the FSA.                   V o l u n t e e r s are invited

 to get          involved         in e s t a b l i s h i n g a r e g i o n a l       committee        to o r g a n i s e the

 branch democratically.                         Advice        and       a s s i s t a n c e fro m F S A h e a d q u a r t e r s

 (in      Liverpool)              is provided,            along         with      any        initial      funding         the

 a s s o c i a t i o n c a n afford.

        F S A s eeks         to       give s u p p o r t e r s a new,           ac t i v e o p t i o n to c o m p l e m e n t

 their       attendance               at      football         matches.              The      Association          is     run

 e n t i r e l y by v o l u n t e e r s ,         m o s t of w h o m have n ever b e e n              involved in any

 other organisation.                       It e n c o u r a g e s    the d e v e l o p m e n t of a d m i n i s t r a t i v e

 skills,        the m a n a g i n g of p u b l i c m e e t i n g s             and      e f f e c t i v e d e a lings w i t h

 the m e d i a by d i r e c t e x p e r i e n c e .            R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of    the F S A have a lso

 hel d r e g u l a r m e e t i n g s w ith M i n i s t e r s            for Sport,           the    F o o t b a l l League,

•the F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n an d the police.

 The     FS A       recognises             c o n s t i t u t i o n a l l y a b asic dut y to p r o v i d e access,

 information              and education                about        the     gam e       of     football        and       it's

 o rgan i s a t i o n .      Members           are      encouraged          to r e p r e s e n t a new role model

 for s u p p o r t e r s     — that          of      a c t i v e and      responsible          contributors.             Muc h
more could be done,                especially           in     the a rea of r e a c h i n g y o u n g e r        fans,

but     resources           are constrained.                  Wi t h i n t hose con s t r a i n t s ,      the     FS A

takes       every       opportunity               it         can    (the         Government        proposals         on

compulsory          membership,             for         example)           to     encourage        all     football

s u p p o r t e r s to r e c o g n i s e    their         common interest,               organise effectively

and act together.

With funds the F S A c o u l d d e v e l o p it's a c t i v i t i e s                    i nto y o u t h c l u b s and

schools       (some c o n t a c t s h a v e a l r e a d y          bee n        m a d e in the Lon d o n a r e a     in

this      respect)        a n d o f f e r m e m b e r s as n e t w o r k s          of    support        for     young

football o f f e n d e r s        who       need       tuit i o n in a l t e r n a t i v e m o d e s of s u p p o r t

for t heir local           club.           This        'alternative              to custody'       i n v o l v i n g the

FSA was one r e c e n t l y s u g g e s t e d           in it's        Summary           and    Recommendations

by the Sir N o r m a n C h e s t e r fo r F o o t b a l l Res e a r c h .
                                   "x
If  you  feel it a p p r o p r i a t e p e r h a p s you c o u l d a d v i s e us at the a b o v e

address a b o u t the f o r m a l r e q u i r e m e n t s for a p p l y i n g              for funds.



                                                                                 ROGAN TAYLOR        (Chair)
THE OMBUDSFAN INITIATIVE
 OUTLINE P R O P O S A L FOR F U N D I N G THE POST OF N A T I O N A L F S A                 1O M B U D S F A N •




 Since its emergence               on M e r s e y s i d e    in 1985,       the FS A has grown to
 become     the leading and best a r t i c u l a t e d v oice of supporter opinion.
 Over 8 , 0 0 0 supporters            have d i r e c t l y joined the A s s o c i a t i o n and a
 further     12,000 are a f f i l i a t e d to the FS A via their own clubs.
 There are c u r r e n t l y f i f t e e n regional               branches,         organised to include
 fell the supporters            (regardless          of club allegiance)                 of a g iven area.
 Regular m o n t h l y public m e e t i n g s and c a m p a i g n i n g activities help
draw t o g ether fans of              'rival'      teams,        p r o m o t i n g the idea of supporters
working together            in co m m o n interest.              B o t h regional and national
committees are elected annually,                        the latter at the National Co n f e r e n c e .


M e m b e r s h i p of the F S A     costs £2 a se a s o n              (under 16's £1). Members
receiv^feix N e w s l e t t e r s a year,            bi-monthly, and n e x t season it is h o p e d
to extend this service by p r o d u c i n g a t a b l o i d — size n e wspaper paid
for by a d v e r t i s i n g revenue and d e l i v e r e d monthly. All the FSA's                            funds
go to runn i n g the A s s o c i a t i o n on a d a y to d a y basis. Everyone
involved w o r k s v o l u ntarily.


The impact on the football w o r l d of the FSA's                                 emergence has a l r e a d y
been substantial.            Desp i t e     initial r eluctances                  (especially on the
F.A.'s part)         to mee t and deal w i t h a new v oice                        in the game,       the
FSA is now       involved at v i r t u a l l y every level of f o o t b a l l ’s
administration,           e x c e p t i n g U.E.F.A.         and F.I.F.A.           The vigorous
c am paigning for r e c o g n i t i o n r e c e n t l y led to the formation of a new
body - the S u p p o r t e r s L i a s o n Com m i t t e e - w h i c h includes the F.A.'s
and the L e a gu e's senior officers.                       For the first time in one hund r e d
years of p r o f e s s i o n a l    football,         r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of those who w a t c h
and those w h o a d m i n i s t e r the game now sit r e g u l a r l y around a table.
The FSA has been c o n s i s t e n t l y s u pported by the P.F.A. and its C hief
Executive, G o r d o n Taylor,             as w e l l as bodies             like the Football T r u s t
and the Sir N o r m a n Ches t e r C e n t r e              for F o o t b a l l   R e s e a r c h at Leicester.


There is an i ncr e a s i n g range of initiatives now e m e r g i n g w h i c h d e m a n d
some form of i n s t i t u t i o n a l i s e d su p p o r t e r r e presentation.              These        include:


            1) F o o tball and the C o m m u n i t y — and other                      similar p r o jects —
                 at clubs;
            2) F o o t b a l l ' s F a m i l y    Forum;
                                                       2


                   3) The Football Trust's C o m m u n i t y A v a r d Scheme;


                   4) Po l i c e — S u p p o r t e r L i a s o n Commit t e e s ;


                   5) P o s sibly,      the F o o tball M e m b e r s h i p Authority;


     The range of initiatives w ill p r o b a b l y w i d e n but,                       at present,
     supporters        r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s attend m e e t i n g s   l a r g e l y at their own
     expense and i n c o n v e n i e n c e . T h i s       is not a n ideal basis for the full
     input fro m s u p p o r t e r s that the game u r g e n t l y requires. A N a t i o n a l
     'Ombudsfan'         needs    to be e s t a b l i s h e d in o r d e r to s y s t e m a t i c a l l y
     consult w i t h an d refl e c t the views                 of s u p p o r t e r s and to provide the
     resources to a r t i c u l a t e those views e f f e c t i v e l y . The p o s s i b i l i t y
     of a c o m p u l s o r y m e m b e r s h i p scheme b e i n g i m p o s e d on all football
     supporters — w i t h the n ovel problems                      it w i l l b r i n g to the game —
     make the post even more v ital for the future.


     An    'O m b u d s f a n 's ' role w o u l d include:


          a) R e p r e s e n t i n g supporters'       interests on o f f i c i a l bodies;


          b) R e f l e c t i n g supporters'       obs e r v a t i o n s and r e commendations             on
              the m a j o r issues that face the game                    (e.g. m e m b e r s h i p schemes;
              p o l i c i n g methods;     gr o u n d improvements;            r e t u r n to E u r o p e a n
4^            football etc.);


          c) Acting,      where n e c e s s a r y as an a r b i t r a t i n g contact between fans
              and other parties;


          c) R o u t i n e l y f i e l d i n g comp l a i n t s and c o m m e n t s about the game fro m
              fans and lias i n g w i t h the media;

          d) P r o m o t i n g the game and the s e l f - i m a g e           of supporters;          help i n g
              to d e v e l o p contacts b e t w e e n s u p p o r t e r s      and clubs;


          e) Init i a t i n g r e s e a r c h on supporters'            interests,         in close c o - o p e r ­
              ation w i t h the Si r N o r m a n C h e s t e r Centre;


          f)Helping to g e n erate new support for the game,                             both as p a r t i c i p a n t s
              and spectators,          a mong y o u n g p e o p l e and,        p a r t i c u l a r l y among
              w o m e n and ethnic m i n o r i t y groups;
                                                   3




         g) M e d i a t i n g between E n g l i s h fans and the authorities               on
             football       trips abroad;


    From next season,           the FSA hopes to be able               to finance an office
    w i t h secretarial        assistance from the m e m b e r s h i p fees. The Football
    Trust ma y provide a capital                grant to purchase             office equipment.
    W hat the FSA clea r l y cannot af f o r d to do is pay a salary of from
    £ 1 3 , 0 0 0 — £ 1 5 , 0 0 0 p.a.   to e s t a b l i s h a N a t ional   Ombudsfan.   That
    requires a f a r - s ighted and in d e p e n d e n t sponsor.



»
                                                                                                                               1




 A PROPOSAL TO THE FOOTBALL TRUST FOR THE CO-FUNDING OF A LIAISON/v
 CUSTOMER RELATIONS INITIATIVE FOR FOOTBALL


 1.    Introduction

 1.1      In     the        aftermath         of        the      Hillsborough              t r a g e d y one p o i n t of

c o m m o n a g r e e m e n t on all        sides       seems        to be      about       the      need       for m o r e

 information             on        football         spectators               and      their       views,        and      the

development            of     b e t t e r c h a n n e l s of c o m m u n i c a t i o n b e t w e e n supporters'

o r g a n i s a t i o n s and the        f o o tball          aut h o r i t i e s .       One     measure         of    the

increasing          imUportance           attached             to     d e v e l o p m e n t s of this kind comes

from the g r a n t:ing of legal r e p r e s e n t a t i o n for the F o o t b a l l                         Supporters

A s s o c i a t i o n at the T a y l o r Inquiry.

1.2      Although           the      game        no w     has         an      established            and      respected

r e s e a r c h arm,     p r o v i d e d by the Si r N o r m a n C h e s t e r C e n t r e at Leic ester,

there r e m a i n s a c r u c i a l v a c u u m          between            the       views     and        p r o b l e m s of

g r a s s r oots    support and           the o f f i c i a l bo d i e s w h i c h ru n the game.                      Lack

of     contact         of this k ind u n d o u b t e d l y c o n t r i b u t e d           to H i l l s b o r o u g h and

prevents        information             from       fans          -    with        respect       to     hoo l i g a n i s m ,

facilities,         p o l i c i n g etc.         - r e a c h i n g o f f i c i a l s w h o have the p o w e r to

convert such information to                        practical               use.        (FSA information about
B i r m i n g h a m fans at C r y s t a l Palace,               for example,              may     have p r o d u c e d a

different          and      more      appropriate response from officials at Selhurst
Park.)

1.3      The need         for      such      a     link         will       undoubtedly            gro w      with      the

i n t r o d u c t i o n of a n a t i o n a l m e m b e r s h i p scheme and the F o o t b a l l M e m b e r s

Authority.         E ven the r o u t i n e t e e t h i n g p r o b l e m s             w h i c h will       inevitably

be     associated           with      the    i n t r o d u c t i o n of this           massive         bureaucratic

s t r u c t u r e will test the             patience            of     many       fans.     The e f f e c t s of any

compulsory national                sc h e m e c o u l d be c r i p p l i n g w i t h o u t         a      substantial
                                                                                                                                         2




      ef f o r t to l e s s e n t heir               impact         on     spectators              for w h o m the e x e r c i s e

      wi l l    be      almoskt^ alien.                   One can a n t i c i p a t e that                the       problems       of

      a p p e a l s and c o m p l a i n t s w i l l e s c a l a t e             without        a     channel          via       which

      fans ca n a r t i c u l a t e t h e i r d i f f i c u l t i e s .

      1.4       T here       ca n        be     little         doubt         that       the        Taylor        Inquiry        wil l

     a l s o r e i n f o r c e the f i n d i n g s of p r e v i o u s                investigations             into the game,

     na m e l y that f o o tball has                 failed to m a r k e t             itself e f f i c i e n t l y and w i t h

     the       sophistication                  one    m i g h t e x p e c t fro m the              national           sport.         A

     l i a i s o n link w q u l d a s s i s t             in    this       sphere and w o u l d h e l p p r o v i d e the

     kind       of     i n f o r m a t i o n w h i c h wil l be              vital       for       improving           relations

     b e t w e e n the game and its                  supp o r t e r s at c l u b an d at n a t i 6 n a l               level.

     1.5       T h e r e is        an         increasing            r ange      of     organisations                and     bo d i e s
                               i
     which       now        demand             some         kind           of        institutionalised                 supporter

     representation.                  T h e s e include:             F o o t b a l l a n d the C o m m u n i t y projects;

    Football's Family                    Forum;         police/supporter                  liai s o n       committees;           the

    Fo o t b a l l     T r u s t 1s      Community             Award         Scheme;        possibly            the       Football

    Members          Autho r i t y ;           the ne w        liaison           body       involving            the       FA    and

^   supporters'            representatives.                    At present,            supporters'          representatives

    a t t e n d such m e e t i n g s at their own                        expense         and lack i n g the r e s o u r c e s

    to      m a k e a re a l l y p r o d u c t i v e c o n t r i b u t i o n to the                 game's          new     future

    w h i c h w i l l be b uilt f o l l o w i n g T a y l o r ' s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s .

    1.6        The         Football             Trust           has        consistently                pr o v e d      itself       a

    willing partner                 in         the d e v e l o p m e n t        of     innovative           projects which

    directly          benefit            the      g ame        of     f o o tball and its              s upporters.              The

    Trust's contributions                      towa r d s i m p r o v i n g g r o u n d s      -     as     well          as those

    provided          by     FGIT         -     s u s t a i n i n g c o m m u n i t y schemes,            meeting policing

    costs,      a i d i n g a n t i - h o o l i g a n m e a s u r e s and             stimulating           research            have

    b een      substantial.                    The name and            logo     of the F o o t b a l l T r u s t are now

    w i d e l y k n o w n to m i l l i o n s of supporters,                     especially           since L e a g u e m a t c h

    p r o g r a m m e s b e g a n r e g u l a r l y to c a r r y the T r u s t ' s             'advertisement'.
                                                                                                                                3




1.7        This         is       an    ideal          time          to        drive        hom e       the     message      to

supporters             of how the             Trust        w orks        to     provide            a    better,        safer,

all-round           experience           of w a t c h i n g football.                  However,         there is as yet

no d i r e c t      link b e t w e e n the Trust and the fans on the terraces.

2*     A ne w s u p p o r t e r liai s o n role

2.1         This           important                 contact could                   be      provided           vi a      an

i n d e p e n d e n t n a t ional      suporters1            r e p r e s e n t a t i v e w h o could e f f e c t i v e l y

liaise w i t h the Trust,                     e.g.     via      the           Sir      N o r m a n C h e s t e r C e n t r e at

L eic e s t e r .        Supporters'            organisations                  hav e      good c o n t a c t s w i t h the

C e n t r e and this new a r r a n g e m e n t c ould p rove m u t u a l l y b eneficial.

2.2     This        new s u p p o r t e r s    l i a i s o n i n i t i a t i v e would:                   7

              (i)       provide         representation                for           supporters'           interests        on

                        official        bodies;

            (ii)        consult         w i t h fans on m a j o r issues                   facing the g a m e          (e.g.

                        p e r i m e t e r fencing,         relocation,              g r o u n d sharing etc.);

          (iii)         act,      where       necessary,         as an a r b i t r a t i n g c o n t a c t b e t w e e n

                        fans and o f f i c i a l bodies a n d / o r their clubs;

            (iv)        r o u t i n e l y field c o m p l a i n t s and c o m m e n t s                from    fans a b o u t

                        the game,         thus r e l i e v i n g the F A and                   the F o o t b a l l L e a g u e

                        of a t i m e - c o n s u m i n g and o n e r o u s             task;

              (v)       promote         the g a m e and b e t t e r r e l a t i o n s b e t w e e n c lubs and

                        fans;

            (vi)        aim to        initiate          and      develop             research           programmes         on

                        supporters'            interests            in        c l o s e c o l l a b o r a t i o n w i t h the

                        Sir N o r m a n C h e s t e r Centre;

          (v i i )      h elp to g e n e r a t e ne w          support              for      the       game,    b o t h in a

                        participatory                and       spectatorial                 sense,           among     young

                        people,       f a m i l y gr o u p s and f o o t b a l l i n g m i n o r i t i e s           such as
                             j
                       w o m p n and b l a c k Britons;
         *■* uuOtJ            y6-£3        Zl'-Zl          61-90-6Q6T                                ot£S t>£<z swoyj a3ni3Q3y



                                                                                                                                        4




            (v i i i )       involve              fans            in         anti-hooligan             and      self-policing

                             campaigns;

                 (ix)        mediate          between             English           fans     an d      the a u t h o r i t i e s on

                             football         trips abroad;

  3.     Pundinq

 3.1             it     is     d i f f i c u l t at t h i s            stage         to     provide        precise            figures

 o n the f u n d i n g i m p l i c a t i o n s of e s t a b l i s h i n g a n e w r e p r e s e n t a t i v e r o l e

 f or      football            spectators.                   It    is        also         realised       tha t         the     Trust

 traditionally provides only capital                                         r a t h e r t h a n r e v e n u e funding,            in

 a n y case,           it m i g h t b e         useful,           in     a v a r i e t y of ways,            if    a    n u m b e r of

 b o d i e s w i t h i n the g a m e c o n t r i b u t e d              f u n d s t o the        setting           up of       a new
 p ost      of         this      kind.          The PPA         and     th e F o o t b a l l   League         have           already

 shown           an     interest           in         this     respect.               Recently,          too,       the        Chief

Executive              of th e    FA    h a s b e e n r e c o m m e n d i n g tho amployme.it by                        that body
of a       customer relations                         officer'           who        would      provide            the     FA    with

  better              communication             with          those          who      f u n d the    game1.         T h e Trust,

then,      would be approached only for                                  a     proportion            of the total              f unds

needed       to e s t a b l i s h t h e         l i a i s o n role,           p e r h a p s in t h e      first          instance

o n a t r i a l basis.

3. 2             Transport                and              material                costs,           including             minimal

secretarial support would probably cost                                            in t h e r e g i o n o f     £7-10,000         in

the      f irst          ‘p r o b a t i o n a r y '       year of the position.                     S a l a r y c o s t s could,

pe r h a p s ,    be provided              by         a     c o n s o r t i u m c o m p r i s i n g t w o o r m o r e of th e

o t h e r o r g a n i s a t i o n s wj.thin the g a m e .
FOOTBALL FAMILY FACE REPORT
 FOOTBALL'S FAMILY FACE - THE NEXT PHASE

 The View of the Football Supporters' Association

       \ that any organisation called 'Football's Family Face' is destined for
 difficulties concerning its own identity and role in football without its starting
 point being a clear definition of what is meant by 'the family'. Football crowds
 have never been predominantly comprised of family units and probably never will be.
       y roj-e of t^e family has traditionally been to provide the means by which
 young people are initially introduced to the game. Many people were taken to their
  irst game by a relation before eventually breaking away to go with members of their
 own peer group.

 Family enclosures can be invaluable in providing an environment in which parents
 can take their children to football matches without exposing them to the often
 macho and racist environment that exists in other parts of many football grounds.
 While we do not entirely agree that it necessarily a good idea to shield young
 people m this way, we do accept that family enclosures can go some way to alleviating
 the tears of many parents.

  We fear, however, that by taking out of a normal football crowd those elements that
  could possibly act as a restraining influence (ie parents with children, maturer
  adults, etc;, clubs are creating a more inherently young white macho environment in
| certain parts of the ground. There is nothing wrong with being young white and male
  but we have^to accept that these are the people who appear to be influenced by violent
   nd racist behaviour. Of course, we are not saying that parents should not be able
  to take their children to a designated part of the ground if they wish, but we have
  to accept that these children will eventually grow up and be forced to stand in the
 areas that they were initially being shielded from.

Many of,the schemes discussed at football's Family Face meetings are not, in fact,
  ami y sc ernes at all, but childrens schemes. Some do not seem to involve parents
very much at all. Encouraging children to go to games in groups with supporters of
  e opposing team is an excellent idea, but what happens when they get too old? Is
it then back to the fences, police horses, metal detectors and smelly toilets that
the rest of us face, week in, week out?

The point that we would make is that you cannot develop policies for families at
football without looking at the whole crowd. Getting children involved in their
c ubs is fine, but do not forget that we are currently in a situation where many
football clubs are deliberatly trying to destroy or undermine their own supporters
clubs, and are thereby alienating large sections of their adult support.




               THE F.S.A., 59 OAKWOOD ROAD, HALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
                                            I

  Footballs Family Face as it stands appears to ignore the ’adult’ family entirely.
  At many football grounds you will see families of adults and, if FFF is genuinely
  concerned about the family, it should certainly not be ignoring these. If it is the
  genuine intention to attract families then we have to be looking at more general
  issues such as womens toilets, which are, on the whole, dreadful.

                 whichthe above Points are important depends on how you view the role
 or i H h L r ^ ^ V       7 Seek . ^ st to Provide addtional entertainment for children
 or is there a greater purpose, i.e. part of a long term stratergy to change patterns
 down0inVsOUr at   0t 311 matches? If the former is the case then FFF should slim
                          Parame5ers and accePt that ^ has only a minor role to play
 bv whirh     i   J latter is the case then it must broaden its scope to look at ways
 by which people of all ages can become more involved in their clubs.

 a ^ d L v ! ! T v ? °f Pe°Ple Wh° attGnd FFF meetin8s, the FA, the Football League,
 sha^e if fh         ianS- S]-on*0,S ’ bureaucrats and supporters, it would be a great
    ame if the organisation s full potential were not realised. There is a need for an
 g ^ e S°and one that°r                   together the various different interests in the
 havp *    f-h  h           T   ak Wlth SOme authority. FFF is the nearest thing that we
 world at largeU 1                 distinctly weak in getting its ideas diseminated to the


We would support a radical re-appraisal of FFF and would certainly support the idea
orobfhTlvad         3 F°°tba11 Consultative Committee, although the suggested title
Forum’ L ^ t h i s Stitlpe -eXt?nt f      interests Evolved. We would prefer ’the Football
                     ^        3 ^ a4y bein8 USed by an°ther body. How about ’The Standing
unfortnnafp0n        tbsl1 °r TJe Football Advisory Group’ (although this does have an
with          a5r°nym): T1?e cy^le and len8th of the meetings could remain the same,
with the agenda consisting of reports back from specific working groups set up to look
at particular issues. FFF could be reconstituted as one of these working groups none
 t l t t         nec?r s j1? have to meet °n the — day>- — at s ? s s r ? iu ^
 have another               f 13 to^concentrate on attracting children tofootball, why not
,football and             f          a5 tractin§ women? HoW aboutone looking at racism in
^ n v dn jf   a P 5       looking at the stewarding of away travel? The list is endless.
S e t ^ ^ o S e r . ^           already 100kln8 3t theSe iSSUeS' but there ls         for


lir                   th^ b°r- C?Ul? beC0Be a giant talkinS shop, generating enough hot
hv     inflate Leicester City s late lamented pitch balloon. The way to avoid this is
by ensuring that the ideas raised are listened to and, if possible, acted upon In
i r L CimportaS S e r e f o r ^ h ^ r " 0*"8 PG°Ple n0t directly involved in the discussions,
it is important therefore, that the organisation adopt a TUgfier profile. This can
“       y °nly be don® lf the body is administered by an executive committed heavily
to self-promotion and information disemination.

FFF is capable with^little imagination, and a lot of hard work, of promoting both
towards1^ 6 ?     ° football and of developing policies and ideas that could do much
towards removing the negative side.

Craig Brewin
-FSA National Secretary
August 1988.




                   THE F.S.A., 5 9 OAKWOOD ROAD, HALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
 REFCRT TO THE MINISHR RE S O R T BY 'FOOTBALL'S FAMTT.Y FACE' NATTCNAL H M I N G PAKIY CN
 PKKBED LNTHAIIVES TO OCTfiAT FOOTBALL HXLLGMIE31

 Introduction


 The National Vforking Party (NWP) was formed at a Keele University conference in August
 1986, to which all 92 League clubs were invited. Its aims are to put forward a series
of positive initiatives, to reduce violence associated with football and to promote
a greater family involvement in our national game.          ‘ ■■

Groups represented on the NWP include all those who are involved in the various local
and regional initiatives to promote the game within the caimunity, including SAFE (Soccer
as Family Entertainment), I-fatch hfetes, the Football Supporters' Association, the
National Federation of Football Supporters' CLubs, Supporters United, and representatives
from football clubs, local and central government, the police and research organisations
concerned with the social implications of football hooliganian.


The NWP is the only national forum providing a platform for such a diverse range of
opinions from interested parties within the game.

The NWP met for the second time in Decsnber 1986 in London, to consider the Football
League's draft report, "Hooliganism at Football Nktches". The meeting concluded that,
although the draft report made a number of positive proposals, it was deficient in
certain respects. In particular, concern was expressed at the narrow range of views
represented and the consequently restricted focus on a limited number of initiatives
which fail to provide the constructive and imaginative anti-hooligan programme which
the NWP believes the game and its many allies are able to sustain.

This paper examines the issues raised in the League's report and expands on those to
which NWP members' own experience can make a positive contribution. For convenience,
the order of this report follows that of the League's.

Closed Circuit Television (QCIV)


Ms accept that CCTV has an important role to play in the fight aggdnst hooliganism,
though its long-term effects are likely to be those of displacemsnt. Me submit that it
should be used primarily as a preventive measure, though it will continue to be useful
in identifying troublemakers after the event.


W° are also concerned about the individual supporter's rights of redress for expulsion
or summary banning, in view of-possible contraventions of the European Convention on
Hunan Rights.


We note that the League made no reference to the significant financial contribution of the
Football Trust towards the installation of CCIV nationally, nor were the Trust consulted
about the League's proposals for a further extension of CCTV.

Perimeter Fencing


The NWP hopes that consideration can be given, in the near future, to the removal of periiieter
fencing at clubs which have designated areas for family or menbership enclosures.   It is
appreciated, however, that seme clubs will still need to take special precautions for
certain matches.

Membership Schemes


The NWP is in favour of a voluntary national membership offering incentives to the supporter
eg discounts on match tickets and away travel. Such msnbership would entitle the supporter
to access to controlled areas of a ground, where ccnifort and safety would be guaranteed, as
well as benefits to the individual. Mgnbership cards could be withdrawn in the event of mis­
behaviour and clubs circulated with this information. Cards would only be issued where
appropriate evidence of identity had been produced, f-feny entirely credible membership schemes
already exist within supporters' organisations but the NWP noted that League clubs had taken
little advantage of them, let alcne developed them as a basis for access to grounds.

The NWP is opposed to a compulsory national membership card scheme.


There has been a considerable amount of research into partial membership schemes, such as
the one at Leicester City, and total schemes, as at Luton Town, but there is little acknowledg­
ment of this in the League's report. The coficept of "controlled access", as described by the
League, is of little practical value because it is premised on an ad hoc designation of
specific sections of the grounds as "controlled" and is based on statistics which are, at
best, vague and, at worst, contrived.

Most clubs are new caraiitted to family and membership enclosures as potential 'safe' areas
inside grounds, as part of broader 'cormrunity' initiatives, and some use them. Danand at
most clubs does not seem to indicate that such schemes are attractive to all well-behaved fans,
but they are useful in improving the image of the game, the quality of the spectator-
experience for those using them, and the rational use of police resources at matches.


The NWP.is carmitted to extending and expanding such schemes, to giving incentives to fans to
join, and to increasing the active role of spectators in them.
3.

Luton Tcwn's 'hcne-only' scheme, although disliked by many loyal spectators throughout
the country because it discriminates against well-behaved fans as well as hooligans,
has so far been enormously successful in curbing hooliganism at Kenilworth Road. Research
at Luton suggests that a scheme of this kind nay be relevant only to a limited number
of clubs. .Developments this season have persuaded Luton to consider soma modification of
the scheme, to allow restricted away support for 1987/88.

The NWP recognises that seme clubs nay find such schemes effective and useful, especial ly
if they also allow for limited hooligan-free away travel. It also recognises that,
on a limited number of occasions and subject to police approval, matches for particular
clubs should be made all-ticket events, and that a total ban on away fans for specific
matches nay benefit the game more than matches played under excessively dangerous and
intimidating conditions.

Restrictions of this kind seem more desirable and potentially more useful than a controlled
national membership scheme which risks becoming both impracticable and unmanageable,
besides losing the game considerable support.

Family Enclosures

The NWP would make several recornnendations on this issue.

     Madia coverage should be sought to highlight the progressive steps taken by clubs
     in providing family enclosures.

2 . It is considered insufficient for a club merely to designate an area of the ground
     a "family enclosure". Facilities of a high standard must be provided for supervision,
     catering, toilets, etc, with particular provision for wemsn and children.


3. The help of supporters' clubs should be enlisted to improve the organisation and
     supervision of family enclosures, and to give them the opportunity of contributing
     positively to the development of their clubs.

4.   After more detailed discussion and subject to your approval, the NWP would issue
     guidelines for nrinirrun specifications for family enclosures. As a practical encourage­
     ment, a national award could be made in recognition of the quality of facilities
     offered. Hie award could be made by the Football League, the Football Trust, the
     Department of the Environment or this National Working Party, or a combination of
     two or more of these.
     Consideration should be given to improving the lines of ccmnunication between the
    Football League and those members of the NWP currently involved, on behalf of clubs,
    in the day-to-day running and administration of family enclosures.

Players' Conduct

Hie NWP considers the example set by players, both on and off the field, to have a significant
influence on the conduct of spectators. Coaches and managers also have a considerable
responsibility in discouraging foul play and cheating in matches.

Every effort should therefore be made to employ players as ambassadors in schools and in
the cannunity. To this end, training courses in public relations and cannunication skills
should be encouraged and organised by clubs.

Similarly, suitable arrangements should be developed for the enhancement of ccmnunication
s k i l l s within the Youth Training Scheme (YIS), since these trainees are the ambassadors
of the future. Hie Chairman and Secretary of the Professional Footballers' Association
have expressed support for this proposal.


Education

The NWP believes that schools should be encouraged to teach youngsters that participation
and enjoyment are just as important as results.

A draft report by Liverpool City Council, "Report of the Steering Ccnndttee on Soccer
Violence", suggests that schools can perform an important function, especially for
their least-advantaged pupils, in providing contexts within which young people can
experience regions and cities different from their own in ways which stress co-operation
and collaboration between geographically distinctive areas and cultures. Hie report
suggests a number of ways to achieve this:

1. Field-trips to different cities and regions.

2. Projects in collaboration with schools from different areas, possibly involving
    pupil-exchange visits.

3. Regular sporting fixtures between schools from differait cities (female as well
   as male).


4. Classes to discuss the regional, cultural and sporting distinctions within Great
   Britain, aimed at undermining the extreme forms of aggressive parochialism which
    tend to be associated with football hooligan behaviour.
  Alcohol


  The NWP feels that players should be used to project an iirage of health, enjoyment and
  sportsmanship, particularly against drinking, snaking and drug-taking.


  The NWP supports the view, expressed in the Liverpool City Council report, that educational
  and broader cultural initiatives should be used to undermine the links which currently
  exist between heavy drinking and a particular image of masculinity.

 The NWP hopes that, in due course, consideration can be given to the introduction of
 alcohol into the responsible environments of family and membership controlled areas.

 Legislation


 The NWP deplores obscene and racist chanting at football matches.


 Vfe suggest that it would be helpful for players publicly to declare th^i i~ opposition
 to such behaviour and for League clubs to state their views and policies in their
 magazines and programmes.


 It is worthy of mention that some clubs, including Leeds United, eject and impose life
 bans on supporters responsible for racial abuse.


The NWP feels that adequate powers of arrest for the police already exist.

Sentencing


The NWP acknowledges that there are few alternatives at present to custodial sentences for
hardened offenders, but considers that minor misdemeanours should be penalised by reporting
to attendance centres during football matches and/or worthwhile activities such as ccmnunity
service, perhaps involving work at local clubs.


The NWP challenges the statement by the Football League that wider publicity should be
given to court sentences for offenders. Additional publicity will reinforce a competitive
attitude among potential hooligans to see who can create the most trouble, so that some
clubs can gain reputations for extreme violence.

latches Abroad


The bridge-building exercise of the Match Mates trip to Brussels in 1986 has been recognised
and applauded by our ambassador to Belgium. Ihe Foreign and Carmonwealth Office have asked
to be kept informed of any future venues abroad. Since the Match Mates event, an invitation
has been received for Stoke on Trent schools to take part, during 1987, in an international
 tournament, sponsored by the European Economic Carmunity.


 You will recall that information about the f-fetch f-fetes scheme was sent to you with the
 Keele conference papers last year.


 The consensus of opinion within the NWP is that further research should be undertaken
 into the efforts of other countries to combat hooliganian - a problem not unique to Britain.
 Wa would welcome your observations on this proposal, with a view to initiating such research
 and a subsequent report.

Convicted Offenders


A central data bank of known troublemakers nay be of use to seme clubs but, should finances
be available, the NWP would also recotmend the creation of Football Envelopment Officers
as a preventive strategy within the ccmnunity.



AHimCNAL MEASURES


Segregation


Wrilst accepting that seme segregation is needed as a short-term measure, the NWP hopes
that, in the long-term, total integration of supporters will again be possible.


Support should be given to those clubs which already promote effective integration
through junior and senior supporters’ organisations and exchange visits.

Policing


Operational liaison between clubs and police should be extended to include representatives
frcm both sets of supporters.

Such meetings would enable and encourage supporters to pass on information about impending
trouble.   (Many fans knew about the planned Bradford/Leeds violence a week before the
match).


Other Maasures


1. The NWP is surprised that the report of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities'
   Joint Working Group, "Football Violence -the Metropolitan Viewpoint", and the various
   ways in which football clubs can be involved with the local authority in the community,
   received no mention in the League report.
 2. The NWP is also surprised that the League report nakes no mention of supporter involve­
     ment in such particularly helpful areas as steuarding, club liaison, intelligence
     gathering and travel clubs. Wg believe that football clubs should be encouraged to
     establish full channels of ccnuiunication with their supporters.


 3. Consideration should be given to the suggestion of the Football Supporters' Association
     that a Supporters' Ombudsman be appointed to protect the interests of supporters,
     assisted by regional volunteers, to provide as wide a representation as possible.

 Summary


Externally enforced forms of control will not ultimately solve the hooligan problem. If
 the game is to continue as a major spectator sport, police escorts, segregation cages and
fences and the other paraphernalia of match-day control must gradually be scaled down.
The League report seems to point in the opposite direction.

At the moment, the conditions under which this objective would become possible - Luton
notwithstanding - seem far from being realised. The NWP believes that this is partly
because clubs and the football authorities have done too little to mobilise active and
constructive support for the fight against hooliganisn from ccnmitted and well-behaved
spectators.


Seme initiatives already operative to bring younger fans together (Match Mates, family
enclosures, exchanges, SAFE, etc), and their counterparts (the supporters' club links),
help to increase self-regulaticn ancng fans. Such programmes should be expanded to provide
for a much greater involvement and dialogue between supporters' organisations, clubs and
the police, and a far more efficient utilisation of the goodwill which clubs enjoy from the
vast majority of their fans.


The NWP is camri-tted to extending the role and involvement of orderly fans in anti-hooligan
initiatives and to including such fans much more fully in the formulation of policy in
these areas.


The NWP recommends the further expansion of "Football and the Ccfmiunity Progrannie", which
needs to be properly evaluated and monitored. However, this programne must not be regarded
as in itself a solution to the problem.

Moreover, central government must recognise that the capacity of local government to involve
itself in anti-hooligan strategies is itself limited by constraints on local authority finance.


Finally,-in its submission the Working Fkrty has put forward the views of a wide cross-section
of public opinion, who are gravely concerned about the future of our national game. The
Working Party respectfully submits that urgent action, along the lines indicated within this
paper, needs to be taken by government, central and local, by clubs, the footfall authorities
and football suporters, to reduce the impact of violence and hooliganism on the o^me by pro­
viding a safer environment for the enjoyment of football by supporters and families.




                              U's Family Face' National Working Ikrty by:




                                              D Capper
Projects Nknager                              Assistant Secretary
Stoke on Trent City Council                   Stoke City Football Club


                       Joint Secretaries
FOOTBALL FANS AGAINST HOOLIGANISM
FC-CTBiLL T’A’TS AGAT??5*P HOOLIGANISM


I'NTUOgjC-rlOH


Trie Football Supporters Association (F.S.A-) was formed in August, 1985}
in response to the growing crisis which affects our national game.         The
main aim of the P.S.A. is to seek representation for foofball fans "by
providing a democratic organisation through which their views can "be
effectively expressed.     The F.S.A. has already worked at committee level
with Liverpool City Council and also the "FOOTBALL’S FAMILY FACS".         The
association consists to date of ten regional "branches, including two in
Scotland.    The "branches are organised regionally, as opposed to around
individual clubs, and hold monthly public meetings which invite all the
supporters of a given area to come together.      The F.S.A. is the only
national organisation which ordinary supporters can join simply and
cuickly, regardless of their club allegiance.


The F.S.A. does not "believe that hooliganism is simply foofball’s
problem.     Consequently, the success of any measures taken to tackle the
occurence of violent or disorderly "behaviour at football matches is
limited by the context in which it occurs.      As the research by John
VJillinns and his colleagues at Leicester University has clc~rly showns
a)      hooliganism at football matches is not a recent phenomenon
b)      hooliganism does not occur only    at    football matches
c)      hooliganism at football matches is not a specifica.lly British
      phenomenon


     Given the scale ana extent of the problem, it is clear that football
clubs can at best seek to limit the scope for hooliganism in their
grounds and vicinities, while the larger task of "solving” hooliganism
in society must lie beyond the scope of footballing bodies.
      "tVv4_   S A        tV-s.         5t»_cX cv ^ l C-'Von^ ^v\ \p-vjj_ tfSLtvv^-e
       3± wore peon i,; .-it-r^ro- foot.bni mp.tcM*.                         it is cbvic—    :.--
          ,t many potential fcctbali ^;:p=rtcrc are currently put off l i v e l y ’
      |following their clubs by the rnicb-p-Alicised problem of h o o l i ^ i r m ,

                                                       pattern of attendances at football
     p matches over the last 40 years will see clearly that the apparently
      timpxe equation: hooliganism = declining gates is just not true.                         In
      fact, the equation is more accurate in reverse;                    consistently declining
      gates has contributed to an acceleration of the hooligan problem.                             It
      may well be that ohe violent minority who have always been present in
      football crowds were once checked by the large majority of ordinary
      people present at football matches.             Over the last four decades, many
      of tiiese natural "checkers” of bad behaviour have simply stopped going
      to watch football, long before any hooliganism seriously arose.                        If
      such be the case (and this argument has been forcefully presented by
     Professor Bernard Crick) the game needs to re-attract the                          non-violent
     supporter back into the game, thus considerably diluting the violent
     minority and re-establishing a powerful peer-group pressure on them to
     behave properly.




     F.S.A. RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE ANTI-HOOLIGAN COMI-'ITTEE


     SHORT-TERM MEASURES



••   I)   The Football League has considerable power and access to the media
          at its disposal.        It should launch a high-profile programme calling
          for all football supporters to join with the League to defeat the
          hooligans.    Such an initiative could include a public commitment to
          take supporters on board in novel and challenging ways; to provide
          more accessible information and advice to supporters; to open a new
          chapter in supporter-representation and consultation.                        The Football
          League's public image would be mr.csively enhanced - particularly
          amongst football fans and potential fans - by such a clear change
          in direction.    For the past 10 years, the game's sirosorters have
          been subject to increasing restrictions and almost constant attack
          by the press and others.        In consequence the self-image of the
          average fan has never been lower.            As at Luton, all supporters are
          now apparently tarred with the hooligan's brush.                     Consequently,
          any concerted programme backed by the Football League which positively
                       t-O            :c-tAf»*vNS-<; feu V*   -    o^A       ‘■'WaSW vrcxs.cuuw\


image but also - and possibly more significantly in                the fight 'gainst
hooligaJiism - the image which supporters have of themselves a.s responsible
people.

The Football Le3.gue should seek actively to counter               bad public it;/ about
football by conducting thorough research into given                cases and
publicising its results.     If the Football League is seen to be positively
defending football supporters wrongly accused of bad behaviour (as, for
example, the widespread and totally u n t r u e reporting of Merseyside fans'
involvement in the Ferry Riot incident), the average fan’s reaction will
be to defend football in response.      The F.S.A. recognises the considerable
difficulty which the Football* League rnay have getting its new message
across    and suggests the serious consideration of the League's publishing
its own mini Paper, perhaps as a supplement to the 'Today* newspaper?
The F.S.A. could also serve as a grass-roots organisation capable of
widely disseminating such a publication.

Host football supporters begin their careers going to a game with friends.
The Football League in conjunction with the F.S.A. should plan a 'Bring
A Friend to the Hatch' Day this season.          Massive publicity could be
achieved by designating one Saturday as the (day when every regular football
supporter should seek to persuade one non—attenaer to accompany him or her
to a match.    Publicity in the run-up to such a Day could emphasise,
perhaps using interviews with lifelong.fans, the excitement of the
occasion, the safety and good humour of the crowd etc.                   Follow—up publicity,,
including positive accounts of 'first match experiences', could be used
effectively to better the image of the game generally*


The Football League should encourage the institution of regular meetings
prior to potentially troublesome matches between representatives of both
groups of supporters, the police and club officials.                 These meetings v.ould
enable and encourage supporters to pass on any information tney ma/ have
about impending trouble.      (For example many fans knew about the planned
Bradford/Leeds violence a week before the match.)                 The meetings could
 effectively supplement the already existing police intelligence networks
 and encourage a better liason and flow of information beov.een police and
 travelling supporters.      The F.S.A.'s London Branch met recently with
 senior Metropolitan police officers in charge of football crowds.
                                                *3seutr       i d e a o f currcuvg^^ swj&K

     fva-t-Vwii^s


     H^DrJM-?'^-! '-SASURS5


-\                  ■'■            ...   ^rn ^ ^ r> V •■-    i;*1':-'? rc-.Trv cf -^v .-■ rr_'"r,   ~ ip l

     There is little in the present format of either the 3.B.C. or I.T.V.
     Saturday lunchtime programmes which positively inspires the public to
     go to a match.         Particular frar.es are rarely highlighted (unless the
     T.V. company plans to show it ‘live' on Sunday) and film clips of the
     equivalent exciting games last season are no longer shown.                                In conseouence,
     the Football Le?„gue should consider in future packaging its own product
     into a regular, weekly 20 or 30 minute advertisement of Sat\irday’s
     forthcoming attractions.            Many clubs now video their own matcnes.
     Selected highlights - not restricted to First Division clubsi - could
     be compiled to whet appetites for the weekend games.                            The whole pacKage
      could be sold to television, incidentally providing many smaller sponsors
      of less fash-ionsible clixbs vziijh nvuch—*iiee,d.ed. exposure#


2)    If voluntary membership schemes and enclosures are to be adopted by
      individual clubs, costs of membership should be kept to an absolute
      minimum.      In order to greatly increase the percieved legitimacy and
      popularity of such schemes, supporters should be actively encouraged to
      administer them themselves, and be offered in return improved channels of
      communication to their clubs at board level.                      Such developments would
      show the clubs and the Football League in a more supporter-conscious
      light, encourage new supporters               who would be attracted by the prospect
      of involvement and confirm traditional loyalties amongst current
      supporters.         Fans who are more closely involved with their club and who
      feel they have an important role to play within it will also be more
      ready to assist any general anti—hooligan measures.


3)     Football clubs, many of which are now sited in run down urban areas,
       should be actively encouraged-by the Football League to attract those
       people who live in the vicinity of their grounds.                         Often these areas
       are now inhabited by black or Asian people, who not only receive no
       direct encouragement to attend football matches but are positively
       discouraged by the racism of some minorities amongst football crowds.
       The Football League should join the F.S.A. in conducting an active
       campaign to eradicate racism by seeking directly to involve more
       black and Asian people in the game.                  Racism and hooliganism go hand
       in hand but, as yet, there has been no serious campaigning to encourage
                           o rea d s-                  su cu k    wM   r i-d io * U :   r < v ^ is'f c W h * ^ .   T W

      (~ O O tV )< M _ V    L -< ~ « v < J v U   C O u l< 4                                 M   .


      oj* nv.ch            9 camr>a.igr.



4)    RepesrcTi into ways of encouraging more fenale supporters s.nd whole
      family grcups at football matches should he publicly "backed by the
      Football League.                                The F.S.A. was initially surprised at the high
       level of interest in the game amongst women but discovered thnt the
       overall lack of good amenities at grounds - in particular toilet
       facilities - played an important part in keeping-many-women away.
       Hard—fact research into the problem would encourage more cluoo                                                 oO
       pla.ce such amenities a.s a high priorit;/.


5)     The Football League ana the F.S.A* should develop a football
       supporter's 'Code of Requirements'.                                   Such a code would need to
       spell out the basic standards a supporter may expect.                                               Such as:
i)              A good view of the game
ii)             Reasonable access to toilet facilities, entrances, exits etc.
iii)            A decent standard of food and                          drink available
iv)             Firm but even-handed policing                          and stewarding

       Xf such a code were adopted and w e l l — publicised, it would not only
       help to attract more spectators but also provide an agreed criteria
       by which supporters could measure their grounds.


       AN OMBUDSMAN FOR FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS


       A most effective way to implement majiy of tne initiatives described
       above would be to appoint a Football Supporters Ombudsman, with
       regional representatives to assist him or her.                                               This post v.rould need
        to be given a high profile and should include the tasks of-


1)       Taking up individual supporters complaints and, where justified,
        acting on them
2)       Providing the Football League with required information about
        supporters and polling their opinions on specific matters
 3)      Actively countering 'bad publicity'
4)       Organising regular meetings between supporters' r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s ,
        the clubs, the police and the Footba.ll League
 5)      Promoting events to attract mere spectators to football matches ^                                                   ^      ^
 6)      Assisting in any specific research undertaken to monitor the m e d i ^ ^ ^ ^ | ^ ^

         coverage of football and the effects on hooliganism of individual                                                       ■ V;

         initiatives, membership schemes etc.
        ( t>T                             toe   fo u v ^   ff-©r->      foaJtacuA .   U   a   ^

itself and/or from the Football 5*ust, or other interested bodiesv                                    -j
Perhatis even -private or commercial sponsorship ought to "be                                     .
                 '■               .               V-   -                **
considered?     The appointment could "be made by combined representatives.’
   ,             .—■■■■' -fi r.       ~   ~     :. :            j:'[ ? r r

that a *supporter-person*, rather than a ' football—person* , be


their own interests at heart is in command.                          It may be possible
initially for the Ombudsman's regional representatives to operate
on a part-time or even voluntary basis.                       The F.S.A. would offer its-
own regional structure as a communication and opinion—assessing
network and throw itself wholeheartedly into ensuring the success of
such an exciting initiative.


The importance of the Football League acting decisively and quickly
upon these recommendations can hardly be overstated.                              The £ootb,-ll
League - subject to attack from many sides, including the government
and the media, for its supposed indecisiveness over the hooligan
problem — must be seen to be acting positively and rapidly.
The strength of the F.S.A.*s recommendations lies in the fact that
they have emerged from detailed discussions amongst supporters
themselves all over the country.                  If implemented these recommendations
would win the general approval of the vast majority of football s
faithful fans.        For too long supporters have been seen as "the
problem" without any recognition that, naturally, they are also
the solution to that problem.                 If our national sport is to survive
and prosper, the Football League must lead the way and adopt the first
positive and radical approach to winning those supporters over onto
their side.     If that can be done - and done quickly - the day of the

hooligan will soon be over..
MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/GOVERNMENT
                                                   Reply to;
                                                   32 Chursto n Gardens
                                                   Bounds Green
                                                   London Nil
   Rt. Hon. Colin M o yn ih an M.P.
   House Of Commons
   Westmins ter
   Lo n do n SW1


   Dear M r Moynihan,

   I am w r i t i n g regarding your recent statements in P ar l i a m e n t to
   the effect that the views of the Football Supporters As so ci ati on
   would be taken into account by the W or k i n g P a r t y draw ing up your
   proposed identity card legislation.

   I understand that the Work ing Party has now met several times, and
   as yet we have not received a formal request for our opinions..    As
   you are no doubt aware, we do not believe that yo ur legislation
   will have any effect on the hooligan p ro ble m and will be a disaster
   for the future of football as a spectator sport. However, although
   it is clear that we will not disuade you from yo ur proposed course
   of action, we do think that we have some pos it ive proposals that
   you could consider.

1; Use   of I.D.   Cards
   If your proposed legislation becomes law, and all football spectators
   must carry I.D. cards, we would like you to co nsider making the use
   of the cards a requirement at certain p re - d e t e r m i n e d games only.
   There are over 2,000 Football League matches per season, the vast
   majority trouble free. If most games were d e s ig na te d 'card free'
   this would ameliorate the short term financial loss that many clubs
   will suffer, and would also make the system cheaper to operate. We
   are obviously concerned ab out congestion a t turnstiles and this
   suggestion would also go someway towards p r e v e n t i n g this.

2; Confiscation of Cards
  The criteria for the confiscation of I.D.cards must be clearly
  defined. If the criteria is a court conviction, then many of the
  people, whom we are sure the police would lik« to see excluded,
  would still be admitted. As you are aware, the police have failed
  to secure convictions against people that they have identified as
  ringleaders on the terraces. The severity of the offence would also
  have to be specified, as we believe that not all offences warrent
a life ban. M a n y young people who are arr ested at football matc h­
es grow out of their rowdy phase to become model supporters. In
any case, is a life ban what is proposed ?
If conviction is not to be the criteria, what is ? As you are no
doubt aware many people are ejected from football grounds without
being charged. Even in West Germany, where the events that prompted
your ac ti on occured, there were only 39 arrests amoungst English
supporters, and these were all away from football grounds. Are we
to put the matter entirely in the hands of the police, without
resort to a court of law? We would be unhappy too, if it were
entirely at the dis cretion of the club. In Southend, a group of
supporters were recently banned from Southend Un ite d F.C.'s home
ground for p u b l is hi n g inaccurate information in a newsletter and
for co nsidering organising a demonstration a ga ins t a proposed
change of ground. The club ignored the fact that the demonstration
was, in the end, never called, and that some of those banned were
pensioners. It seems strange that clubs are reluctant to exclude
people from their membership areas for racist abuse but will ban
their l o y a l i s t f a n s for. disagreeing with them.

1Neutral* Supporters
I am not alone in not always watching my own team play on a Sa tur ­
day, but often watch a more local side. Wou ld I be excluded from
doing this in the future ? Would I have to stand with the away
supporters ? If your system is eventually used to ban away fans,
and the p ote nt ial for this exists, will it also ban neutrals ?
Wh at is to stop people, particularly people living in London, from
joining several clubs or even joining with false names ?

A t t r a c t i n g Back the -Fans
Your proposals will lead to a fall in attend anc es in the short term,
which you clearly believe will be compensated for by an increase in
the long term. Even if your proposals were su ccessful in E r a d i c a t i n g
violence from the terraces there will not be an autom ati c return.
H oo li gan ism is not the only cause of the fall in gates and its
significance can not be quantified. Simply a tt r a c t i n g back those los
through the introduction of I.D. cards wi l l require a massive market
ing effort by the League, and even they wi ll admit that they have
found market in g themselves to sponsors ea sier than marketing them­
selves to the public.
There is an ever dec reasing spiral being encouraged by your Go ver n­
ment. A large numbe r of people are first introduced to football by
a member of their family. For each spectator lost there is also lost
a poten tia l recruiting agent for the next gen eration of supporters.
We would therefore appeal to you to build into your proposals some
positive benefit of membership.

Real M em b e r s h i p
We think that there is a very strong case for giving democratic
rights to members of membership schemes. The scheme of which I am
a member has regulations that explicitly state that I am not a
'member' of anything, but a 'registered cardholder' and have
’no right to participate in the affairs of the club'. Clearly the
word 'membership' is a misnomer. I understand that from your point
of view it is the registration element that is important, but our
concern has always been that membership schemes undermine, and in
some cases have virtually destroyed, traditional supporters clubs.
This is unfortunate because membership of a se lf -or gan is ed supporter
    3 -/-

            club or other supporters body fosters a sense of responsibility, and
            our evidence suggests that the most trouble free away travel is that
            organised^by supporters clubs.
            This Government has always claimed a commitment to the rights of the
            individual. The Governments Trade Union legislation was claimed to
            be designed to give more rights to rank and file members. Yet the
            Government has encouraged the growth of membership schemes which give
            their members no involvment in their administration. Having an
            elected committee would also provide a body with which the football
            club could liase when making major changes which affect the club.
            There have been many ideas adopted over the recent years designed
            to encourage a sense of responsibility amoungst children (m a t c h - m a t e s ,
            Fundays, etc. ) but nothing has been aimed at the older supporter.

    6;      World Cup,   1990
          We are extremely worried about the possibility of serious outbreaks
    ^    of violence in Italy should England qualify for the next World Cup.
    w    We cannot see how your proposals seek to tackle this. Less than a
          year ago you said that you would not be introducing 1 0 0 $ membership
          schemes, but events in Germany led you to change your mind- We fear
          that a serious outbreak of violence in Italy will lead you to s u p p ­
          ort a ban on away fans in England. (We cannot see the link, but then
          we also cannot see the link between the European Championships and
          your current plans.) We are currently working on our own plans to
          control people travelling abroard to watch football and would welcome
          an opportunity to present these in detail to someone in authority.


            I hope these views are ol some help to you, and that you give them
            some consideration. A detailed reply would be greatly appreciated.
            One side effect of your recent statements has been an increase in
            FSA membership, that has taken even us by surprise. This, at least,
            will help us to do our bit to change attitudes on the terraces, and
            to direct the energies of supporters into more constructive activities
            thar^ following the hooligan celebrities given prominence by the media.

•
            Yours sincerely,




            Craig Brewin
            National Secretary




            cc                        ( Football’Association)
                                      (Football League)
 The Prime Minister                                             28th June 1988
 10 Downing Street
 LONDON


 Dear Mrs. Thatcher,

This Association shares your deep concern over the behaviour of some English
football supporters in Germany recently. It was a clear indication of the
failure of the whole anti-hooligan strategy pursued over the past three years.

The one element clearly lacking in that strategy was the active involvement
of the supporters themselves in devising it. Though this Association has met
the current Minister for Sport and his predecessor, we have been as yet unable
to pursuade either the Football League or the Football Association to consider
seriously our representations. Yet the ordinary supporters of this country -
themselves most frequently the victims of violence - know the problems better
than anyone else. Is it so difficult to recognise that consequently, they
might have some good ideas about solutions?

 This Association was formed within a few months of the Heysel stadium tragedy.
 I and a Community Liaison Policeman, Peter Garrett, both lifetime Liverpool fans,
 felt we had to do something positive to motivate the supporters of this
 country and encourage their deeper involvement in the running of the game.
•Within a year, the F.S.A. ha4 flourished to include a dozen regional branches,
 holding regular monthly meetings at which all the supporters of the region -
 regardless of club loyalties - could come together and recognise common
 interests. We felt it most urgent to present a new role-model to younger
 supporters bemused by the publicity the hooligans attract. We took
 responsibility and we acted.

This Association now needs your help in recognising the positive input
supporters can make and in urging the football authorities to meet with us .
This country gave the world its most popular team sport and a profound
affection for the game still exists here despite all the difficulties of
recent times. If that heartfelt affection can be tapped and involved in
developing solutions to those difficulties, a long-term victory over the
hooligans will be achieved.

I look forward with some urgency to hearing from yoi'.

Yours sincerely,




ROGAN TAYLOR,
(Chair)
                       lO DOWNING STREET
                             LONDON SW1A 2AA

From the Private Secretary                     3q j une   19 88




       KU.        (W

        I am writing on behalf of the Prime
Mui i ster to thank you for your letter
o q p ?8 June.

     This is receiving a ttention and a
reply will be sent to you as soon as possible.




                                                 £   /l/vu


                                        Dominic Morris




Rogan Taylor, Esq.
Colin Moynihan
M inister fo r Sport           TEL: 051 709 9988
Department of the
Environment


15th July 1988


Dear Colin Moynihan,

It was with surprise and disappointment that I heard you announce the formation
of a membership-scheme Working Party that appears to exclude any representation
of supporters. I know from your expressed opinion (and indeed that also of
your predecessor) that you feel supporters have been badly under-represented in
the past. Consequently, I cannot understand the absence of the fans from your
list of "government, the football authorities and the police".

As the representative of a government pledged to enhance personal choice and
consumer consultation, you must recognise the advantages of involving football
supporters in the consultative process. The proposed membership scheme will
affect all fans in the most radical way and, consequently, it seems even more
vital to include them.

I therefore formally request that provision be made to include an F.S.A.
representative on the Working Party.

I look forward to hearing from you.


Yours sincerely,




                         o-

Rogan Taylor




                                      l i A l . I . U O O D . 1. 1YF. RPOOL. L2f> I XD
                             lO DOWNING STREET
                                 LONDON SW1A2AA
From the Private Secretary

                                                       21   J u ly   1988




      Thank you for your letter of 28 June to the Prime
 Minister about the Football Supporters Association.  The Prime
 Minister was pleased to note that the Association share the
 general concern about the deplorable behaviour of some so
 called football supporters in West Germany.

      The role which supporters clubs can play was of course
 recognised in the February 1987 agreement on anti-hooligan
 measures between the Government and the football authorities.
 In particular it suggested that they should be consulted in
 the preparation of local plans for the management and control
 of home and away supporters which all clubs in the Football
 League have now produced.

      As you say in your letter, the Minister for Sport met the
 FSA and the National Federation of Supporters Clubs earlier
 this year and appreciates how strongly both organisations feel
 about official recognition.  But the relationship between the
 FA, the Football League and representative bodies like your
 Association is, of course, a matter between those
 organisations.

      I      have arranged for a copy of your letter and my reply to
 be sent to the FA and the Football League.




                                           (DOMINIC MORRIS)




Rogan Taylor, Esq.
                     JkUAM EAV7^
                                                        DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONM ENT
                                                        2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P3EB
                                                                   01-232x3®3Jt 276 3000
                    ■^KETAR-fjJ-                        My ref:          M/PSO/3 594 3/88
                                                        Your ref:


                  Rogan Taylor Esq
                  The Football Supporters Association
                  59 Oakwood Road
                  Halewood
                  Liverpool L2 6 1XD




                  Mr Moynihan has asked me     to thank you for your      letter of
                  15 July about the Working Party he is to chair which will
                  be looking into the details of the implementation of the national
                  membership scheme for football supporters.

                  The Minister wishes to keep the size of the Working Party
                  to a minimum and it will not therefore be possible to extend
                  membership to the FSA.      However the Minister has asked me
                  to invite you to let him have in writing any points the FSA
                  think should be taken into account.    If you wish to let him
                  know about your thoughts on a national membership scheme in
                  this way, he wou l d be pleased to bring them to the attention
                  of the Working Party.


                      <7O




                  ALASTAIR MCINTYRE
                  Private Secretary




     100%




REC raEO P aper
Ref RT/SF

31st August 1988

Mr Colin Moynihan
Minister for Sport
Department of the Environment
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 3EB

Dear Mr Moynihan
Thank you for your letter of 22nd August. As you will know from the National Secretary s
letter, the F.S.A. was already intending to put some points in writing to.y°u * How® ^ ’
I hope that you will also meet with ourselves soon with a view to discussing the matte s
we raise. I note from Hansard that, in reply to a question from Dennis Howell on J y
12th, you stated your intention to "talk" to supporter representatives.

I amsure that there are a number of areas where your own views and the F.S.A.'s
coincide. Reading your recent comments about the discrepancy between the time the
Football League Management Committee spend debating television fees and that spent
seeking to involve the clubs' supporters and communities"more closely, to enhance
the stadia amenities and encourage more women to attend matches, this Association
could hardly agree more. Given your intention to draft legislation concerning
football supporters and their clubs, the Government has a marvellous opportunity to
directly benefit the status of supporters. Such a positive change would be an
important contribution in the long term campaign to eradicate hooliganism.

I hope to hear from you with a view to our meeting as soon as possible.

Yours sincerely


               ■ ;. -   ■'     —   A,'- '

Rogan Taylor___
Chairnan




                   THE F.S.A., 59 OAKWOOD ROAD. HALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
                       ^UAMErv^                       DEPARTMENT OF THE EN VIRONM ENT
                                                      2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                                                 01-212 3434

                                                      My ref:
                                                                              M/PSO/1834 5/88
                                                      Your ref:




                                                                       2 7 OCT 1988




                   Thank you for your letter of 31 August about the proposed national
                   membership  scheme  for  football supporters.      I have also seen
                   Mr Brewin's letter setting out your Association's views on the
                   scheme and this has been brought to the attention of the members
                   of the Working Party established to examine the scheme in detail.
                   I am sorry that you have not had an earlier reply.

                   I would be very p l e as ed to meet representatives of the FSA to
                   discuss  the  scheme   and other  matters as  you  have suggested.
                   Perhaps you would contact my secretary on 01-276-3449 and make
                   the necessary arrangemei




                                                                   C-U K » J L
                                                                COLIN MOYNIHAN




      io o x




                   Rogan Taylor Esq
R ecycled P aper
        MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/FOOTBALL LEAGUE
       MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE ESA/FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/FOOTBALL LEAGUE
     The Secretary,                                                 28th June 1988
     The Football League,
     319 Clifton Road,
     Lytham St. Annes,
     LANCASHIRE,

•    FY8 1JG,.


     Dear Graham Kelly,

    It is with a sinking heart that this Association views the 'Five Point Plan'
    outlined by the Government following the behaviour of some English supporters
    in Germany recently. We have consistently maintained that the measures imposed
    at home over the last three years will do little to solve the hooligan problem
    either here or abroad. Those restrictive measures, while being largely
    necessary, need urgently complementing with a positive programme designed to
    win the active support of football fans. Yet all we hear is that the screws
    are to be tightened still further, threatening the very existence of a
    broadly-based and heathy footballing culture in England.

    We do understand your reluctance to admit an additional voice to the table -
    more representation means more complication! But we believe the situation
    is moving to the point where this reluctance must be foregone in the
     recognition that the long-term advantages to be gained from opening up a real

•   dialogue with supporters will far outweigh any disadvantages. Our interests
    are moving" closer and closer together. Once effective representation of
    supporters is achieved, our aims in the current crisis will be largely
    identical. Consequently, we urge you to consider most seriously beginning a
    new chapter, a new partnership with the fans of this country. We request a
    meeting with you at the earliest possible opportunity, preferably before the
    July 6th meeting with the Government.

    The week in Germany showed up unmistakeably the failure of the last three years
    strategy. The ship of football is sinking fast. Will the football authorities
    fail, even in extremis, to invite the game's supporters on board to help bale
    it out? Surely we deserve at least a chance to make a real contribution?

    We are available at anytime convenient to you and hope to hear from you as a
    matter of urgency.

    Yours in sport,




    ROGAN TAYLOR
    (Chair)
    cc. The F.A.
                                                                                           °V N   d   ED


                                             THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1|G. T e le p h o n e 0253 7 2 9 4 2 1. T e le x 67675. Fax 0253 724786. Secretary R.H.G. K elly, F.C.I.S.




     7/20453                                                                                                                                                               19th July 1988.




    R. Taylor, Esq.,
    The Football Supporters Association,
    59 Oakwood Road
    Halewood
    LIVERPOOL
    L26 1XD


    Dear Mr. Taylor,

            Thank you for your letter of 28th June.

        I am sorry it was not possible to hold a meeting with you before the
   meeting with the Prime Minister.

        If you could let me have your assessment as to why you feel the last
   three years' strategy has failed and your alternative proposals for the
   future, I may be able to pursue further discussions.

            With kind regards.


                                                                               Yours sincerely.




                  A ll c o rre s p o n d e n c e t o b e a d d r e s s e d t o T h e S e c re ta ry . R e g is te re d O ffic e as a b o v e . R e g is te re d in E n g la n d 80612
                                   Tel: 051 709 9988


27th July 1988

Graham Kelly
Secretary
The Football League
Lytham St. Annes
Lancashire
FY8 1JG




Dear Graham Kelly,


Thankyou for your letter of 19th July.


You ask me to assess the reasons for the failure of the anti-hooligan strategy
and to outline alternative proposals for the future.     The former involves some
criticism of the Football League itself.     This Association trusts you will not
misread this criticism as directed personally at you, but rather as summarising
the expressed feelings of many of our members about the general management of
the League and its attitude in the past towards supporters.


The anti-hooligan strategy of the last three years has failed because the
measures involved are designed simply to contain the problem, not to solve it.
Seeing hooliganism as just a "public order issue" that consequently requires
heavier policing, rigorous segregation of opposing fans, and further restrictions
which continue to deter ordinary citizens from attending football matches is no
solution at all.     If the real cost of that policy - particularly the large
numbers of police involved - had been borne by the football clubs themselves,
very few of them would be functioning at all.     The only way in which that
policy can be described as "succeeding" in any sense at all is to point to
lower arrest figures inside grounds.     The problems remain outside - and even,
on occasions, still inside when the opportunity arises.
The last three years     has been all stick and no carrot as far as supporters
themselves are concerned.     The Football League must bear much of the responsi­
bility for this sad situation.     Opportunities have arisen to take a positive
attitude to the role supporters can play.     When the League's Anti-Hooligan
Committee asked to meet the F.S.A. in 1986, prior to presenting its recommend­
ations to the Government, we offered a paper,    'Football Supporters Against
Hooliganism', outlining our alternative proposals for the future.      It was
completely ignored and the resulting report to Government from the Football
League was a most ineffective document.     It offered a 50% membership scheme,
not as a positive anti-hooligan measure (which is what the Government wanted)
but as a sop to ward off a compulsory membership scheme.     All supporters got
offered were "stiffer sentences" and no incentive to get involved in solving
the problems at all.


The imposition of that 50% scheme was carried forward subsequently in the most
half-hearted manner (and the Government is now taking full advantage of that
failure).     Guidelines of the absolute minimum were offered to clubs, many of
whom, understandably, could not see any point in it at all.     Some clubs looked
upon the scheme as yet another way to squeeze more money out of their supporters.
Yet the 50% scheme was itself     an opportunity to start the process of positive
involvement of fans.     It was a chance to offer an alternative role model to
supporters, especially the younger ones, by opening up the doors to their
deeper involvement in the game.     With rare exceptions "membership" was simply
paying for the privilege of what, the previous season, one could do for
nothing.


Now we face the certain prospect of compulsory membership for all active
supporters.    The Football League and those supporters urgently need to develop
a positive strategy to face such potentially damaging legislation.     So far,
frankly, the League have rarely given supporters the impression of having a
clearly defined and generally accepted strategy about anything.     The impression
many receive is of a body back pedalling its way to oblivion and fielding hot-
potatoes (reluctantly) on a day-to-day basis.     The recent negotiations about
television coverage have lowered even further supporters confidence and expect­
ations.     It even appears to some that the League is now almost glad to have the

v/eight of decision-making lifted from it by Government.    No more messy consultations
no more listening to (and ignoring) detailed research conclusions if they prove
at all critical of the League's previous positions.     These opinions have been
vigorously expressed by supporters in letters and by phone to the F.S.A. in
recent weeks.    Some of these opinions may be harsh, but they represent a widely
held feeling amongst fans generally.     This Association must recognise that -
as must the League - or we both face the dismal prospect of the inevitable
demise of the professional game in this country.


But it need not be the case.    The compulsory scheme — though inadvisable and
potentially enormously damaging - can yet be turned to advantage.     If "member­
ship" is restricted to registration, with no complementary, positive attractions
attached to it. dozens of clubs may go to the wall.     But if football supporters
as a whole can be offered a new role in the game — both locally and nationally -
that makes hooliganism positively against their interests and gives major advant
ages to becoming a "member", then the professional game might just make it
round this most dangerous bend in its one hundred year road.


Together, the football clubs and the supporters can devise a long term, positive
strategy to re-market the game.     It won't be quick and may not be easy, for the
whole atmosphere of being a football fan must change. Even to start the        process
you must begin by talking to supporters and finding out what they think might
work.   You must also listen closely to ex-supporters to discover what might
make them return to the game.     But at least when compulsory membership comes,
you will know - for the first time - exactly who your customers are.


The F.S.A. is ready to take its part in that strategy-building process.        We are
a positive force with the energy, commitment and enthusiasm to advertise the
game we love more effectively than any other group.     We will take the new
message - the new role for supporters - to the young fans in this country,
but we need your recognition and support to succeed.     Why not, as a last throw
of the dice, turn to the very people who have kept the game going for a century?
I look forward to hearing from you with a view to our meeting soon.


Yours in sport




Rogan Taylor
Chair
MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                     THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                              LIMITED
                                               Founded 1863

                                  Patron: H e r M a je st y T h e Q u e e n
                                 President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e of K e nt
                                       Chairman: F.A. M illichip

General Secretary:                                                               Phone: 01-262 4542/402 7151
  E.A. C r o k e r                                                                      Telex: 261110
                                                                                   Facsimile: 01-402 0486




                       16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

Our Ref:                                  Your Ref:
             PFS/SKC/1393                                                       29th June, 1988

Mr. Rogan Taylor,
The Football Supporters Association,
59 Oakwood Road,
Halewood,
Liverpool.
L26 1XD.


Dear Mr. Taylor,

    I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 28th
June as Mr. Croker is away from the office at the present time.
    I regret that it is not going to be possible to arrange a
meeting with you before July 6th.   However, I am sure Mr. Croker
and Mr. Millichip would be interested to receive your comments
prior to their meeting with the Prime Minister and I wonder
therefore whether it would be possible for you to submit them in
writing prior to that date.

    I     appreciate in the long term you would wish to have a
meeting with representatives of The Football Association and will
write to you again on this subject as soon as possible, but in
the meantime, if you wish to put further comments on paper I will
ensure that these are brought to the attention of Mr. Millichip
and Mr. Croker prior to their meeting next week.
                                     Yours sincerely,




                                Patricia F. Smith
                      Personal Assistant to Mr. E.A. Croker

                                                                                             THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                           Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate. London W23LW
                           Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797                 ANNIVERSARY
    n
 Our ref RT/WJ

                                                                                                               Telephone Numbers:
4th July 1988                                                                                                  Work: 051 709 9988
                                                                                                               Heme: 051 734 5340
Patricia F Smith
Personal Assistant to Mr E.A.Croker
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
London
W2 3LW

Dear Pat Smith

Thank you very much for your prompt reply to my letter of 28th June. I do
appreciate the difficulty involved in arranging a meeting at such short notice,
though this Association has been available (and most keen) to meet the F.A. at
anytime during the last thtee years.

The F.S.A. is currently at work on detailed proposals for dealing with the
various issues raised by the hooligan problem. What we fear - as I briefly
outlined in my last letter - is that, once again, a programme will be devised to
"solve" the problem that involves no input from supporters at all. It will
concentrate on purely negative, controlling and restraining measures, the effect
of which will further reduce the number of active football fans. The type of
fan who will stop attending matches will be precisely the type we need to
encourage - the mature, experienced supporter. The game may find itself left
with only those fans who are prepared to wade "through hell and high water" to a
football match. This is exactly what has happened already to England's travelling
support — it consists almost entirely of young,males aged between 18—25 years;
the most vulnerable group to provocation and bad behaviour.

Consequently, we urge the F.A. and the F.L. to publicly announce their ___
commitment to a radical and positive campaign to win the support of the game's
fans — to enter into a real partnership with them. This campaign will need to
complement the ongoing restrictive measures, offering active involvement to fans
and providing a new role model to young supporters with energy to spare. It is
vital that we tap the deeply felt affections that football still arouses in the
hearts of the English people. If we are to do that, we must involve them in
providing solutions, not simply subject them to ever increasing restrictions.




                                                                                                                                cont

          T H F .   F . S . A .   O A J C W   n n n   P H   h a i   r \ r A   n n   t   t v Tt r t > n n n r   i   oc   F v n
This Association will do everything it can to motivate and mobilise 'the support
the game needs. In combination with the network of 'alternative' football
publications, we speak to, and for, over 50,000 fans - many in the younger, most
vulnerable, age group,and this year we will launch our 'youth' F.S.A. for under
16 year olds. But,without your support and an ongoing dialogue with yourselves
that takes the views of these supporters seriously, we are whistling in the wind.

The case for supporter consultation is now overwhelming - and increasingly
recognised as simple common sense. We hope very much to meet with you as soon as
possible and look forward to hearing from you following the June 6 th meeting.


Yours in sport




Rogan Taylor




           THE F.S.A., 59, OAKWOOD RD., HALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
                             THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                              LIMITED
                                                               Founded 1863

                                                Patron: H e r M a je st y T h e Q u e e n
                                               President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                                     Chairman: F.A. M illichip

       General Secretary:                                                                              Phone: 01-262 4542/402 7151
         E.A. C roker                                                                                         Telex: 261110
                                                                                                         Facsimile: 01-402 0486




                                  16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

       Our Ref:                                          Your Ref:
                  P F S / S K C / 1 420                                                             5th July,      1988


    Mr. R o g a n Taylor,


•
    The F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s Association,
    5 9 O a k w o o d Road,
    Halewood,
    Liverpool.
    L26 1XD.



    D e a r Mr.      Taylor,

              T h a n k you for y o u r l e t t e r d a t e d 4 t h July, w h i c h I w i l l b r i n g
    i m m e d i a t e l y to the a t t e n t i o n of Mr. M i l l i c h i p and Mr. Croker.

              W e w i l l c o n t a c t y o u a g a i n as s o o n as p o s s i b l e c o n c e r n i n g a
    p o s s i b l e meeting.

                                                Yours          sincerely,




                                                P a t r i c i a F. S m i t h
                              P e r s o n a l A s s i s t a n t to Mr. E.A.                       Croker




                                                                                                                   THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




                                          Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gale, London W23LW
                                          Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797                         ANNIVERSARY
                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    LIMITED
                                                     Founded 1863
                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                        Chairman: F.A. M i l l i c h i p

   Chief Executive:                                                                   Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G. K   e ll y fc is                                                                    Telex: 261110
                                                                                        Facsimile: 01-4020486


                            16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:                                        Your Ref:
            ED/jr/2655
                                                                                        7th June 1989




 Mr R Taylor
 Campaign Co-ordinator
 The Football Supporters Association
 59 Oakwood Road
 Halewood
 Liverpool
 L26 1XD

 Dear Sir,

 Crystal Palace v. Birmingham City. Barclays Leaaue. 13th Mav. 1989
 With reference to your letter of the 31st May concerning the
 forthcoming Disciplinary Commission when incidents involving
 spectators on the occasion of the above match will be
 investigated, it has been agreed that the Football Supporters
 Association may, as requested, be represented at the Commission.
 We would ask you therefore, to make the necessary arrangements for
 one representative of your London Branch and one from the
 Birmingham Branch to attend the meeting at Selhurst Park on
 Tuesday, 13th June at 1.00 p.m.
 It would be appreciated if you would let us have the names of the
 two persons concerned prior to the date of the meeting.
 Yours faithfully,



 for Chief Executive




                                Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                                Incorporated in London Registration Number 77791
MISCELLANEOUS CORRESPONDENCE FSA/PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
THE fO O TM L SUPPORTERS
       ASSOCIATION
15th July 1988

Brendan Batson
The P.F.A.
2 Oxford Court
Bishopsgate
Lower Mosely Street
Manchester
M2 3WQ


Dear Brendan,

Following our telephone conversation yesterday, I would like to place on record
our wholehearted support for the position adopted by the P.F.A. with regard to
the 'Super League' issue. It is quite clear from our own members that supporters
overwhelmingly reject such a concept and feel deeply disappointed at the surrep­
titious and conspiratorial proceedings which lie behind recent developments.
Interestingly the most vehement condemnations of the Super League have come
from fans of the so-called 'Big FiVe' clubs. I have no doubt that, if those
clubs were to go ahead with a plan to abandon the Football League structure,
their own supporters would abandon them in significantly large numbers.

Our members sure also possibly even more concerned about the government's
plans to enforce a compulsory membership scheme. It seems to us vitally
important that supporters are represented on the Working Party which, at
the moment, only appears to include "government, the football authorities
and the police". We would greatly appreciate any representations you or
Gordon might make (especially to the football authorities) in support of
our inclusion in that Working Party.

This season, more than ever before, the F.S.A. needs to get its message
across to the fans of this country that loyalty to the game is the over­
riding loyalty, and that they should get as deeply involved as possible
in the current debates. Consequently, the F.S.A. needs to contact
supporters on a much wider scale than previously - a task which will go
far beyond our limited resources. Any contribution from the P.F.A.
towards those resources would be gratefully received—and_used to good
effect in uniting all the supporters of this country.

Finally, the F.S.A. are looking to develop a coherent youth policy this
season that will offer a new role-model to young fans entering the game
for the first time.




          T1IK F.S.A., 59, OAKWOOD RD., HALF-WOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 !XD
For too long, the hooligans have hogged all the limelight. The cq-operation
of professional players and ex-players would be of enorraouse help, both in
devising and developing such a policy. Perhaps when the season has settled
down a bit we could meet with you to discuss the matter?

Until then, I look forward to hearing from you.

With best wishes.

Yours in s p o r t .




R ogar
(Chair)




            THE F.S.A., 59, OAKWOOD RD., HALEWOOD, LIVERPOOL L261XD
                              Professional Footballers Association
                              2 Oxford Court Bishopsgate, Lower Mosley Street Manchester M 2 3W Q
                              Telephone: 061-236 0575

                              Secretary: Gordon Taylor M.A., B.Sc. (Ecoa) Tel: Home, Mellor (025481) 3177




 R ef: GT/SCL


 3rd A u g u s t, 1 9 8 8 .


Mr. R. T a y l o r ,
(C h a ir ),
F .S .A .,
5 9 , Oakwood Road,
H alewood,
LIVERPOOL,
L26 1XD.


Dear Rogan,

J u s t a l i n e t o th a n k you f o r y o u r s u p p o r t d u r in g t h e r e c e n t p ro b lem s w h ich
was g r e a t l y a p p r e c i a t e d .

You w i l l b e aware no d ou b t o f our F o o t b a l l and t h e Community Programme
o r g a n i s e d from t h i s o f f i c e , i n v o l v i n g b o t h p r e s e n t and p a s t p l a y e r s i n
im p r o v in g r e l a t i o n s w i t h and b e h a v io u r o f s u p p o r t e r s . I am s u r e Roger
R eade, our Community Programme o f f i c e r , w i l l b e d e l i g h t e d t o m eet w i t h you
and d i s c u s s t h e s e m a t t e r s .

Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




Gordon T a y l o r ,
S ecretary.




c.c.     R oger R ead e, Community Programme.
 THE COMMUNITY PROGRAMME IN PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL
                   •BAt/
                                                   MANAGED JOINTLY BY THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LTD. &
                                                    THE PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALLERS’ ASSOCIATION


                                                                 HEAD OFFICE
                                                            2 OXFORD COURT
                                                              BISHOPSGATE
                                                        OFF LOWER MOSLEY STREET
                                                         MANCHESTER M2 3WQ
                                                           TELEPHONE 061-236 0583




           RR/TP


           8 th August     1988


       Mr Rogan Taylor
       Chairperson
       The Football Supporters Association
       59 Oakwood Road
       Halewood
       Liverpool L26 1XD


       Dear Rogan

       As you know, Gordon has passed to me a copy of y 0 ur letter to
       Brendan Batson which I found most interesting.   I agree wholeheartedly
       with your sentiments and feel sure that supporters loyalty to the
       game is of the utmost importance.

       "The Community Programme in Professional Football" (currently involved
       with 25 League Clubs) is making significant strides in involving
       current and former professional players in all football - related
       activities including new approaches to young fans and to supporters
       g en e r a l l y .

       Perhaps it is an opportune time for us to meet you and some of your
       Committee to discuss the possibility of taking further steps down
       this particular road?  Please don't hesitate to contact me at the above
       address.  I look forward to h earing from you in the near future.

       Yours sincerely




       Chief Administrator




ACTION
FOR JOBS
FSA RESPONSE TO I.D. CARD WORKING PARTY
 IDENTITY CARDS FDR FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS?

 THE  RESPONSE  OF THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS' ASSOCIATION             TO       THE
 REPORT Oh THE MINISTER FOR SPORT’S WORKING PARTY

 In t r o a u c t io n

  ihe root Dai I supporters Association was not represented on tne
 Workma     i-'artv that d'r’ew up tha Goverrmisnts proposed  ident it v
 cai- d scheme.     We asked to part ici Date.   not because we  agree
 with che scheme, tout because we know that we have an expertise
 that would have proved invaluable.        In the end it appears tnat
 the Minister values the views of the No 10 Poiic.v Unit and         an
 assortment     of Civil Servants more than those of tne      ordinary
 supporter.     Tnis   in itself is suprising as we are supposed to
 pe the prime beneficiaries of the scheme.

we oppose the scheme in its entirety         for five main r e a s o n s :

        It- will not work.   It will have little positive impact on
        the prup 1am that ii: is desipned to solve.

ii)     It is a major attack on che civil          liberties of   over       5
        m i 1 1 ion peo ole.

i l i ) It will lead to a immediate drop in tne number of   people
        attending   matches and provide a disincentive to the next
        oenerat ion of supporters.

iv)     The r e s u 11 ing finincial crisis will    lead to a decline        in
        facilities for supporters.

v>      Ic will create dangerous congestion at turnstiles.
7'he  FSA rejects,     absolutely,  the   concept    of compulsory
identity cards.    We reject the arguments put forward       in   its
defence    and intend to do all we can to ensure tnat the scheme
is never introduced. The purpose of this response, however, is
to    show that,  even from the Governments       perspective.    the
scheme   is   so Full of holes as to make     it   unworkable.   This
paper   goes   through   the  working   party    report  in detail,
explains    the consequences of the proposals and makes a number
of suggested amendments which we believe will make the         scheme
less dangerous,     both   in terms of supporter safety     and   the
threat to civil liberties.     They have already received support
from   a number of MP» s who have agreed to move amendments        on
our behalf, when the legislation is introduced to parliament.
Pages 1--3, Backaround   to the Working Party.

This chapter     states tne .justification for tne report.      The
Prime Minister apparently told the football authorities        chat
she   "believed"    that the scheme would work    and the  Workinq
Party    started    from the basis that    aggressive behavior   at
football    matches   "may"   produce a hostile environment     and
create     the "risk"   of disorder.   This is rather a tenuous
beginning    and   it .isinteresting to note that nowhere does   it
state   how the    Prime Minister came to her belief,   nor how the
scheme   will prevent "aggresive behaviour".

The   governments proposals come as a response to The Minister
for   Sport’s report     to  the   Prime Minister   following  the
turopean   Championships,    yet this report has remained   secret
and the working party report does not even address the problem
of travel overseas. Furthermore, the proposed legislation will
allow the   Secretary of State for tne Environment to bring the
scheme   in for any sport.   Ifthe proposed legislation becomes
law, parliament will have voted to allow the government, if it
wishes,     to force   any UK citizen,   who wishes to attend  anv
sporting   event,    to carry    an identity card  which  must  be
produced on demand.

we   know  that the Sir Norman Chester     Centre    for Football
Research   has conducted research on behalf of the Government
that   suggests that    the scheme  will  not   work.   This,    the
Government are now hiding.    There is also an exageration as to
the extent of this "aggressive       behaviour".    Itis not apparent
in every part of the ground atevery football match.       In fact,
at most games    (nearly 3,000 per season) you would struggle to
rind   any at all.    We would have liked the working      party   to
have   examined the    extent of football   related   hooliganism,
because   without   doing so it would be almost     impossible     to
ascertain   the feasabilitv    of  targetting,    ie«   developing
measures   that can be used to address problems at       particular
grounds, parts of grounds, or particular matches.

We also think that it is unfortunate that the issue of funding
has not  been addressed. The government clearly see this as not
its problem, and with the clubs having to work out how to make
up the cash lost at the turnstiles,   this will be crucial.    It
is also unlikely that the Government will achieve any savings
in policing costs. The scheme will have to be policed in order
to  identify    and arrest those    people who are to have   their
cards confiscated.    Furthermore,  there  is likely to   be  an
significant increase in policing at the point of entry.
     Chapter 1 "General"                 cage 4

     ine suggestion        is made here that consideration be     given to
    ext,ending   the     scheme to other parts of the UK.     There is n>->
    explanation     f o r _ this   other than a vague reference to    tne
    likelihood    of     tnglish hooligans going to Scotland     to   causa
    trouble.    and      lets face   it,   if thev are that  committed    t<-.
    causing trouble,        this scheme will not stop them.    We would be
    unhappy ir parliament gave the Secretary of State the power to
      ■-> tiiis without       itself first    examaning  the  success     or
    otherwise of the operation of the scheme in England.

The     position   of neutral supporters is not     addressed.   Manv
people     who   attend matches will not hold a card     identifying
rnern with one of the two competing clubs.        We believe that if
clubs     or the police are,    themselves,  left to   decide   which
areas     of the around these people are to be admitted to there
W ^.i be Cha° S -   'he Problem will be one of communication, with
rnumt neu-cral     supporters not knowing where to uo.    and   as  a
consequence,      adding   to the congestion that is already likely
 -<-■ occur at big matcnes.    Also, unless the clubs can accurat Iv
predict the number of non-aligned supporters likely to         attend
a particular game,       reserving specific areas of the ground for
neutrals will reduce the capacity of stadia.

THE FSrt REC O M M E N D S ;
I- ihat   parliament         do  not give the Minister  the  power        to
extend   the    scheme.       Should the Minister wish to do  this        it
snould be the subject of a new Bill.

d-That  parliament  lay  down that clubs   must  allow   neutral
supporters free access to all .parts of the ground,   except for
specific matches which should be agreed with the FM h .

^-Ihat     no  legislation go before parliament  before  detailed
<7°st^n 9s f arid sources
1   /H n ' . v r . - l -
                            of funding,
                           •»   4   —i
                                         have been developed  and
Chapter £5 Membership of the scheme,

ftp d 1 icat ioris (paras 3-6)

The photograph on the card is clearly irrelevant as tne report
states elsewhere that it will riot be checked.     The idea that a
hooligan   will   be deterred   from transferring   cards   by  the
presence  of a     pnotouraph is naive     in the   extreme.   More
importantly.    however, it means that applications will have to
be in person, rather than by D o s t , in order to check the photo
at the time of application.

It is not clear, from the Working Party report, how supporters
are to obtain their cards.    Even if a supporter is allowed to
buy her or his card from a club other than the one that she or
he  supports,   there are still many supporters who   live   many
miles    from a football ground and who could only apply      for
their    card on a match day.   The number of  temporary   cards
issued could be enormous.

Postal applications    will   be allowed for  people living     in
Scotland    and   overseas. This  makes a mockery of    the  whole
system as anyone who has their card confiscated need only know
someone   with a non-Enalish address to get another.     The  race
that Scottish fans need cards to go to the England v Scotland
game is also ridiculous.    The game only takes place in England
once   every    two  years, confiscating the cards   of   Scottish
hooligans would be pointless.

We   oppose   the operation of the scheme      at   Wembley   Stadium.
Access   to the Stadium is already poor,       and we have    compiled
our own report on the Difficulties that supporters have had in
getting into Wembley Stadium,      made worse by the fact that tha
crowds queue directly facing the entrance and push u p         against
the   people   at the  front   of the   queues.     This -report    was
compiled    from   eye-witness   accounts   of    the   problems  that
occured   at   the 13SS FA Cup Final and has been submitted         to,
and discussed with, both Wernbley Stadium and the FA. It showed
that any delays in getting the crowd inside the ground already
create   severe and dangerous crushing around         the  turnstiles.
Also   the thriving black market in Wembley tickets means          that
it   is impossible to fully segregate the crowd and the use          of
identity cards will not assist in the matter.

THE FSA RECOMMENDS;
1-That the cards do not have photographs.

£~That   postal applications be allowed.

3-That Wembley Stadium be exempt from the scheme.




                                     4
Membership Cards   <Paras 7-13)

The   report   states that "no system of  membership   cards  was
impervious    to forgery and fraud1'. Having recognised this the
working   party should realise that the people least likely    to
be   effected   by the scheme are those who are best   organised.
This    certainly   does  not  apply  to  families   and   casuai
supporters.

The  Working  Party also appears to have overlooked  the  ract
that  it there is a possibility that convicted hooligans could
bribe a turnstile operator in order to get into a match      or
simply mug someone outside the ground in order to get a card.

We  are also concerned at the prospect of renewal every  three
years.  This provides an opportunity for clubs to charge again
for the privalege of watching a match.   Also it will cause  a
repeat  of the problems that will occur when   the  schema  is
introduced.

The cards are to be checked at the turnstile by the       turnstile
operator.    This process will almost certainly take longer than
the   half   second   suggested.   Any  one who has   worked   at    a
checkout    point would know that not all cards     register   t irsfc
time,   and   the prospect of a computer failure is frightening.
It   is widely     known   that at  Luton  Town  the   computerised
turnstiles    are   often switched off.   The report   states   tnat
checking    the   photographs would cause   "unaccsotable    delay'1,
which   begs the auestion -- what amount of delay is considered
"acceptable"?.     At a recent evening match where Arsenal played
Liverpool,    the kick-off was delayed by 15 minutes due to       the
size of the crowd.       Imagine the problems had the card    schema
been in operation.

THE FSA RECOMMENDS?
1— That  cards be renewed automatically upon        expiry.   in   the
same way that  credit cards are.
Exemptions from membership    (Paras 14-21)

The   report   sungests that exempted from the scheme      will   be
parties of school children,     children accompanied by adults in
family   areas,   disabled   people,  arid people   in hospitality
boxes.   The comments on hospitality box users ars particularly
insulting    to the average supporter.    The report   states   that
"the risk     of hooliganism amongst these groups is negligable
and hospitality boxes...are an important source of revenue        to
many   clubs".   Perhaps bhe Working Party does not -realise that
tne most important source of revenue for all clubs is through
the turnstiles,     nor perhaps,   does it realise that there are
also   a  large number of other areas within      football  grounds
where the risk of hooliganism is ’n e g 1igable’. Why then should
these people be exempt?    This is another clear indication that
the  government considers all 5.5m active football       supporters
to be potential hooligans.

THE FSfl R ECO MM EN DS ;
1“ That  genuine      supporters be treated   in   the   same   wav   as
spectators     in hospitality boxes.




                                   6
Criteria for withdrawing or withoiding rnernbershio (Paras

It   is  proposed   that the leaislation state that   a card     be
withdrawn should the holder be convicted of a .football related
criminal   offence.   The penalty period will be either cl or     5
vears,   depending   on  whether  or not  the   convicted   person
receives a custodial sentence. There will be a statuatory 1 *st
defining   what a "football related offence" actually     is.^ Tne
working   Party   considered  bans for any one   convicted   of
violent   offence but decided against it.    In paragraph d4    the
Working   Party   implies that it feels that just because a man
beats his wife it does not make him an unacceptable person       to
go to football matches.

More   worrying    is the   discretionary   criteria.     The   report
implies   that an ejection will lead to an automatic        i>- rnunth
ban.   This is o f concern as an ejection from a football ground
should   not    imply that the person ef fected has cornrni fcted any
offence.    filso, there is a considerable level of inconsistency
between police forces regarding the type of behaviour that can
lead   to ejection.    The FMfi seems to have complete freedom        to
ban anyone it likes for as long as it        likes.    The  Proposals
appear   to    over rule the legal   process and allow tne     i-Mfi to
find   people cuilty of offences     without a hearing and     w i tn
giving   the accused any chance to defend themselves.         There is
no reference      to  appeals in the main body     or the^ recurt,
although    the summary states that the FMft may "oossiDly"         near
them.

THE FSA R E C O M M E N D S ;                                       ....
1— That  there       be no withdrawal of - a card without a   criminal
convict ion.

£— Courts should have the power to recommend the length of any
card withdrawal period up to a D r e d e t ermined maximum.

3-Should  recommendation (i) above not be accepted  then   card
withdrawal should only take place after the relevent supporter
has had a proper hearing with the right to be represented.

4-There  should be a statuatory right of appeal  against   card
withdrawal or the length of the period of card withdrawal.
    New Criminal Offences     (Paras   29-32)

     J-'c wiia       be an   offence to provide   false   information    when
    •oplying         for a card or to attempt to uain entry to    a    ground
    without a valid card.         The penalties are not specified. "There
    lts           oe a J-e^al requirement to show an     identity   cav'd on
    aemana        wner, requested by a police officer or club' official.
    ivuC tu do so will not be a criminal offence but will mai--p the
    Holder iiaoie for card withdrawal.          To have to snow a card     on
    demand,         regardless  of whether   or not an offence    has    been
    commi ted          is  Pointless and   a gross infringement of      civil
    u oe r t i e s .   These conditions are desioned to discouraoe people
    from borrowing other peoples cards,          however,   as pointed 'out
    auove, t m s will be a fairly insignificant deterrent.

    Of more immediate concern to football supoorters.    however, is
    tne possibility of hooligans using the card system to identify
    supporters   of tne opposing team.   If a card must be shown    w
    demand   what arrangements will exist for supporters to     ensure
    •cha-c tne  person requesting it has a bona fide reason for     so
    doing?   There  is also the possibility that    noolm a n s  could
    force people to show their card against their will.

    THE! FSfl RECOMMENDS;
    i-Thdt cards be shown on admission only.




t




                                        a
 Chapter 3; Designated Football Matches

         reDO r^ states that it is to be the Secretary of State wno
 w 1 1 i have    the  power to designate  which  matches shall    be
 covered by the scheme. Initially these designated matches will
 be all games between League Clubs including friend 1ies and the
 Charity     bhield.   Matches  not involving the clubs first   team
 will     not be included.   The Secretary of State is to be   given
 tne Dower to extend the scheme to other Leagues,      such as   the
 Vauxhall Conference, without reference to parliament.

 Where a League club is playing a non-Leapue Club in a cup tie.
 che match will be designated and the supporters of the League
 -'ide will   hcive to take their cards.   If the game    is to    be
 played   at  a League ground the cards will be checked      at   the
 tut nsciies  allocated to the League side.    This means that any
 supporters   of   the  home  side  who   have  had   their     cards
 confiscated will be able to attend the game,     but only if they
 stand   with  the   supporters of the   opposing   side.   This   is
 illogical, surely, as these are the last people the Dovernment
 would   wish to desegregate.   Even if such names are to be made
 all-ticket,   it   would not be too difficult for a supporter of
 the League side without a card to get a one.

i~or    games involving non-British teams away fans will only   be
admitted     to the ground on production of anational   idencity
card or a passport. When a Scottish side plavs in England that
team ’s supporters    will be admitted to the ground only if they
Ji-iiii the scheme through a F-ootball League club.  The  Working
l-'arty apparently    believes that "Many Scottish  and  Northern
j.rish Supporters will be members because they support Football
League clubs anyway". However, if a supposed Scottish hooligan
is applying to an i-nglish club for an identity card.    what   is
to stop her or him stating on the card that she or he supports
tnat club or even the English national side. Seareoation would
be impossible.

The Secretary of State will also have the right to     designate
“other sporting events" to be included within'the scheme." The
implications  for this are considerable.   This  would   require
major  amendments  to the whole concept and structure    of  the
scheme  which  without  discussion in   parliament  is totally
unacceptable.

THE FSft RECOMMENDS;
1-That parliament set down the list of designated matches,       and
only parliament be empowered to amend it.

c.‘-That matches involving non-League teams not be designated.

vi      internat ional   fixtures be excluded from the scheme.

4- That   the   Secretary of State not be allowed to extend      the
scheme    to    cover  other  sports  without  introducing       new
1egislat ion.
chapter 4 Resoonsi bi 1 ity For the Scheme

The Football Membership fiuthority      (Paras 1-6)

■i he i-Mfl will be desi gnated by statute and is likely to consist
of the Fft and the Football League.      It is unfortunate that the
government       has not considered allowing for an element olr sell"
administration within the scheme. The Working Party constantly
refers      to the scheme as a "membership" scheme yet has made no
reference to the rights and privaleges that usually no hand in
hand with memoership of any body, We would like to see a right
to    vote.    fis clubs   will have a  list  of   their    -registered
supporters       there  is no strong argument for not allowim;      the
supporters to elect people to oversee the scheme.         E-iy creatina
the    proposed     ’them and us’ situation    the   oovarnriisnt   are
encouraging people to break the system.

THE FSfl RECOMMENDS?
i— ihat  at a Club level the supporters registered under    these
proposals   be allowed to elect rsprssentat ives to oversea   the
operation of the scheme.

   That the  Football Supporters Association  be  allowed.          bv
statute, to nominate a representative to sit on the F i ' i r t or any
other body established to oversee the scheme.




                                   10
 iie Clubs ftesLScmsibi 1 it i«   (P<   •11)

         clubs   will   be resoonsi ble  for  the   dav   t<     da'
aamiviist rat ion of tne scheme.   There is one line in the report
that relates to entrance times ana this merely states that tne
clubs      are responsible   for "taking such precautions  as    are
reasonable, (as they do now), to cope with the arrival of last
minute crowds".     Wha'c these precautions are is a mystery.    One
thing that is clear is that the clubs must do more than       ‘'they
do n o w 11.

Crowds     nave  to  be encouraged to arrive   earlier,    but    the
average     English football ground is not a welcoming place     and
many people have better things to on a Saturday lunchtime than
stand around a culd football ground for two hours waiting         for
a game to start. Perhaps there are forms of entertainment tnat
will     atcract  an earlier arrival but for a night   rnatcfi th is
will      be virtually   impossible,   particularly   in     winter,
 ur t iisrmore the ban on alcohol sales within the prouncs is       a
positive encouragement to people to attend late.      (The FSfi has
never     accepted that the alcohol ban serves any purpose as      as
most     people who wish to enjoy a drink before a game can still
uuite easily do so).     It seems that the government is washing
its    hands of the mess that it will create    arid preparing     to
blame     the clubs for not sorting out the obvious problems that
will occur.

 ihe Secretary     of State is to have the power to determine    on
what basis a ground may be licensed.      The use of closed cire it
TV   appears   to   have  been already  designated   an essential
)■equi r ement out   the Minister*  again   without  reference   to
parliament, will be able to place additional conditions on the
clubs.

THE FSfl RECOMMENDS;
1— That  parliament  determine the criteria that must        De   met
before a ground be given a license under this scheme.

cl That parliament give detailed consideration to the      problems
of  crowds arriving shortly before kick-off,       before approving
the legislation.

3-That the the ban on alcohol sales within football grounds be
1 i fted.
Monitoring The Scheme   (Paras Id— its)

It is the Secretary of State who will have ultimate power over
the scheme,   'not the FMA,   and not parliament.  She or he will
approve   the details of the scheme and will be able to revise
or  extend it.    It also appears likely that, although the   I-Mh
will be responsible for punish inn clubs who do not operate tne
svstem   "effectively".    the Minister will reserve the right vo
instruct    the F M h to take action should "he have    reason to
believe that a around should lose its license".

The Secretary of State will also have tne power to "terminate
the scheme" or to "designate another body" bo administer          it.
The   FMft can be abolished at the whim of the government.       Ihis
is olacino      to much power in the hands of   the   Secretary    of
State.    If parliament feels that this system is desirable then
it should be parliament that retains the ultirnats authority l'°
amend or abandon it.     To create a body v nat i^» under permnneiifc
threat of abolition and must operate under the instruction         ot"
the Secretary of State is unreasonable.      The FMft will,    quite
clearly,      be just  a government agency,although    funded      by
football and football supporters.

The  fact  that   the  FMtt must   operate    in accordance    witn
Government instructions and can be overruled by the      Secretary
of  Stats,  who   also  has tha power to    amend   the  .Licensing
criteria means that the Minister will,     in effect.   be setting
himself up as judge,jury,   and prosecuting      counsel, witn the
power tochange the rules if he does not      get a conviction.

iHE H ‘
      cdh RLUQMMfciMDii ;
i- That     local    authorities   be given' the power to    determine
whether or not a t o o t b a 11 ground should be iicensed.

£ —The parliament    retain   the right to amend     the     scheme   or
abolish the FMft.
                                                                                                                                                                   5




             'Ot




    Sanctions on Clubs                                           (Paras 1 7 - 2 7 )


    ~                     ali s                         a s -                                                _♦*?                    —        ‘v .
    awarded
    ri nhc;" u under
                   j this
                        • scheme will                                                     '-relate t
                                                                                                   ^.-
                                                                                                     ~"a^.'nd'^r
                                                                                                       P‘      r«=i~t.tii*-•‘
                                                                                                                         fcfrl*m a™ n 2
                          Ly H,- : : r ; ^ i                       t k   :       s    s   s       t * - .                      « ™                   -
    s is s -* .             ~           / -                 d u if ^    - ^ 7 r 7 r , v ~       0*;?
       s^pending              a cluos licence would be to denv it tne rioht ’+-
   aarnit scsctators to its                                          -■                  fiunt-    tu
    •it i(r lf,P „ , • _ .                     *   ■'!<=*•^r.es .    iv wouid a d osar than,    -ch^c
   woMir                                        are to be 1 icenced. unless the o n v e r n ^ n t
   T *e t H 6 ? U t ^ c l i P C' P Oi UU T°.that
   c ;tt                                  iO „
                                                   had h *d           licence withdrawn to      olay                                                       *




  Licences          will    not       be suspended due         to       crowd        misbehavior
       - l _in an "emergency",                  what ever that              means         Th«     M Ii^
  . jsur, tor suspension will be where "a c l u b ’s f a i 1 ,^p
  '-ut   us         responsibilities under the scheme IS ol" suff
  significance
  QC- DL.ij.rt‘L » H^   to, out
                              , the errecteffgrt<vD™    Cc or
                                                   iveness   -■*
  Hb                  ~
                            sfc.-.vs^„j
                                           __ I*._  ,   — ...~ ■ the
                                                         ,                  scheme 5
                                                                   «■«**-ir SOnH'Tilt? at‘C r »
                                                                                                i s^ 1
                                                                                              fisis'"
                                                                                                *»..
  thp
       D---X rived    out
                       „    a pova•■   these  "resp.-.ns i bi  I i t irr
                                                               iiw ii"S i n d u c e aettira     i-  ■’
                      ‘                   - Which - » » •* •           d i fficult         t ask     ™
                                  L l K " “ S « " • > « ■»                          for "serious

  Should             the computers                           malfunction        or     there         h=            ___ +>
    © m © * r ,' a   j» v r i ,,' v / M   f h c s            •               -   ,                             n w   r   D w     c t n u « t ; n £ rir’'
    wwwr qwriL.y tne pulice may allow club? tn -»h «v.i *                                                   *
  B 1 S C t rnvi i r a 1 1 w ^u,                   >      ,.                       "*       1C U t e U p i S W i CfiOU'C
  fcfiectf u n i C d i i y                c h s c K i n”q *cne    car'd®
                                                           '',,x= i-ciruw*   T+* ii«n v-
                                                                            it           + ,
                                                                                       o t        noweve’        f\
  ^ h d t
  wnat       a n
             an         1   e ? m i» v 'n o v -« n w ?
                        »emerg en cy ’ consists of                            <Shrm n                 t* -a r
                                                                                                        !:        ’
  congestion outside a around due to the l a t e                                                  - us            serious
  thousand people,
  be held *»»--»-«.«< K i
                                                it is u n c l a d
                                                                .       whtther
                                                                                ■             j
                                                                                          - n r i y a l or several
                                                                                      or not cne ciuo                 will
  nw,n           "r-ji-e^punsiple
                      r.T r~.
                                                       even it the police aqree tnat tnPf.
                                      __________________                                                      -''n-
                                                                                                                  a T- ....
                                                                                                                         cnere is                              a

 THE i-Sft R E C O MME NDS ;
 i that  the  responsibilities of clubs                                                                     under tni- scheme
 more clearly defined.                                                                                               “ schema                are
I... T . +
 <=■ m a t     parliament allow for a football cluh    4-  „
 with      t-hti r,..,!               ,         t-iup, is, Conjunction
 enterirn        +-K      ^    swit c:n off the system  should  delays
   nteir i n g   the ground appear "unacceptable" or should tne^P "ho
 dangerous congestion outside the ground.                           bS




                                                                                     13
Data Protection Act     1984   (Paras 23- ij.)

 me   report states that "informat ion about all supporters will
be held on a central computer" It is not.      however, clear what
infurrnat ion will be held and the report implies elsewhere that
tners   is a    likelihood that information additional       to   that
suoDlied    by the    cardholder is likely to   be   kept.    If the
problem    of hooliganism is anywhere near the level assumed        bv
L-he Minister.   the amount of people who will be the subject of
this   additional    information  could  be hues,     If   they    all
exercised    their   rights  under the  Data   Protect in fict the
administration     costs could be vast.  The rsoort irnol ies that
■che records held by the Filft will be used by third parties for
market ing   purposes and this could have    serious   irnpl icat ions
for Dersonal privacy.

THE FSfl   iCOWMEMDS:

I-i hat only  information supplied by the applicant or            the
courts be held on the Fhifl computer.

1 .
  ‘hat   parliament   seek assurances regarding the  confident i-
ality ui     information   held  by the FMih and  rauardirig  the
organisations     who  are   likely  to have  access    to   such
informat ion.




                                    14
Chapter 5, Notification of Offences

The    courts  will   be    responsible  for  deciding  wnat   is a
" foot ball related offence" ar.d for notifying tha FMtt, although
-che    definition    will    be  in accordance    with   statutory
guidelines. The police will notify the clubs of people ejected
from their ground. When initially deciding who is eligable for
an    identity card "past behaviour will be taken into account".
     vet it is not clear upon what basis these decisions will be
made.    The  existing nuidalines for football related      offences
are    already vague.    Pin offence committed outside  a football
around    is only   considered to be "football     related"   if  it
occurs within a specified time period.

Under    present law it is unlawful for police or court     records
to   be supplied to another party and this will reauire a major
change in law which should not slip through the     par 1 iarnentary

•
process.
•records
            If access is to be allowed to the police and
           of  football  supporters,
extended into other walks of life?
                                       will   this  principle
                                                              court

                                      There would also appear to
                                                                  oe

toe problems concerning the rehabilitation of ofi'enders.      It is
unreasonable that     a  person  who has been   convicted    of   an
offence and served a sentence several years previously, can be
•reconvicted by the FMft. Surely those people who are unsuitable
for   admission to a football ground are already subject       to  a
banning order?

THE FSfl RECOMMENDS 5
i— That card holders be allowed to join the scheme with a ciean
slate unless currently subject to a banning order.




                                  15
    Chapter & Technology ana Timing

    ihe system     will  operate   usinn local  comput er s and    local
    computer   files.   Cards  will be checked on    entry  against;   a
    "referral file" fed into the local computer. Cards will not be
    checxed atiainsi the central computer record.     This oresumaisly.
    is    because of difficulties with    the technology.   The re-feral
    file.   held   on computer disks. will be sent to each club       by
    “registered or secure po s t ” before each game.   This means tnat
    the     system will not be on-line and that      the computer will not
    be    able to tell if the card has    already    been used   that    day.
    1 hers are many tootbal 1 grounds where it would be possible to
    pass   a card outside the ground for use by another     person    or
    simply pass the card back out through the turnstile.

    Constant reference is made in the report to damaged cards      but
    no  guidence is given regarding what happens when a turnstile
    operator   is handed    such  a card.    The  ‘
                                                  r eport   makes   no
    recommendations   as to the type of card that should    be   used.
    Bar  codes are    apparently easy  to  forge.   and   the   report
    explains how to do it (for the benefit of those of you who do
    not  already   know) and magnetic strips apparently lose     their
    information easily.   The most favoured option is a smart     card
    (a card   with   its own   chip)  but  these  are   horrendously
    expensive  and   the technology for using them on the     proposed
    scale does not yet exist.

    Due    to   the    problems with the technology,  no   deadline   for
    irnpl irnentat ion   has been set.  although the system will not be
    in    place by the start of the i383/30 football      season.   There
    will    be no phased iyvbroduct ion, which is unfort unate as th is
    would     provide the opportunity of identifying     and  addressing
    unforseen difficulties.

    THE FSft RECOMMENDS;

•   1-That
    option.
             the Government    and the FMA support the     lowest   cost
Conclusion

I f our' recommend at ions were to be accepted we believe that the
scheme    would be far less dangerous and would not have such^ 3    .


catestrophic    effect    on  football  as  it otherwise    woulc.
However,    the effect would be marginal and we would still find
the scheme impossible to support. We cannot come up with ideal
solutions    to  tha problems that the scheme wiil cause and     we
would orefer to see the1 whole idea drooped.

 The Working P a r t y ’s proposals appear to be a classic    example
 of how not to draw up government policy. The Working Party was
 u iven the ridiculous brief,     not to devise policies to cufiCrul
 football hooliganism.      but to persue one particular   approach.
 It   did not,   therefore,    look at other methods of controlinu
^iooliaanism    that have been tried and have worked,     nor did it
 in any way try to evaluate the nature of the         problem,   Ihis
 system   will   not    work but will simply drive   away  the   next
 generation of supporters, ft further point worth noting is that:
 due to the lack of analysis regarding the nature and extent of
 the hooligan     problem,    there  is no yardstick   by whicn    to
 measure the success of the scheme.      This means that it is here
 to   stay.   If the level of hooliganism falls then the       scheme
 will no doubt be heralded as a success,      but if it remains tne
 same or     increases then the Government will    claim    that  the
 scheme is necessary.

 In January 19SS Mr Movnihan told the FSft,    at a  meeting   in
 Marsharn Street, that he had no intention of introducing such a
 scheme.   We   are  therefore  convinced that this  is a    panic
 measure, an attempt to be seen to do be doing something rather
 than really getting to grips with the problem. It is important
 to remember that the decision to go ahead with the scheme     was
   response to the trouble that occured on the streets of     West
Bbrrnanv   in the summer of 198Q and it is interesting   to   note
 that   the UEFfl report on the events there has been ignored   by
 the   government as it does not support its case.   England   are
 hoping   to compete in the World Cup finals in Italy     in  13^0
 and,   as yet, there is no evidence that the Government is even
 considering how to prevent trouble there.

 One   of the sad aspects of the Working P art y’s report is that
 it   ignores the possibility of providing supporters with     real
 membership of their clubs.   Many supporters would be only     too
 willing   to join a voluntary scheme if it gave them a     genuine
 right   to be involved in the club that they support.    Why   not
 give   supporters  the right to elect a member of    their   clubs
 board? Democracy never hurt anyone.




 Report prepared by Craig Brewin, FSft National Secretary,
 in consultation with the FSft National Committee.
 December 1988.
MINUTES OF MEETING AT LANCASTER GATE 5/10/88 WITH APPENDICES




           (a)   Application Form
           (b)   Publicity Outlets
           (c)   Rules and Constitution
           (d)   Europe Statement
           (e)   FSA Cup Final Ticket Allocation suggestion
                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

             Notes of a Meeting with Representatives of the
                    Football Supporters' Association
                held at 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                      on Wednesda y 5th October 1988


Pre s ent:

The Football Association

Mr. A . D . McMullen (in the Chair - Vice-Chairman of F . A . )
Mr. F.A. Millichip (Chairman of F.A.)
Mr. R.H.G. Kelly (Chief E xe cu ti ve Designate)
Mr. G. Kirton (F.A. Staff)
Miss P.F. Smith (F.A. Staff)
Mr. L.F.J. Walker (F.A. Security Liaison Officer)


Football Supporters'     Association

Mr.   R. Taylor (Chairman),
Mr.   N. Grant (Vice-Chairman)
Mr.   C. Brewin (Secretary)
Mr.   P.J. Garrett (Membership Secretary)
Mr.   A. Goldberg (Chairman West Midlan d Branhh)


It was noted that whilst Mr. Millic hi p was present, it had been
decided that Mr. McMullen should take the Chair as Mr. Millichip
would probably have to depart befo re the end of the Mee ti ng and
as Mr. McMullen had Ch ai re d the Me et in g with the Representatives
of Lhe National Federation of Supporters' Clubs held jr. September
1988.


1.     FOOTBALL S U P P O R T E R S ’ ASSOC IA TI ON MEMBERSHIP    It was noted
         that the pr esent F.S.A. Membership by direct application
         was 5,536, although as F.S.A. were in the process of
         conducting a major recruitment campaign they anticipated
         a considerable increase in membership by direct
         application in the near future.                There was also
         considerable rep re sentation on the F.S.A. through group
         membership and the total membership from group or direct
         membership was over 20,000 individuals.                (Sample
         application forms are shown in Appendix A) .

         The F.S.A. referred to the coverage they received through
         various publications, details of which are shown in
         Appendix B.

         It was noted that the F.S.A. worked closely with Police
         at local level and that in fact Mr. Taylor had been
         invited to deliver a series of lectures to the Senior
         Police Training College.      Also, it was now becoming
         regular practice for the F.S.A. to be consulted by Local
         Authorities in conn ec ti on with planning applications for
         local grounds.
    T h r o u g h its m e m b e r s h i p the 92 Football L e a g u e C l u b s were
    r e p r e s e n t e d on the F.S. A., p lus some 50 n o n - L e a g u e C lubs
    and a spread of m e m b e r s h i p f r o m European supporters.

    In recent times the F.S.A. ha d r e c eived s u p p o r t f rom Mr.
    Go r d o n Ta y l o r of the P.F.A. and fund i n g f r o m the P.F.A.,
    The Football Trust, The S c o t t i s h P.F.A. a n d S t i r l i n g
    District C o u ncil.        A p a r t f rom this funding, the F.S.A.
    was funded in t otal b y the £2.00 m i n i m u m m e m b e r s h i p fee
    (£1.00 for u n d e r s i x t e e n ) .

   Summarising, the F.S.A. s a i d that the y h a d c r e d i b i l i t y                      -
   among s u p p o r t e r s as a w h o l e an d b e l i e v e d it c o u l d only
   bene f i t the gam e if t h e i r A s s o c i a t i o n h a d c l o s e links
   with The F.A.


OTHER SUPP ORTERS' A S S O C I A T I O N S                  It wa s n o t e d that the
  F.S.A. had t w e l v e r e g i o n a l b r a n c h e s and a n u m b e r of
  a s s o c i a t e d o r g a n i s a t i o n s b a s e d around s p e c i f i c
  clubs, e.g. "Back to the V a l l e y C a mpaign" at Charlton,
  "Left on the Shelf" at T o t t e n h a m Hotspur, etc.

   The F.S.A. h a d o v e r l a p p i n g m e m b e r s h i p w i t h the N a t i o n a l
   F e deration of F o o t b a l l Supporters' C lubs an d the
   A s s o c i a t i o n of P r o v i n c i a l Supporters' C l u b s and
   e n d e a v o u r e d to w o r k c l o s e l y w i t h otlier s u p p o r t e r s
   o r g a n i s a t i o n s on i s s u e s of m u t u a l interest.             The F.S.A.
   b e l i e v e d that the m e m b e r s of other s upporters'
   a s s o c i a t i o n s w o u l d g r a d u a l l y m o v e t o w a r d s the F.S.A., as
   it was an a c t i v e a n d m o r e e f f e c t i v e group, r e p r e s e n t i n g
   supporters.

   The F.S.A. c o n s i d e r e d t h a t m a n y F o o t b a l l L e a g u e Clubs
   w ere d i v o r c i n g t h e m s e l v e s f r o m their s upporters' clubs,
   p a r t i c u l a r l y if it w a s an a c t i v e supporters' club.             The
   F.S.A. also felt tha t as c l u b s r e a l i s e d the m o n e y that
   was to be m a d e o u t of s u p p o r t e r s ' clubs, i.e. t h r o u g h
   travel etc., t h e y h a d g r a d u a l l y taken o v e r the
   supporters' c l u b s a n d c o n v e r t e d them to tr a v e l clubs,
   w ith no o t h e r f a c i l i t i e s or activities.            C o p i e s of the
   F.S.A. R ules an d C o n s t i t u t i o n were t a b l e d (Appendix C).


G O V E R N M E N T P LANS FOR A C O M P L E T E M E M B E R S H I P S C H E M E The
    F.S.A. s t a t e d t h e i r s t r o n g p r e f e r e n c e to refer to the
    sche me as an I d e n t i t y Sche m e , bu t w ere a d v i s e d that the
    t e r m i n o l o g y u s e d in the A g e n d a was that u s e d by
   G o v e r n m e n t bodies.

  In c onfidence, The F.A. s u m m a r i s e d the d i s c u s s i o n that
  had taken p l a c e w i t h G o v e r n m e n t R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s an d other
  Football A u t h o r i t i e s s i n c e the m e e t i n g w i t h the Prime
  M i n i s t e r on 6th July, w h e n it h a d b e c o m e c lear that the
  G o v e r n m e n t w o u l d p u r s u e the i n t r o d u c t i o n of a N a t i o n a l
  M e m b e r s h i p S c h e m e e f f e c t i v e f r o m the c o m m e n c e m e n t of
  Season 1989/90.
The W o r k i n g P arty w h i c h ha d b e e n set up following the
Me e t i n g on 6th J u l y a n d C h a i r e d b y the Minis t e r for Sport
had hel d several v e r y l e n g t h y m e e t i n g s in the p r e p a r a t i o n
of the "enabling" l e g i s l a t i o n an d at these meetings the
Foot ball A u t h o r i t i e s h a d e x p r e s s e d t h e i r views strongly
c o n c e r n i n g the m a n y i m p r a c t i c a l i t i e s of the Scheme and
the overall h arm t h a t was l i k e l y to result from such
legislation-            It w a s n o t e d t hat the o b j e c t i o n s of the
Football A u t h o r i t i e s w o u l d e i t h e r b e i n c o r p o r a t e d in the-
Rep o r t of the W o r k i n g P a r t y or the F o o t b a l l Au t h o r i t i e s
would issue their o w n R e p o r t on the d i s c u s s i o n s that
had taken place.

The F.S.A- r e g i s t e r e d t h e i r total o b j e c t i o n to the
conc e p t of a N a t i o n a l M e m b e r s h i p C a r d Scheme.   However,
like The F . A . , the F.S.A. r e c o g n i s e d that the G o v e r n m e n t
had the "muscle" to e n s u r e tha t the l e g i s lation was
p a s s e d and, t herefore, h a d to w o r k t o w a r d s m i n i m i s i n g the
d amage that such a s c h e m e c o u l d cause.

The F.S.A. e x p r e s s e d r e g r e t t h a t t h e y had not been
p e r m i t t e d to be r e p r e s e n t e d on the W o r k i n g Party, but
were a d v i s e d that the p o i n t s t h e y p r o b a b l y w i s h e d to put
forward had been s t r o n g l y m a d e by bi\e Football
Authorities.

The F.S.A. said t h a t t h e y w e r e s e e k i n g four conces s i o n s
wit h regard, to the p r o p o s e d l e g i s l a t i o n :-

(a)    C o m p u t e r i s e d t u r n s t i l e s i m p l e m e n t e d at all
       football g r o u n d s s h o u l d be s w i t c h e d off and
       only a c t i v a t e d for c e r t a i n p r e - d e t e r m i n e d matches,
       which would be all-ticket.

      The F.A. r e s p o n d e d tha t s u c h a p o s s i b i l i t y had
      been d i s c u s s e d b u t the G o v e r n m e n t w e r e firmly
      of the o p i n i o n t h a t to be e f f e c t i v e the Scheme
      must be c o m p r e h e n s i v e and a p p l i e d to every
      Foot ball L e a g u e match.              The F.A. further
      advised that th e s a f e t y a s p e c t s in c o n n e c t i o n
      with the S c h e m e h a d b e e n d i s c u s s e d at length as
      far as the s a f e t y of S p o r t s Grounds' Act was
      concerned, b u t the M i n i s t e r for S p o r t had
      stated that th e m e m b e r s h i p l e g i s l a t i o n w ould
      take p r e c e d e n c e .        The G o v e r n m e n t did not want
      to see e x c e p t i o n s to the S c h e m e an d w o u l d prefer
      a t e m p o r a r y m e m b e r s h i p scheme, i.e. one off match
      membership, for i n d i v i d u a l s w h o c l u b s regar d e d as
      "no risk" i.e. s p o n s o r s h i p p a c k a g e s , exe c u t i v e
      boxes, f a m i l y e n c l o s u r e s , etc.

(b)   The sy s t e m s h o u l d b e self a d m i n i s t e r e d and the
      F.S.A. w o u l d l ike a n o m i n a t e d p l a c e on the
      F ootball M e m b e r s h i p A s s o c i a t i o n (F.M.A.).
                                              (4)


                 The F.A. i n d i c a t e d that the C o n s t i t u t i o n of the
                 F.M.A. had not b e e n decided, but the F.S.A.
                 request w o u l d be c o n s i d e r e d .

         (c)    On the q u e s t i o n of n e u t r a l supporters, w o u l d there
                be d e s i g n a t e d areas, w h i c h      w o u l d p r o b a b l y be
                i m p r a c t i c a b l e and, if not, w o u l d the neutral
                s u p p o r t e r s be p l a c e d in the home or the away end?

                The F.A. a d v i s e d t h a t a r r a n g e m e n t s at eac h ground
                w o u l d be the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of the club in
                c o n s u l t a t i o n w i t h the local Police.

         (d)    W i t h regard to the c o n f i s c a t i o n or o t h e r w i s e of
                m e m b e r s h i p cards, the i n d i v i d u a l should have the
                right of appeal, p o s s i b l y to The F.A.

               The F.A. a d v i s e d t h a t it w o u l d be d i fficult to
               c omm e n t on s uch an issue u n t i l suc h time as the
               final W o r k i n g P a r t y R e p o r t an d the s u bsequent
               le g i s l a t i o n was known.


4.   P REPARATION FOR THE R E T U R N T O E U R O P E 0-F E N G L I S H C LUBS
        The F.S.A. c o n s i d e r e d t hat the c r o w d troubles in G e r m a n y
        during the E u r o p e a n F o o t b a l l C h a m p i o n s h i p had been
        totally e x a g g e r a t e d and r e f e r r e d to various schemes that
        should be i n t r o d u c e d in an e f f o r t to cont r o l t r a v e l l i n g
        supporters.         T h e s e p r o p o s a l s are r e f e r r e d to in A p p e n d i x
        D (i - v i i i ).

       The F.A. p o i n t e d out the d i f f e r e n c e b e t w e e n a one off
       friendly or c o m p e t i t i v e m a t c h o v e r s e a s and a final
       tournament, as in G e r m a n y .                 R e f e r e n c e was mad e to the
       England Travel C l u b w h i c h ha d b een e s t a b l i s h e d for the
       1980 European C h a m p i o n s h i p Final T o u r n a m e n t but w h i c h had
       not r e s o l v e d the p r o b l e m of c r o w d troubles.                  The F.A.
       policy for m any y e a r s h a d b e e n not to take tickets for
       senior I n t e r n a t i o n a l m a t c h e s o v e r s e a s and such p o l i c y
       would c o n t i n u e for E n g l a n d matches.                   However, such a
       policy was not n e c e s s a r i l y p r a c t i c a l in t o u r n aments and,
       in any event, if a g r o u p of i n d i v i d u a l s tra v e l l e d
      overseas for a m a t c h w i t h o u t tickets, there was little
      The A s s o c i a t i o n c o u l d do.         The F.A. w o u l d c o n t i n u e in
      its e n d e a v o u r to d i s c o u r a g e o v e r s e a s A s s o c i a t i o n s and
      Clubs from s e l l i n g t i c k e t s on the day of a match, to
      assist in s e g r egation, b u t suc h c o - o p e r a t i o n c o u l d not be
      g u aranteed and i n d e e d in m a n y c a s e s w o u l d be
      non-existent.             The F.A. h o p e d in the f o r e s e e a b l e future
      the G o v e r n m e n t w o u l d i n t r o d u c e le g i s l a t i o n to r e s trict
      known football t r o u b l e m a k e r s f rom t r a v e l l i n g o v e r s e a s to
      a country at the time of a f o o tball m a t c h inv o l v i n g an
      English c lub or the E n g l a n d N a t i o n a l Team.
                                      (5)


  The F.A. r e f e r r e d to the i m p o r t a n c e of r e c e i v i n g
  in formation on the a c t i v i t i e s of p o s s i b l e t r o u blemakers
  p u r p o r t i n g to be f o o t b a l l s u p p o r t e r s and the F.S.A.
  i n d icated that t h e y w o u l d be p l e a s e d to e n c o u r a g e their
  memb e r s to assist in thi s c o n n e c t i o n w h e r e v e r p o s s i b l e in
  the hope that a n y i n f o r m a t i o n p r o v i d e d t h r o u g h that
  A s s o c i a t i o n w o u l d be t a k e n s e r i o u s l y and a c t e d upon where
  necessary.              However, it was a c c e p t e d that the p a s s i n g on
  of information was a c o n t r o v e r s i a l issue for the F.S.A.
  and it did not r e c e i v e t o t a l support, as some members
  felt that the i n f o r m a t i o n m i g h t be i n a c c u r a t e or that the
  p a s s i n g on of s u c h i n f o r m a t i o n m i g h t refl e c t on the
  c r e d i b i l i t y of the F.S.A.           The F.S.A. did agree,
  however, that t h e y w o u l d p u b l i s h the requ e s t of The F.A.
  in order that i n d i v i d u a l m e m b e r s c o u l d decide.

  The F.S.A. also e x p r e s s e d r e s e r v a t i o n s r e g a r d i n g the
  imposition of r e s t r i c t i o n s on k n o w n troublemakers, as it
  was not n e c e s s a r i l y e a s y to d e f i n e a troublemaker.
  R e f e r e n c e was a lso m a d e to the fact that if E n g l i s h clubs
  were banned fro m E u r o p e a n c o m p e t i t i o n s , such a ban should
  e x t e n d to the E n g l a n d N a t i o n a l Team.

                                                        V
CUP FINAL TICKET A L L O C A T I O N S Y S T E M          The F.S.A. tabled a
  s u bmission r e g a r d i n g the a l l o c a t i o n of Cu p Final tickets
  (Appendix E) and d r e w a t t e n t i o n in p a r t i c u l a r to the
  proposals c o n t a i n e d in P a g e 3.

  The F.A. advi s e d t hat the a p p r o p r i a t e C o m m i t t e e within
  The As s o c i a t i o n w o u l d be c o n s i d e r i n g the a l l o c a t i o n of
  1989 C u p Final t i c k e t s f o l l o w i n g the struc t u r a l
  alterations to W e m b l e y S t a d i u m and that C o m m i t t e e w ould
  also be c o n s i d e r i n g the f i n d i n g s of the inves t i g a t i o n
  into the a l l e g a t i o n s r e g a r d i n g the sale of 1988 Cup Final
  tickets at e n h a n c e d pric e s .

  The F.S.A. were a s s u r e d that the s u b m i s s i o n w ould be
  brou g h t to the a t t e n t i o n of the C o m m i t t e e when
  c o n s i d e r i n g any a m e n d m e n t to the future a l l o c a t i o n of Cup
  Final tickets.

  The F.S.A. s u m m a r i s e d b y s t a t i n g that they c o n s i d e r e d
  that the large m a j o r i t y of f o o t b a l l s u p p o r t e r s b e l i e v e d
  that the Final s h o u l d b e a t t e n d e d by the suppo r t e r s of
  the c o m p e t i n g f i n a l i s t s and, g i v e n the r e d u c e d total
  c a p a c i t y for f u t u r e C u p Finals, f i r m l y b e l i e v e d that the
  c o m p e t i n g finalist t e a m s s h o u l d be given an increased
  allocation, i.e. in e x c e s s of the p r e s e n t 50,000 tickets
  a l located to the two clubs.
6.         V E N U E S FOR I N T E R N A T I O N A L M A T C H E S A N D P R I C I N G POLICY
               The F.A. advi s e d that, in a c c o r d a n c e w i t h the curr e n t
               c o n t r a c t w i t h W e m b l e y Stadium, all E n g l a n d ' s Senior
               I n t e r n a t i o n a l M a t c h e s w e r e p l a y e d at W e m b l e y Stadium.

               The F.S.A. r e f e r r e d to the c o s t i n v o l v e d for m ost
               suppo r t e r s t r a v e l l i n g to L o n d o n for the fixture and asked
               that c o n s i d e r a t i o n be g i v e n to r e - n e g o t i a t i n g the
               c o n t r a c t w i t h W e m b l e y S t a d i u m in o r d e r that I n t e rnation al
               matc h e s c o u l d be "sha red" t h r o u g h o u t the country.

               The F.S.A. also r e f e r r e d to The F.A. p o l i c y to p e r m i t
               half p r i c e tickets for c e r t a i n m a t c h e s at W e m b l e y Stad i u m
               but not for the Cup Final.

               The F.A. a d v i s e d tha t its p o l i c y in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h the
               v e n u e s and p r i c i n g of t i c k e t s for m a t c h e s u n d e r its
               c o n t r o l was taken a f t e r c o n s i d e r i n g t h e facts r e l a t e d to
               the c a t e g o r y of match.


7.         S COPE FOR J O I N T W O R K B E T W E E N THE F.A. A N D THE F.S.A.
              The F.S.A. r e q u e s t e d t h a t c o n s i d e r a t i o n b e given to
              h o l d i n g regu l a r m e e t i n g s b e t w e e n T h e F.A. and F.S.A. and
              the a p p o i n t m e n t of a su p p o r t e r s ' l i a i s o n officer, in
              order that b o t h A s s o c i a t i o n s m a y b e c o m e m o r e f a m iliar
              w i t h their p r o b l e m s a n d to f u r t h e r p r o m o t e the gam e of
              football.

               The F.A. a d v i s e d t hat a s i m i l a r p r o p o s a l h a d been mad e by
               the N a t i o n a l F e d e r a t i o n of F o o t b a l l Supporters' C l u b s and
               w o u l d be c o n s i d e r e d b y th e a p p r o p r i a t e C o m m i t t e e w i t h i n
               The A s s o c i a t i o n in th e n e a r future.              In this connection,
               the F.S.A. a d v i s e d t h a t w h i l s t t h e y b e l i e v e d t h e r e was no
               p o s s i b i l i t y of a m e r g e r b e t w e e n the F.S.A. an d the
               N.F.F.S.C., it w a s h o p e d t hat b o t h b o d i e s w o u l d wor k
               c l o s e l y t o g e t h e r in t h e fu t u r e for the g o o d of the game
               of f o o t b a l 1.


At the c l o s e of the M e e t i n g Mr. M c M u l l e n t h a n k e d the
R e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of the F.S.A. for t heir at t e n d a n c e .




PF S / b c / 4 2 8
18.10.88
                                                          Do you want:
                                               BETTER facilities at YOUR ground?
                                              FAIRER ticket share-outs for big games
                                                            in fact . . .
                                              MORE say in how FOOTBALL is run?
                                           YES? Then JOIN the F.S.A. and help yourself.


                                                                vet   for yeaK weV e been i9nored b>   ^


               ^ P R E S B N T A m !in “0n ^
       tim S e -                             branches and ™™bers   over the countiy. Our aim is
       simple. REPRKENTATION for ordinary supporters on foofcalTs ruling bodies - so YOU can
       have a say m the future of our national game.                              soiuucan

       JOIN US NOW: complete this form and return it to the address shown below.

       I would like to join the Football Supporters Association and I agree to abide by its rules
       I enclose a membership fee (Minimum £2.00).

       Signature..................................... *

0 ^   D ate..............

      Surname.......
      (BLOCK LETTERS)


      Forenames....

      Address



      Post Code

  Team supported.....................................

  Telephone...........................................

  Please indicate AGE: Under 16 0                         16-21 □     Over 21 □
  Are you disabled? Yes/No


  —           , i        .I, ,JHE F.S.A., 59                Rr>Ar>                «n im n « /» .   ,
     Instead OfJust: Reading Rbout Football's Problems.

                      Why Not Do Something RboutThem?
 Football             supporters              are       under         attack           from        hooligans,              politicians,                 property
 speculators               and even some clubs,                           who appear               to care little for the fans who
 provide them with their living,                                        life are pushed around and exploited but rarely
 listened to.


 Over the past three years, the F.S.A. has sought to change all this,     life have
 had some success, but with the Government seemingly hellbent on destroying foot­
 ball "as a spectator sport", we need to be bigger and stronger.


 rTembership is just £2 (under 16's £1) and for that you will receive our regular
 newsletter and the chance to get involved in monthly branch meetings and local
 campaigns.                The F.S.A.              is currently involved in pressing for increased ticket
 allocations for Cup Finalists; better facilities at grounds for every one (but
 especially women and the disabled); effective measures to eradicate racism and
 racist chanting.                     This season we will fight the compulsory membership scheme.
Most of all, we want supporters to be involved and represented at every level
 of the game.                  Together we pay over £60 million a year into the game - far more
 than       any so-called "Sponsors",                               including television.                            Yet, when have you, the
customer, been asked about                                    anything?               The       only way             to     change          things is              to
organise and act together.


Loyalty to the came must be our over-riding loyalty,                                                           li/e must take responsibility
now and act in the best interests of the game.


Please complete the form below and send it off with your £2.                                                                          You'll be taking
part in the only fight worthwhile - the fight to Reclaim the Game for the fans
to whom it really belongs. Why not join us?



SURNAME................................................ FORENAMES,
ADDRESS:........................................................


TE'-: ...................................................... AGE: UNOER 1 6 □ 16-21 Q                            over      21 Q
Ant YCu DISABLED? NO/YE5 (PHYSICAL/SIGHT/HEARING)


SIGNED.......................................................................................... OATE:..........................................................
TEAFI SUPPORTED:.............................................................................................................
5ENC TO: FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION, 59 OAK'JCCD R0A0, LIVERPOOL, L26 1XD.




                                                                                                                                       APPENDIX A
   Instead Of Just Reading About Football's Problems.
          Why Not Do Som ething About Them?


     r X ™ n UPW?r! areUndera“ack'romhooliOans.politicianS,propertyspeculatore
     living We^reDushMiam*aHPeHrt° Ca,e,irtlef0r,he^anSwhoprovitlethemw',h,tleir



                                                                     des,royin9 ,oo,b a"

    Hnalisf, Athf ~         inV° ,Ved in pressin9 for increased ticket allocations for Cup
     *      ; the return of our c,ubs to Europe; better facilities for all supporters ftJt
          h           anddlsabled fans) and effective measurestoeradicaterac^marfK
   r a c is t   chanting. T h i s season we will fighttjie G overnm ent'splannedl. D . card syslenv




 Why not join us? Complete the form below and Include your subscription.



 SURNAME....................................... FORENAMES.                 ^
 ADDRESS..                                                                       .................................................................

                                                                                                                   °
                                                                                                    ................
       ..................................................................... ... UNDER 16    U         16-21 □             over 21 F I
    E YOU DISABLED? NO/YES (PHYSICAL/SIGHT/HEARING)

SIGNED...
        ................................................................DATE........
TEAM SUPPORTED:.........................                                                                 .......................................

                r o o t o a l ! .s u p p o n r m s a s s o c ia t io n s s o a k w o o o n c w i. u v t n p o o . !                       i> t>
Say No to I.D. Cards!
The Government proposals to force all football supporters to carry I.D. Cards
is:
                                   VINDICTIVE towards supporters
                                    IRRELEVANT to the hooligans
Just think about it:
1. Inconvenience                                 - you’ve got to provide photographs
                                                 - present yourself in person (no postal applications)
                                                 - declare your ‘loyalty’
2. Cost                                         Anything from £2.50 to £12 - simply for the privilege
                                                of doing what you can now do for free!
3. Danger                                       Delays at turnstiles - failure of the computer -
                                                crushing outside the ground - increased hooliganism.
4. Civil rights                                 why should we be picked out to carry I.D. Cards? Are
                                                we an ‘experiment’?
5. Punishment                                    your I.D. Card can be confiscated even though you
                                                 commit no offence.
You don’t have to accept it. Join the F.S.A. and get involved in the only fight
worthwhile - the fight to reclaim the game for all supporters. Why not join us?


S U R N A M E ............................................... FOR EN AM ES.

A D D R E S S ............................................................................


TE L:.....................................................................................AGE: UNDER 16 □                         16-21 0              over 21 □

ARE YO U DISABLED?                          N O /YE S          (PHYSICAL/SIGHT/HEARING)


S IG N E D .................................................................................DATE................................................................................

TEAM S U P P O R T E D :...................................................................................................................................................
SEND TO: FOOTBALL SUPPO R TER S ASSOCIATION, 59 OAKWOOD ROAD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD




                                                                                ©
     B




p>
                                                                                 aPPENDIX B



                         TH E FOOTBALL SU P P O R T E R S ASSO CIATIO N




   What     is the FSA ?



   The     FSA      is a n     independent pressure                  group    that campaigns a n d
   lobbies       on issues        of concern          to f o o t b a l l s upporters.            This   involves '
   the A s s o c i a t i o n   in a w i d e      variety of a c t i v i t i e s . We m e e t re g u l a r l y
  with     the p o l i c e a n d      o t h e r bodies        con n e c t e d wit h f o o t b a l l a n d have ••
  an     excellent working relationship with                           the PF A a n d       The Football
  Trust. We a r e          r e p r e S n tad on the Footballs'               F a m i l y Face W o r k i n g
  Party,      we c arry out ou r own r e s e a r c h a n d h ave w o r k e d w i t h both                        the
  University         of L o n d o n a n d      the U n i v e r s i t y of L e i c e s t e r .    We have a l s o
  been    involved         in a n u m b e r of s u p p o r t e r       campaigns,        the m o s t p r o m i n a n t
 •of w h i c h h a v e     c o n c e r n e d mergers,         ground    sharing and         ground d e v e l o p -
 ments.                                                                   ^



 We    seek a l s o      to inform a n d educ a t e suppor t e r s . M a n y of o'ur memb ers
 prod u c e    their own m a g a z i n e s a n d n e w s l e t t e r s a n d we h old               regu l a r
 meetings        in d i f f e r e n t parts        of the c o u n t r y      to enable          supporters        to
 get together            to d i s c u s s    the games p r o b l e m s a n d p o s s i b l e        solutions.
 Our meetings a r e            o r g a n i s e d on a     regional       r a t h e r than       club basis       in
 order     to f o s t e r g o o d w i l l a n d     to a l l o w     fans    to learn from each others
 e xperiences. We try to ensure that our m e e t i n g s a r e a d d r e s s e d by some
 -one p r o m i n a n t wi t h i n the game.


We     try and     present an attractive alternative                            to the a g g r e s s i v e a n d
 r a c i s t b e h a v i o u r often        seen on     the    terraces.       We o r g a n i s e   in a
deliberatly non-bureaucratic                       fashion         so a s   to a v o i d a l i e n a t i n g   the
sort of y o u n g people u h o               make up a l a r g e p r o p o r t i o n       of a n a v e r a g e
football crowd.



We n o w have       supporters          of all      92 L e a g u e     clubs a m o u n g s t our membership,
plus a sizeable             number of non-league                 clubs.      The L o n d o n     Branch a l o n e
cont ains     supporters          of ove r 75 L e a g u e          clubs.     We have 12 r e g iona l
b ranches a n d a n u m b e r o f a s s o c i a t e d            organisations          b ased a r o u n d
specific      clubs.        These     include       the    'Back       to The    Valley         Campaign'
                   A      553
                          m
                          <&)
                                  TH EF O O TBALL SU P P O R T E R S ASSO CIATIO N




2 > // m'»   • •




             a t Charlton,         'Left On The Shelf*                a t Tottenham,            the   'True Blues'
             a t S o u t h e n d U td ,* Fulham- •87* , the                'Chelsea I n d e p e n d e n t S u p p o r t e r s
         As so ci at io n*         and    the    *^PR L o y a l S u p p o r t e r s A s s o c i a t i o n * .    We have
         a n u m b e r of s t u d e n t b r a n c h e s a n d ar e             supporting anti-racist
             campaigns      in N e w c a s t l e a n d Le e d s .


         We a r e h e a v i l y l i n k e d w i t h         the fanz i n e network.              There a r e      o ver 100
         fanzin es        in     t h e . c o u n t r y a t present,          mos t b eing p r o d u c e d       by FSA
         members.         The l a r g e s t i n d i v i d u a l     c i r c u l a t i o n exceeds      10,000 and         the
         total c i r c u l a t i o n       is a p p r o x i m a t e l y l O O . O O Q ^ W e    estimate         that there
                        ov e r 1 m i l l i o n       fanzines        sold       this season.


        We have a n            o v e r l a p p i n g m e m b e r s h i p w i t h both     the N a t i o n a l    Federation
        of F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s     Clubs a n d       the A s s o c i a t i o n of P r o v i n c i a l
        Fo o t b a l l Supporters Clubs                 in L o n d o n .      Many    of our m e m b e r s ar e mem b e r
        of su pp o r t e r s        clubs,      s o m e of w h i c h a r e N F F S C or A P F S C I L a f f i l i a t e d .
        We have w o r k e d          c l o s e l y in    the p a s t w i t h a n u m b e r of s u p p o r t e r s
        clubs on a          v a r i e t y of s p e c i f i c issues,             (e.g.     Wimbledon,           Charlton,
        Fu lham an d T o t t e n h a m ) a n d h a v e h e l p e d             fans     to get t o g e t h e r w h e r e
        no sup po rt er s            club c u r r e n t l y     exists.        We have had         regular meetings
       with        the N F F S C ,    including a           j o i n t m e e t i n g w i t h Colin M o y n i h a n .


       C r a i g Brewin
       FSA N a t i o n a l S e c r e t a r y


       October 1988
           FOOTS* LL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION’


          R;:LES 'SD Ca'iSmUT10N' < * " * " - «        •’«—     * >™»                      ^ „ a i x         c

          1•     name


          T-     n . ™ ot the Assocl3tion         be .T o o c b a n Supporters Association.^


          2.     OBJECTS

          The objects of the Association shall be:-




                °f 1' -1 ■                                        " r : : ™ ; ; ™ * 1 i,hich "           “

      C>        Iu°ppP: “ " : . the ga”e ° f           -»-> to promote   g o o d . n l he^een footb,Tl


      d)       ^PPorterrL anpa« i “ i3'lyC7 n f " S °°              ° f C°nCeC" C° footba11
               s up p o rt e r s and women.       raP a ig n   or improved   facilities   for di sab l e d



      °                         s
                                r?SearC” int°- a"d t0 « ■ - * « «       inforraat ion on, football

                  oppose racism, sectarianism and sexism in football.


   3.          ELIGIBILITY

  The Association shall be non-oarri«n                 anA
  supports football, and supports the obie    f c°nse^uence, any person who
  eligible for membership               J CS °f ChS Ass°ciation shall be


           SUBSCRIPTIONS


                                                           Association shall be determined by the
 paid by new „e„bers who loin the 4
                                  \        “ °" 31 A "gus,:- Ths subscriptions
 August in the following       V      ‘         ^  1 J“"e “ i U run until 31*
 ACM of the local Branch or, U tiiere is^'bra"5                    I™ T ^
                                                                       b? Che
 membership will be deemed to have lapsed.        1D the area>     30 November


 5.       NATIONAL COMMITTEE


 de 1ega ted ^c) ^he^National°Commi1 1 ee"for t h e ^ u r ^ ^ FNa“ °nal Conference but
of the Association. The National Commier-                     ° Che day CO day running
Officers and one representative f r ™ T , h            \    C°nSiSt ° f tIve
be National Chair, National Vice-Chair ^ a M ^ ' c ; ^           Natlonal Officers shall
and National Membership Secretary         No’   v. 003 Secret:ary> National Treasurer
Officer post.             ? bSCretary- No ^ m b e r may hold more than one National



                                e i ^ [ ^ c h r r \ y che Annuai c°nf—
themse 1 ves for re-non ina“tI*on                           ^    ^         t0 °ffer
Che respective Branch ACM.        Branch renrr>     ePyesent‘*t^ve shall be elected at
substitute for meetings of whom the \T          Sen a^ lves sha11 bo able to nominate a
advance.               g        Wh°m Che ^tional Secretary shall be notified in-
      ,, ,          ' ‘; ‘“- s L’1 11 t-'u ‘Cl lon- Norinai iy the Commi t:toe s h a l l meet ence
      P L y U ° ,71° ,u ac'> c h e v e n u e Co b e a 1 c e rn.i c e d a r o u n d t h e c o u n t r y . The National
      ; ° " U C -e " laU mr"ke 3 rrangement? to fill any National Officer' post that fall*;
      vacant between conferences.

   Mtimate responsibility for the conduct of any activity of the Association is
   vested in the National Committee. The National Co^ittce may allow members of
   P    f-SaC 1o Ct °^ C° a,:,:e^c, its meetings but such members may not i m v p or vote.
   aid R    T "      Co^-U t e e neetinS shall consider reports from National Officers
   and Branch Renresentariv p q .

   6.      APPOIN’TMENT OF SUB-COMMITTEES

   The National Committee shall appoint « § such sub-committees and bodies ns it
   may consider appropriate. Membership of sub-committees need not be confined to
   P " :JS 'r       National Committee but Chairs of sub-committees must be National
   Committee r.\embexs.

          BENCHES

  branches of tne Association shall be formed covering areas agreed between the
  , ational Committee and members in the area of the intended Branch. No member
  bv parh r ° C^aC1r ^ ha11 be 3 me:!,ber of more chan one Branch. The area covered
  T        ranci s all, as far as is possible, contain at least two Football
  League °r Scottish League Clubs. Each Branch shall agree with the National
    mmi ee a name which shall not identify it with any specific football club.

 Each Branch shall formulate its own constitution, based on the model
 constitution presented in Appendix A which shall be subject to approval by the
 National Committee. Responsibility for the administration of the Branch shall
        rusted to a Branch Committee. Arrangements shall be made by each Branch
 ooramittee for its election to be held at the sta^t of each football season.
 oranch Committees shall be responsible for arranging periodic general meetings
 v ,the b^anch members m accordance with a pattern to be agreed with the
 National Committee.

 8.      SCOTTISH REGIONAL COMMITTEE

 There shall be a Scottish Regional Committee of the Association which shall be
                I
            branches of ths Association in Scotland. The method of election
 shall be determined by standing decision of the Scottish Regional Committee,
 agreed with the National Committee.

 9.     QUORUM

  he Quorum for the National Committee shall be one-third of the National
  I      ^   °ne' Chird of the Branch representatives- The National Committee
s 2 1 decide the quorum of sub-committees. Only unopposed business may be
dealt with at any meeting which lacks a quorum.

10. GROUP MEMBERSHIP

Branch Committees may invite other organisations to apply for Group Membership
of the Association for an annual fee to be determined by the Branch
Committee. No application shall be accepted without the prior approval of the
• ciLional Committee. The annual fee shall paid into the funds of the Branch
witn^the exception of an amount equivalent to individual membership of the
^   '-i---ion which shall be paid into national funds- Any organisation accepted
i3r gJ0uP “e^bership shall nominate one person who shall have the rights
 c c o r ed _ o _.n i n d i v i d u a l   member of   the As soc i a t i on u n d e r   the A s s o c i a t i o n ’ s
rui e s and c o n s t i t u t i o n .
 U . h.\i'tN’SKS INCURRED BY MEMiiEKS 01’ COMMITTEES

 Fne National Committee may reimburse such expenses as they consider to have
 been reasonably incurred by a member of the \ss^ciation on account of
 attendance at a committee of the Association..


 12.    ACCOUNTS

Payments out of the Association's accounts shall be approved by the National
Committee and shall be made by cheque only, signed by two of the National
Orficers. The financial year shall begin on 1 April. All accounts shall be
audited annually by two auditors elected at Annual Conference. Auditors shall
not hold office within the Association. The Association's accounts and the
names of the persons in membership shall be available for inspection by any
member having an interest. The audited accounts and financial records shall be
presented to the Annual Conference for approval.


13.     ANNUAL CONFERENCE REPRESENTATION

An Annual Conference shall be held in May or June but shall not, if possible,
be held in the same part of the country in two successive years. The Annual
Conference shall consist of:~

a)     The National Officers of the Association.

b)     Representatives elected by Branches on the following basis:-

       No. of Members in Branch             No. of Representatives

              5-50                                 up to 5
              51—50                                u p N>to 6
              61-70                                up to 7

       and so on, subject to the total number of representatives from any one
       Branch not exceeding 50%-l of the national total.

c)     All other members of the Association who shall have the right to
       participate but not to move or vote.

d)     Other persons invited by the National Committee, who shall have the right
       to participate, where the National Committee has specifically given
       permission, but not to move or vote.                             ....


14.    ANNUAL CONFERENCE AGENDA

All Branches, and the National Committee, may submit motions for consideration
at Annual Conference. It shall be for the National Committee to recommend the
number of motions permitted. Motions shall be sent in writing to the National
Secretary of the Association to arrive not later than the March National
Committee meeting. Copies of motions, nominations for National Officer posts
and proposed rule changes shall then be circulated to the Branches.

The National Committee shall be responsible for ensuring that Representatives
receive the Conference agenda and other relevant documents at least 21 days
before the Conference. Motions passed by the Conference shall be referred to
the National Committee, which shall report to the originators of motions and
subsequently to the next conference, on action taken.
     ihc conference shall he held in accordnncc with the standing orders contained
     in -\n pe nd ix. R.

     l>.    VLTERUION’ AND INTEK?RETAT1ON OF RULES

     :ho   interpretation of tnesc rules shall rest with the National Committee. No
     new   rule shall he made, nor shall any rule he ananded or rescinded, except with
     the   consent of a two- thirds majority of representatives present and voting at
     the   Annual Conference.


    16.    SPECIAL MEETINGS

    A special meeting of the Association shall be called

    a) at such time as the National Committee may consider necessarv.            —

    b) within 30 days of the receipt by the National Secretary of a requisition
        signed by not less than 100 members of the Association.

    The Requisition in accordance with provision (b) above shall be in the form of
    a Notice of Motion signed by the persons who will respectively move and second ,
    it 3t the special meeting. The summons convening the special meeting shall
    stai_e the business to be discussed, and no other business shall be transacted.
    Ten days notice' shall be given of such meetings. The composition of special
    meetings shall be the same as that of the Annual Conference.

    17.    WINDING UP THE ASSOCIATION

    The Association shall be wound up voluntarily with the consent of a two-thirds
    majority of the Representatives present at the Annjjal Conference when the
    proposal is recommended by the National Committee.


    18.    TERMINATION1 OF MEMBERSHIP

    "here a member is considered by the National Comraitt.ee to be acting contrary to
    the interests or the Association, that member may be suspended from membership
    with a right of appeal to the Annual Conference. Conference shall have the

©   power to terminate the membership of such person, permanently or for such
    period as it deems appropriate. Neither the National Committee nor Conference
    shall take action under this rule without first having given any members
^   concerned an adequate opportunity to explain their case to the Committee or
    Conference at which the decision is to be taken.
     M.'idel Rules for Branches


     RULE I - OBJECTS

     The objects of the Branch shall be specified.     The objects shall include:-

     a)    The furtlierence of the objectives contained in the Association's National
           Constitution and rules.

     b)    The provision of a channel of communication between Branch members and the
           National Committee-

     c)    The recruitment of new members for the Association, including promotion of
           local, and participation in general recruitment camDaigns.


     RULE 2 - ELECTION OF OFFICERS ANT) OFFICIALS

     The Branch Committee shall be elected at the Branch AGM. The scheme of
     election shall be determined by standing decision of the Branch Committee,
     subject to the approval of the National Committee.

    The Committee shall consist of Chair, Secretary and Treasurer and any other
    officers that the Branch may deem necessary. The Branch Committees shall have
    the right to appoint such officials as it may deem necessary.


    RULE 3 - SUB-COMMITTEES

    The Branch Committee shall appoint such Sub-committees as may be decided upon.

    All members of the Branch shall be eligible for appointment to these
    sub-committees.


    RULE 4 - MEETINGS

    a)    The Branch shall normally hold a general meeting and a Branch Committee
          meeting once a month, and in no case less than three times a year.


•   M
    c)
          The quorum for   Branch Committee meetings shall be specified.

          All members shall be given written notification of general meetings.


    RULE 5 - ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING

    An Annual General Meeting shall be held after the start of each football season
    but before the end of October. The Branch Committee shall present to the AGM a
    written report on Branch activities and the annual accounts.
         STORING OK01"KS FOR A\"\IV\L COKFERFA’CI-:



         1-    The National Co^ittee shall he responsible for arranging the Conference
                      in accordance with rule 14.



         2'        5 * V f                Shal1 he the Chair of tho Association exc;,t
               tor the Agenda item dealing with elections of National Officers at which
               the"v,MS          S,’a11 ^    tS,l;e” b>’ 3 Sati“ »1 Committee member nominate,! by
                                      “         *h*U « « accept n o t a t i o n for any National '



     3.        The order of Business shall be:-

               a)   Chair's address.                                                "

               b)   Minutes of proceedings of previous Conference.

              c)    Annual Report.

              d)    Appointment of Auditors.

              e)    Ammendments and Alterations of Standing Orders.

              f)    Elections of National Officers.

              g)    Motions from Branches.


     4. Noting shall be by show of hands except for             the election of National
          fficers whicn shall be by secret ballot.             The National Committee shall
         appoint persons to organise the ballot who            shall not be eligible to vote.
         In all cases voting shall be restricted to            accredited representatives and

              Standin^Order !7) .ma    ^     SlmPle            (sUbjeCt C° ruleS 15 and 16 and


    5.    A motion which is set forth on the agenda           cannot be withdrawn without the
m         consent: of the Conference being obtained.


          Except as provided in standing order 7 a motion which is not set forth on
          the agenda cannot be submitted without the consent of Conference.

          Such motion shall be in writing, signed by the person who proposes to ,ove
           t, and such person shall have the right to appear before Conference to
          explain the reasons for submitting the motion before the Conference reaches
          any cicision.



    7'                  f’r0“ dural                       noved at any time without previous
          notice on the agenda:

          a) That precedence be given to any particular business set forth on the
             agenda.

         b) That leave be given to withdraw or amend a motion or an amendment, or
            refer a motion or an amendment to the National Committee for
            consideration.

         c) That the question be now put.

         d) That the Conference proceed to the next business.
               e) That the speaker be no longer heard.

                O    That the debate be adjourned.

               g) 1h.-.the Conference be adjourned.

               h) Tnat persons; pr^^ent who t r >        ^ u      <-
                              r , 1 '       10 1,1",1oC members of the Association leave the
                  C oii;c re ace for a specified period.

        Provided that:


        (l>         3ny ”°Ci0" fallinS under sections a), and c) to f) inclusive shall be
                              y put to che           “uhc,ut                                                         „e


        <l0         Ifffe--'°rr Crat the 1uestio" be "°“ put is carried the motion shall take
                    ord';"!              a "y riEht ° f rSPly 35 '’rOVided f "       <" s t a n d i n g

        (iii) a m„ti„n thatthe question be now put shall not be moved while a
              representative is addressing Conference.


’ ^     UV>     "h„ahal°anu " a d
                                " * r t , M «>• d) « •>        * " • » »« »oved by a representative                   *
                debate.           adaressed Conference         on the motion or amendment under



       8. Representatives may move amendments   to motions from the floor                           !„,h
           amendments shall be seconded and be submitted in wrl "'g o the                           oTair
              m v                     * ■M 1 °; ^    "?"*• ^ * " « - « « « •            shall So           be
              moved S I !                    K ? S L “     1SPOS8d ° fV     A" —       ~       *•»        "«     *


       9-a) The mover of a motion shall have the ri°ht of renlv                             .u
            motion shall be put to the vote forthwith. The mover of an                      amendment ^
            shall not have the right of reply.                                              amendment


         b> o r i ^ t i nmorendment         ^   an,ended m0ti°n sha11 ^ p l a c e th-
                ginal motion as the substantive motion and the right of reply
            as provided for above ensues to the mover of the latter.

      10.Representatives, when speaking, shall    stand and address theChair   In   rhP
          -first place, they shall state their name and Branch represented     If two nr
           more Representatives rise at the same time to speak                  rZ
                                                                               ^ a -T           \
           to whom priority shall be given.                     ”     Chair shall decide


      “ * immed ia tely "resumc^the ir^ e a ts .F ^S       ’ representatives then standing shall



      12. A representative shall not s p e a k more than once to the same motion or
          amendment except in explanation, subject to standing order 9.


  13. The mover of a motion or an amendment shall not be allowed to speak for
          “ H x t:       " " T ' V       *     *«»                ^ ^ e r s h a l l not be S o w f d        to
                -        more tnan   fi v e   minutes without the permission of the Conference.


  14. A r e p r e s e n t a t i v e ^.av ar ?nV                         f
      but must c o n f M p ? d o n           of               P°int ° f order-or a s k 5 q u e s t i o n ,
      before the C o n f e r e n c e .1 "             ^   qUeSClon Co Che subject at the time
          A.1 I -business of Conference outstanding shall stand referred to National
          Conn i11 ee which shall report to me",hers its decision on these and all
          other waiters referred by Conference.


    16.   The proceedings of the Conference shall be conducted in accordance with
          the Constitution and Rules of the Association and these Standing Orders.
          In cases not provided for the Chair shall decide. The ruling of the Chair
          on any question of procedure arising at the Conference shall°- so far as
          procedure at that Conference is concerned - be final and binding and
          shall not be discussed.                                        °

    17.   Any one or more of these standing orders may be suspended by a resolution
          of Conference in relation to a specific item of business properly before
          that Conference, and to the proceedings thereon at that Conference;
          provided that at least two-thirds of the representatives present and
          voting Sjhall vote for the resolution.




                                              $

o




©
        (
             D




v




        s,




    i




    d


    1
                                                                                              Appendix D


    ©                         TH E FO O TBALL SU P P O R T E R S A SSO C IA TIO N




          Europe Europe         '89



         Europe Europe          '89 is the F S A 's back to Europe campaign. It consists
         of a major consultation exercise                       conducted through the football
         fanzines m order to gather the ideas of ordinary supporters on the
         Europe issue.


         We are particularly l o o ki ng for ways of controlling tickets in a
         way that will discourage i nd ep e nd e nt travelling in an attempt to
         change the age and gender imbalance of travelling English supporters
         in comparison to those of other countries. ^


         We argue that by returning next season we will give time for the
         policies     to be assessed and                for a ny problems           to be ironed out in
         the relatively low-key a t m o s p h e r e             of first round European tournaments,
        rather than waiting until                thousands         of fans descend on Italy for the
        1990 World Cup.


^       We also believe that by re moving the novelty aspect of our teams
        playing in Europe,            the p r os p e c t of matches           taking on the status
        of major events will diminish.                     G ermany     '88 shone out like a beacon
        to the would-be hooligans,                ( e specially after its                media build-up)
        providing them with their first major stage since Heysel to casue
        trouble.     Furthermore,         we feel         that many innocent English supporters
        were set up as          targets for Germa n             thugs by the prolonged absence.


        We are    f l o ating   the f o l l o w i n g    ideas;
        1 ; Ticket availability             to be restricted             to members of n e w l y formed
           travellers' clubs (similar to the restrictions successfully placed
           on followers of Leeds U t d . )
        1 1 ; Matches    pl a y e d in E u r o p e      i n v o l v i n g English    clubs a n d   the N a t i o n a l
           team    to be a l l - t i c k e t .
2   .   1   ,


                 iii* Absolutely no tickets      to be on    sale from -4.8— hours before
                      kick-off.     This principal needs to be established before           the
                      World Cup.
                iv,   Fans to be issued with vouchers in this country,           redeemable at
                      the stadium in exchange for match tickets only on production of
                      travellers club card and passport,
                v;    Co-ordinated Europe-wide action to arrest ticket touts for
                      illegal street trading or harassment,
                vi;   Convicted     thUgs to report to a police station when England or
                      their own club team are playing in Europe,
                vii; Co-ordinated Europe-wide a c tion to impose international banning
                      orders on thugs.
                viii; The F.A. and Football Legaue          to run inexpensive trips with
                      A.B.T.A.    and A.I.T.A.   ap p ro ve d firms so those fans who wish to b
                      organised can afford       to be.




                Craig Brewin

                FSA National Secretary




                October 1988
I


                                     E
                                 I




         .   .   .   .   .   V
    r'




                                 t
        k su bm issio n to The F o o tb a l l A s s o c ia tio n re g a r d in g th e w ish
        o f f o o t b a l l s u p p o r te r s to have a f u l l and comprehensive
        review o f arran g em ents p e r t a i n i n g to F.A. CUP FINAL TICKET
        ALLOCATION POLICY                                              (O c to b e r   1 9 8 8 .)




P re a a b le


          The F.A . Cup F i n a l , because o f i t s h i s t o r y , t r a d i t i o n , and e m o tio n a l
 v a lu e t o th e n a tio n a s a whole i 6 an even t t o be c h e rish e d and p re s e r v e d .
Thi6 i6 th e p rem ier cup c o m p e titio n th ro u g h o u t th e f o o t b a l l i n g w orld and
 i f f o r no o th e r re a s o n th an p r i d e , mu6t rem ain f r e e o f any t a r n i s h i n g
 in flu e n c e .
          The FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION, d e s p i t e th e o r g a n i s a t i o n ’ s p ro ­
g r e s s iv e n a t u r e , would n o t want t o 6ee any t r a d i t i o n a l a s p e c t s o f Cup
F i n a l day d im in ish e d , b u t does u r g e n t ly r e q u i r e th e FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
to c o n s id e r 6 e rio u 6 ly th e rem oval o f th e many n e g a tiv e a r e a s t h a t g iv e
r i 6 e to c r i t i c i s m o f th e o r g a n i s a t io n o f th e e v e n t, e s p e c i a l l y i n r e s p e c t
o f Cup F i n a l t i c k e t a l l o c a t i o n s .
          T hi6 document a tte m p ts t o b r i e f l y o u t l i n e what s u p p o r te r s f e e l t o be
th e problems w ith th e c u r r e n t a l l o c a t i o n system , and th e c a u se s o f th o s e
p ro blem s, and th en o f f e r p o t e n t i a l s o l u t i o n s t h a t would, p e r h a p s , b egin
t o a l l e v i a t e th e now p e r e n n i a l o u tc ry o v e r a c t u a l o r a l le g e d mismanage­
ment t h a t i s p e rc e iv e d t o be working a g a i n s t t h e i r i n t e r e s t s .
          A c o n sid e re d re sp o n se to th e p ro p o s a ls co n tain ed h e r e in combined
w ith a p o s i t i v e re s o lv e f r o c th e F.A. t o move to w ards, i f n o t f u l l y a l i g n
w ith 6 u p p o rter6 wi6he6 would a l6 o go 6ome way i n r e l i e v i n g th e w idely
h eld view t h a t th e F.A . i6 no t a ttu n e d to th e needs o f i t s own cu sto m ers,
th e game’ s b ig g e s t sp o n so rin g body, th e paying p u b li c .
          F u r t h e r , b u t a s an is s u e n o t to be discu66ed h e r e , th e F . S . A . , n o t
b e in g a n ti-6 p o n 6 o r6 h ip p e r 6 e , i6 f u l l y opposed to th e id e a o f any spon­
s o r s h ip d e a l t h a t would remove, a l t e r o r s u l l y th e l a b e l o f *T.A. Cup-**




            THE F.S.A . 59 OAKWOOD ROAD. HALEWOOD. LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
*2*     Current policy and its problems

                 I t i6 now a d e q u a te ly s u b s t a n t i a t e d t h a t th e c u r r e n t a l l o c a t i o n
        p o lic y has f a l l e n i n t o d i s r e p u t e . T h is i s ev idenced i n documentary
        form by r e p o r ts from th e F .S .A . i t s e l f ( 1966 ) , t h e L iv e rp o o l C ity
        C o un cil T rading S ta n d a rd s Department ( 1988 ) and by g e n e ra l concensus
        o f o p in io n over a g r e a t number o f y e a r s .
                 The 6y6ten f o r t i c k e t d i s t r i b u t i o n h as n o t been r a d i c a l l y a l t e r ­
        e d , b a r a n u m erical upgrading f o r p a r t i c i p a t i n g f i n a l i s t s some y e a rs
        ag o , s in c e i t s in c e p tio n and, th e F .S .A . b e l i e v e s , i6 s t i l l a l l i e d
        to th e p r e - t e l e v i s i o n and r a p id t r a v e l a g e . The6e two f a c t o r s a r e
        e s p e c i a l l y r e le v a n t a6:
       a ) anybody not d i r e c t l y concerned w ith th e two f i n a l i s t club6 can
           view th e match co m fo rtably by way o f th e e x c e l l e n t b ro a d c a s tin g
           coverage now on o f f e r , and:
       b) th o s e who do have d i r e c t involvem ent can t r a v e l t o th e f i n a l venue
          q u ic k ly and a t re a s o n a b le co6t from a l l a r e a s o f th e c o u n try .
      The consequence o f t h i 6 , a6 th e r e p o r t s quoted above have i n d i c a t e d ,
       h as been t h a t th o se peo p le i n r e c e i p t o f an " o f f i c i a l " a l l o c a t i o n from
      o u ts id e o f th e p e rs o n a l i n t e r e s t boundary, have p r e f e r e d n o t t o a tte n d
       th e f i n a l but ta k e ad vantage o f th e t e l e v i s i o n coverage and a good many
       fa n s w ith a d i r e c t i n t e r e s t have t r a v e l l e d to th e venue w ith a s p i r a t i o n s
      o f o b ta in in g th e t i c k e t s t h a t a r e s u r p lu s t o th e re q u ire m e n ts o f th e
       form er c a te g o ry .                                                       ^
                I f th e re was i n e x is te n c e an o r d e r l y t r a n s f e r system o f t i c k e t s
      between th e se two f a c t i o n s t h e r e would p e rh a p s n o t be a problem . How­
      e v e r , th e evidence i s overwhelming t h a t th e t i c k e t t r a n s f e r m arket i s
      dominated by u n sc ru p u lo u s d e a l e r s ( t o u t s ) whose m o tiv es a r e n o t govern­
      ed by th e d e s i r e to p ro v id e a s e r v ic e b u t t o o b ta in maximum p r o f i t from
      minimum o u tla y i n a w e ll f u e l l e d l u c r a t i v e a r e a . While th e o p p o rtu n ity
      e x i s t s t o g a th e r e x c e s s iv e amounts o f t i c k e t s from p eople who do n o t
      want th e e d e s p i te b ein g on th e a l l o c a t i o n l i s t , t h e r e w i l l always be a
      b la c k market to e x p l o i t . The o nly s o l u t i o n h e re i s to ensure t h a t th e
      maximum number o f t i c k e t s go t o th e p o in t o f h ig h e s t le g iti m a t e decand
      from th e o u t6 e t.
               To ta k e t h i s p r i n c i p l e on board i n f a c t encompasses a nucber of
      6 p in - o f f ad v an tag es. The most obvious a r e :
      a ) Fewer t i c k e t - l e s s fa n s m i l l i n g around th e stadium and th u s few er
          a tte m p ts a t i l l e g a l e n tr y by e i t h e r b r i b e r y o f t i c k e t c o l l e c t o r s
          (a w e ll known phenomenon) o r s c a l i n g o f v a i l s which i s a p a r t i c u l a r ­
          l y dangerous p r a c t i c e . (And, o f c o u rs e , th e more "ille g al* * e n t r a n t s
          in th e e t s d i u r th e g r e a t e r th e problem i n s i d e r e g a r d in g th e c o c f o r t
          and s a f e ty of th o s e t h e r e in bone f i d e f a s h io n .)
      b) L ess p re s su re on p o lic e and stew ard s who would th e n be a b le to
         c o n c e n tra te on crowd c o n t r o l and a n ti- c r ir r .in a l measures*
      c) A le s s e n in g o f t e n s io n caused by p o t e n t i a l l y d is a p p o in te d fa n s
         becoming a g i t a t e d and th e r e f o r e a g e n e r a l ly c o re calm atmosphere
         u n li k e ly to provoke p u b lic o rd e r p roblem s.
                 I t should a ls o be borne in mind t h a t a s th e o v e r a l l c a p a c itv c f
      Ver.bley S tadiu n red u ce s - assuming t h a t Cup F i n a l s w i l l c o n t i n u e 'a t t h i s
      t r a d i t i o n a l venue — th e d i f f i c u l t i e s t h a t have become i n c r e a s i n g ly
      w orrying can only g e t worse w ith o u t some a tte m p t t o face th e causes
      head on.
*5*   F.S.A. Proposals for change

           The t h r u s t o f th e F .S .A . p ro p o s a ls f o r changes in th e a l l o c a t i o n
      system c e n tr e on t h r e e p o i n t s , v iz :
      1 ) A cceptance o f th e p r i n c i p l e t h a t a tte n d a n c e a t th e Cup F i n a l has now
            become, by common c o n s e n t, th e a l o o s t e x c lu siv e domain o f s u p p o r te rs
            o f th e two f i n a l i s t c l u b s .
      2 ) Maximum numbers o f th e                       two                 s e t s o f 6upporter6 should re c e iv e t i c k e t s
            a t minimal c o s t ( i . e . f a c e v a l u e ) .
      3 ) E lim in a tio n o f " t o u t s " and th e b la ck              market t i c k e t t r a d e .
               I t a l s o fo llo w s t h a t each o f th e s e p o in ts i s in d e te rm in a b le f r o c th e
      o th e r s and th u s th e a l l o c a t i o n system su ggested co v ers them a l l en b lo c .
                 The s t a r t i n g p o in t f o r a new a l l o c a t i o n p o lic y would be based upon
      a minimum 8% (ap p ro x ) o f a l l a v a i l a b l e t i c k e t s t o be sh ared p ro p o r tio n ­
      a t e l y ( i . e . a s s e s s i n g demand u s in g r e s p e c tiv e average leag u e a tte n d a n c e s)
      by th e two f i n a l i s t c l u b s . The rem aining 15 & (approx) o f t i c k e t s to be
      d i s t r i b u t e d s e l e c t i v e l y by th e F.A.
               The e n su in g e x a o p le s based on a c t u a l f i n a l s o f r e c e n t y e a r s g ive a
      b e t t e r d e f i n i t i o n o f th e p ro p o s a ls and assume a f u t u r e c a p a c ity a t
      Wembley Stadium o f 8 3 . 0 0 0 .

      1.     ( 1988 )    L iv e r p o o l F .C .        v.     Wimbledon F.C .
             A llo c a ti o n t o i )  L iv e r p o o l F .C .          - 5 0 , 00 Q ^ ti c k e ts .
                                 ii)   Wimbledon F .C .                 - 2 0 ,0 0 0 t i c k e t s ,
                                iii)  L iv e r p o o l County FA
                                      (+ im m ediate surro u n din g
                                       d is tric ts )                   - 5«000 t i c k e t s ,
                                 iv ) London County FA
                                      (+ im n :.s u r r . d i 6 t s . ) - 5«000 t i c k e t s ,
                                  v) F o o tb a l l A s s o c ia tio n - 3>000 t i c k e t s .

      2.     ( 1987 )    C oventry C ity F .C .                 v . Tottenham H otspur F.C .
             A llo c a tio n to i ) C oventry C ity F.C.                            - 30,000 t i c k e t s .
                                i i ) Tottenham H F.C .                             - **0,000 t i c k e t s .
                              i i i ) Warwicks FA
                                      (+ i m n . s u r r . d i s t s . )            -     5 ,000 t i c k e t s .
                                iv ) London County FA
                                      (+ i m m . s u r r . d i s t s . )            -     5,000 t i c k e t s .
                                  v) F o o tb a l l A sso c ia tio n                    - 3«000 t i c k e t s .

      3.     (1986)      E v erto n F .C .         v.        L iv e rp o o l F.C.
             A llo c a tio n t o i )    E v e rto n F .C .                          - 35«000 t i c k e t s .
                                ii)     L iv e r p o o l F .C .                     - 3 5 iOOO t i c k e t s ,
                               iii)      L iv e r p o o l County FA
                                       ( ♦ io m .s u rr.d is ts .)                  - 10,000 t i c k e t s ,
                                 i v ) F o o t b a l l A sso c ia tio n             - 3«000 t i c k e t s .

      *t.    ( 1985 )    E v erto n F .C .         v.        M anchester U nited F.C .
             A llo c a tio n t o i ) E v erto n F .C .                              -    35«000 t i c k e t s .
                                 i i ) Kan. U nited F .C .                          -    35«000 t i c k e t s ,
                               i i i ) L iv e r p o o l County FA
                                       (+ i m m . s u r r . d i s t s . )           -      5 |0 0 0 t i c k e t s ,
                                 i v ) H a n c h e s te r County FA
                                       (+ im m .s u r r .d i 6 t6 .)                -      5 |0 0 0 t i c k e t s ,
                                   v) F o o t b a l l A s s o c ia tio n            -      3 |0 0 0 t i c k e t s .
  5-      (198*0       Everton F.C.              v.   Watford F.C.
         A llo c a tio n t o i ) E v erto n F .C .                        - **0,000 t i c k e t s .
                             i i ) W atford F.C .                         - 3 0 ,0 0 0 t i c k e t s .
                           i i i ) L iv e r p o o l County FA
                                   ( ♦ im n .s u rr.d is t6 .)                 5,000 t i c k e t s .
                             iv ) H e r ts County FA
                                   ( ♦ im m .s u rr.d is ts .)                5.000 t i c k e t s .
                               v) F o o t b a l l A s s o c ia tio n          3.000 t i c k e t s .

          At t h i s ju n c tu r e i t would be w ise to m ention t h a t c o n s id e ra tio n
  ha6 been g iven t o th e i s s u e o f s e g r e g a ti o n o f r i v a l s u c p o r te r s , but
  a lth o u g h no t e n t i r e l y d is m isse d a s i r r e l e v a n t , p ro p er measures can
               ,i      d Up° n when th e f i n a l i s t s a r e known and adequate
    b u f f e r zones e s t a b l i s h e d when th e e x te n t o f s u r s o r t f o r Mch
                                     i n view 01 t n e s a t i s f a c t o r y arrangem ents q u it e
  e a s i l y reach ed Tor SIXTJIEN s p t r rtf*                                 v. ~ t __ ___ r>_ten3.r"y
                  U wouia n o t seem t o be to o ard u o u s a ta s k t o f u l f i l .


  A d d itio n a l r e q u i r e n e n t s

           I f (when?) th e rev ie w o f t i c k e t a l l o c a t i o n s based upon F .S .A .
  p ro p o s a ls i s im plem ented, ammendnents t o th e r u l e s o f d i s t r i b u t i o n
  w i l l a l s o be n e c e s s a ry . I t i s u n f o r t u n a t e , but n o t uncon=on, f o r canv
  rumours co n cern in g m a lp r a c t ic e by th e com peting c lu b s th em selves to '
 aoound amongst d is g r u n tl e d s u p p o r t e r s . Some o f th e s e , o fiviously, a r e
 m a lic io u s b u t o t h e r s , p e rh a p s , a r e based on t r u t h i f not e n t i r e l y
 a c c u r a t e . F o r i n s ta n c e , i t was w id e ly quoted i n th e K ersey sid e a re a
 a t th e tim e o f th e 1986 Cup F i n a l between L iv e rp o o l and E v erton t h a t
 ri* - f l a y e r s a t th e r e s p e c t iv e c l u b s had been is s u e d some 110 t i c k e t s
            Be t h a t t r u t h o r rumour i s now im m a te ria l and would be l e s s o f
 a t o p i c cap ab le o f d i s t o r t i o n i f any new d i s t r i b u t i o n r u l e s c o n ta in e d
 tn e fo llo w in g s e c t i o n s .
 1.     No more th a n % o f t h e t o t a l a l l o c a t i o n t o any c lu b ca^ be r e t a in e d
        f o r in te r n a l d i s tr i b u ti o n to s t a f f , p la y e rs , d ire c to rs e tc . *
 (*                    t h a t in p e r s p e c t i v e , i f th e t o t a l a l l o c a t i o n was, s a y ,
       3 5 ,0 0 0 t i c k e t s th e n %     - 1 ,7 5 0 t i c k e t s - would be a v a i la b l e f o r
       c lu b u s e . F u r t h e r , i f th e t o t a l c o m p l e c t o f d i r e c t o r s , p la y e r s ,
       s t a . f e t a l t o t a l l e d 5 0 , th e n a g en e ro u s allow ance o f u r t c 35
       t i c k e t s p e r p erso n i s a v a i l a b l e . )
2.      County F . A . 's r e c e i v i n g an a l l o c a t i o n o f t i c k e t s owing t c t h e i r
        p ro x im ity to a com peting f i n a l i s t c lu b a re to be r e s p o n s ib le f o r
        d i s t r i b u t i n g t i c k e t s t o bone f i d e a p p l i c a n t s who have a genuine
        a f f i l i a t i o n , i . e . r e f e r e e s , o f f i c i a l s o f c e rb e r c lu b s e t c . AND
        s h o u ld ajlo w f o r sy m p a th e tic c o n s i d e r a t io n o f ger.uine r e q u e s ts f o r
        s m all numbers o f t i c k e t s from o t h e r County F .A .’ s o u ts id e th e
        i-jr.e d ia te d i s t r i c t .
3.     Any t i c k e t s rem ain in g u n so ld o r s u r p l u s t c req u irem en ts bv anv clu b
       o r County F.A. w i l l be r e t u r n e d t o th e F.A . f o r d i s t r i b u t i o n e l s e ­
       w here. (P o s s ib ly t o o r g a n i s a t i o n s o r p e r s c n a l a p r l i c a n t s who have
       lodged an a p p l i c a t i o n w ith th e F .A . f o r f i r s t r e f u s a l on anv s u r r 'u s
       tic k e ts .)                                                                                  •    r~

**.    Any c lu b o r County F .A . d e l i b e r a t e l y w ith o ld in g tic!<»ts from t ve’ r
       in te n d e d purpose t o c r e a t e an a r t i f i c i a l de-and o r beir.g c a r e l e s s
       a s t o th e d i s t r i b u t i n n n f                   i__i_______          .
               xutu u ie r e p u ie an a a e a i t w ith i n th e s e v e r e s t a&:



                                             0
         The F .S .A . a l s o f e e l s t h a t i t would be i n th e b e s t i n t e r e s t s o f
th e F.A. and s u p p o r te rs i f th e F .A . were to ex p lo re i n g re a t d e t a i l
any p o s s i b i l i t y o f e x a c tin g some l e g a l r e t r i b u t i o n on any person o r
o r g a n i s a t io n known t o be in v o lv e d i n o r o p e ra tin g a b lack market tr a d e
i n Cup F i n a l t i c k e t s . We a c c e p t t h a t in s tr a ig h tf o r w a r d terras t h i s i s
a very d i f f i c u l t a r e a , b u t f e e l t h a t somewhere i n th e e x i s ti n g frame­
work o f th e law, no m a tte r how rem o te, some measures may be a p p l ic a b l e .
I f n o t , the n th e F .A . must lobby th e Government t o c r e a t e some workable
l e g i s l a t i o n t o outlaw th e t o u t s . I n th e c u rr e n t p o l i t i c a l c lim a te i t
would make a p le a s a n t change f o r th e Government t o be seen to be
fa v o u rin g s u p p o r te r s i n t e r e s t s r a t h e r than making l i f e a s d i f f i c u l t
a s p o s s i b le f o r them.
          One p o s s i b le a r e a t h a t may be examined, and i t i s s t r e s s e d t h a t
t h i s s u g g e s tio n i s made from a p r a c t i c a l common sen se p o in t o f view
r a t h e r th a n any le a rn e d r e c o u r s e t o Stone* s J u s t i c e s Manual o r s i m i l ­
a r , would be t o d eterm in e t h a t Cup F in a l t i c k e t s rem ain th e so le
p ro p e r ty o f th e F.A. a t a l l t i m e s . The p o ss e s s io n o f a t i c k e t , under
s u f fe ra n c e o f th e F .A . o n ly c o n f e r s th e r i g h t on th e p o sse sso r to :
a ) g ain ad m itta n ce t o th e Cup F i n a l , or:
b) t r a n s f e r th e r i g h t o f a d m itta n c e f o r up t o but no more tha n th e
    v alu e o f t h a t r i g h t , i . e . t h e fa c e value o f a s e a t o r t e r r a c e p la c e .
The purch ase o r a c c e p ta n c e o f any t i c k e t would a u to m a tic a lly form a
c o n t r a c t u a l agreem ent t o a b id e by th e se c o n d itio n s (d isp la y e d promin­
e n t l y a t th e p o in t o f s a l e and p r i n te d on th e t i c k e t ) o r by sig n in g
a r e c e i p t f o r th e t i c k e t , a t e a r - o f f p o rtio n o f th e t i c k e t could have
space f o r name, a d d r e s s , s i g n a t u r e e t c . , may fordKan a c t u a l c o n t r a c t .
Then, any mis—use o f th e t i c k e t would c o n s t i t u t e a breach o f c o n tr a c t
o r be deemed t o be f r a u d u le n t u s e and th u s be open t o c i v i l o r c rim in a l
p ro c e e d in g s. To s ta n d and f i l l i n th e t e a r - o f f s e c t io n on a t i c k e t may
be time consuming and p e rh a p s a b i t o f an a d m in is tr a tiv e n ig h tm are, b u t,
i f th e n e c e s s it y t o do t h i s was w e ll p u b lic is e d and p ro s p e c tiv e purch­
a s e r s were aware b efo reh an d th e n i t i s a rg u a b le t h a t th e m a jo rity o f
p eople would be u n d e r s ta n d in g . A ls o , th e r e would th e n be a w r it te n re c o rd
o f th e o r i g i n a l p u rc h a s e r o f e v e ry t i c k e t .
           I t i s d o u b tf u l t h a t , a s t h i n g s s ta n d , s u c c e s s f u l p ro s e c u tio n s f o r
fraud- o r c i v i l a c t i o n u n d e r th e t o r t o f c o n tr a c t would be a t t a i n e d .
However, a s p r e v io u s ly s t a t e d , i f l e g i s l a t i o n could be p ressed by
Government a t th e b e h e s t o f t h e F .A . then th e F.A . would be seen t o be
ta k in g p o s i t i v e a c t i o n which would undoubtedly h old much p u b lic s u p p o r t.
The F .S .A . would c e r t a i n l y back th e F.A. i n any approach t o Government
 on t h i s i s s u e . I t i s f e l t w ith i n th e F .S .A . t h a t t h e r e has t o be sone
p o s i t i v e w i l l on t h i s i s s u e and w h ile a c c e p tin g t h a t enforcement o f any
 law would i t s e l f c r e a t e a p ro b lem , even a s i n g l e p ro s e c u tio n may be a
 s u f f i c i e n t d e t e r r e n t and h e lp red u ce th e b la ta n c y o f to u tin g t h a t now
 e x is ts .
           I t may, however, be a rg u e d t h a t i f a t i c k e t a l l o c a t i o n syster. or. tn e
 l i n e s o f t h a t su g g este d h e r e i n were to be implemented, then th e p ro b le c
 o f b lack m arket t i c k e t s may be re s o lv e d i n any e a se l
Su.~---.ary

        The FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION by unanimous co n sent o f i t s
members and by proxy o f a l l s u p p o r te r s who sig n ed th e p e t i t i o n
io u s ly d e liv e re d t o th e FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION, a g a in u rg e t h e ^ b a l i
A sso c ia tio n to u n dertake a com prehensive and r e a l i s t i c rev iew o f th e
Cup F in a l t i c k e t a l l o c a t i o n p o l i c y .                        .       ...    ,,
        The F.S.A . a ls o u rg e s th e F.A . t o u n d e rta k e any review
due reg a rd t o s u p p o r te rs w ish es and pay p a r t i c u l a r a t t e n t i o n t o th e
p e rc eiv e d problems from t h e s u p p o r te r s s t a n d p o in t w ith rem edies in
l i n e w ith th r e e main p r i n c i p l e s ,
1. The Cup F in a l now b e lo n g s t o th e s u p p o r t e r s o f th e f i n a l i s t c l u b s ,
2 . Those su p p o rte rs should r e c e i v e th e maximum number o f t i c k e t s p o s s i b le ,
3 . T ic k e t t o u t s and th e b la c k m arket m ust be e lim in a te d .

     The F .S .A . i s q u it e p re p a re d and w i l l i n g t o work a lo n g sid e th e
F.A. o r a s s i s t i n any re a s o n a b le way t o a c h ie v e th e s e a im s.




   T h is document i s p rep a red on b e h a l f o f th e F .S .A . by P . J . GARPx.--
   (N a tio n a l Membership S e c r e t a r y , 59 Oakwood Road, L iv e rp o o l L26 1X2 ,
MINUTES OF MEETING AT LANCASTER GATE 23/2/89
           MEETING WITH FOOTBALL S U P P O R T E R S 1 ORGANISATIONS

                         NOTES O F A M E E T I N G H ELD
                  at 16, L a n c a s t e r Gate, London, W.2.,
                    on Thursday, 23rd Feb r u a r y , 1989
                         c o m m e n c i n g at 2.30 p.m.

Present:     The F o o t b a l l Ass ociation:            Mr.    R.H.G.      K elly and
             M i s s P.F. Smith.

             M i s s J.   Smith.

             Th e F o o t b a l l League:        Messrs.        A.   W i l l i a m s o n and
             C. Whalley.

             T h e F o o t b a l l Supporters' A s s o c i a t i o n :         Messrs.         R.
             Taylor, P. G a r r e t t and D. Fle m m i n g .

            T he N a t i o n a l F e d e r a t i o n of F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s 1
            Clubs:       Mr. A.M. Kershaw, Mrs. M. H a r t l a n d an d
            M r . I. Todd.


1.   APOLOGIES   A p o l o g i e s for a b s e n c e w e r e r e c e i v e d f rom
        Messrs. D. Den t (Football Leag u e ) a n d C. B r e w i n
        (Football Supporters' A s s o c i a t i o n ) .

                                                                V
2.   TH E R E D U C T I O N IN THE T I C K E T A L L O C A T I O N T O F.A.         CU P
        F I N A L I S T S T h e Supporters' O r g a n i s a t i o n s e x p r e s s e d
         c o n c e r n that, d e s p i t e str o n g r e p r e s e n t a t i o n s m a d e by
         them for the n u m b e r of t i c k e t s a l l o c a t e d to the
        F i n a l i s t s to be inc r e a s e d - p a r t i c u l a r l y in v i e w of
         the d e c r e a s e d c a p a c i t y at W e m b l e y for the 1989 Cu p
        Final, it had b e e n d e c i d e d t h a t al l p a r t i e s sh o u l d
        r e c e i v e th e same p e r c e n t a g e o f th e t o t a l a l l o c a t i o n
        of C u p F i n a l T i c k e t s as for t h e 1988 C u p Final.                   They
        felt that they shou ld hav e b e e n i n f o r m e d of the
        d e c i s i o n b e f o r e it had a p p e a r e d in the Press.               It was
        p o i n t e d out, however, that d e t a i l s h a d a p p e a r e d in
        the P r e s s b e f o r e a n o f f i c i a l a n n o u n c e m e n t had b een
        m a d e by Th e Ass o c i a t i o n .

        T he FA gave an a s s u r a n c e t hat the C o m m i t t e e had been
        f ully a ware of the c o n c e r n o f the supporters'
        organisations.             T h e y had, h o w e v e r , d e c i d e d that the
        p r e s e n t m e t h o d of d i s t r i b u t i o n w a s fai r as it e n a b l e d
        pe o p l e w h o s u p p o r t e d the g a m e at a l o w e r level to
        a t t e n d the p r e m i e r e v e n t in th e f o o t b a l l year.      This
        d e c i s i o n had bee n ratif i e d by the F.A. Council.
    During a lengthy d i s c u s s i o n           the f o l l o w i n g points were
    n o t e d :-

     (a)    The FSA'S r e q u e s t that the F A c o n s i d e r the
            p o s s i b l e l ive s c r e e n i n g of the C u p Final on the
            grou n d s of the c o m p e t i n g finalists.

    (b)     The a l l o c a t i o n of Cu p F i n a l t i c k e t s w ould be
            r e v iewed on a r e g u l a r basis.

    (c)     The q u e s t i o n of clubs r e c e i v i n g an a l l o c a t i o n of
            tickets in p r o p o r t i o n to t heir a v e r a g e a t t e n d a n c e
            w o u l d a g a i n be c onsidered.

    The supporters'           o r g a n i s a t i o n s a p p r e c i a t e d that du e to
    the time needed           t o a l l o c a t e t i c k e t s for the Final,
    it w o u l d not be       p o s s i b l e for the d i s t r i b u t i o n to be
    a men d e d for the       1989 Cu p Final.

   It wa s a g r e e d t h a t the q u e s t i o n of t h e d i s t r i b u t i o n
   of Cu p Final t i c k e t s w o u l d be f u r t h e r d i s c u s s e d w h e n
   the F A / S u p p o r t e r s O r g a n i s a t i o n s m e t f o l l o w i n g the
   1989 Cup Final, by w h i c h t i m e the new c a p a c i t y of
   W e m b l e y Stadium, t a k i n g into a c c o u n t curr e n t
   struc t u r a l a l t e r a t i o n s , w o u l d be known.


THE 'SAY NO' C A M P A I G N           R e f e r e n c e wa^vjnade to recent
  m e e t i n g s of the S t r a t e g y C o m m i t t e e w h e n c o n s i d e r a t i o n
  had been g i v e n to m o u n t i n g a n a d v e r t i s i n g c a m p a i g n
  a g a i n s t the p r o p o s e d M e m b e r s h i p Scheme.         It was
  noted that it had b e e n d e c i d e d n o t to proc e e d in
  this direction, a l t h o u g h c e r t a i n c lubs in the L o n d o n
  area p r o p o s e d p l a c i n g an a d v e r t i s e m e n t in the L o n d o n
  E v e n i n g P a p e r s e t t i n g out t h e i r o b j e c t i o n s to the
  M e m b e r s h i p Scheme.         It wa s a g r e e d tha t the S t r a t e g y
  C o m m i t t e e w ould be a s k e d to r e - c o n s i d e r the q u e s t i o n
  of m o u n t i n g such a campaign.

   A g e n e r a l d i s c u s s i o n took p l a c e on the p r o posed
   i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of the M e m b e r s h i p Scheme.


THE B A N N E D S U P P O R T E R S O F S O U T H E N D U N I T E D At the
  request of the F S A the item wa s deferred.


THE P R O P O S E D F O O T B A L L M E M B E R S H I P A U T H O R I T Y The
  Supporters' O r g a n i s a t i o n s e x p r e s s e d c o n c e r n that
  by a g r e e i n g to for m the F M A , the F A / F L a p p e a r e d at
  times to be s u p p o r t i n g the M e m b e r s h i p Scheme.             The
  need for the s t a n c e b e i n g taken by the football
  a u t h o r i t i e s in t his d i r e c t i o n w a s e x p l a i n e d and it
  was a c c e p t e d that in the i n t e r e s t s of football it
  was n e c e s s a r y for the FMA to be formed and
  opera t e d under the j u r i s d i c t i o n of the football
  authorities.
     It was felt that e v e r y o n e i n v o l v e d in f o o tball was of
     the v i e w that the M e m b e r s h i p S c h e m e w o u l d have a
     d e t r i m e n t a l effect on the g a m e and was u n i t e d in
     the fight agai n s t the i m p o s i t i o n of the Sc h e m e in
     its present format.

     The Supporters' O r g a n i s a t i o n s s t r e s s e d that they
     w o u l d have been p l e a s e d to supp o r t v o l u n t a r y
     M e m b e r s h i p Schemes w h i c h e n t i t l e d m e m b e r s to
     p r i v i l e g e s not a v a i l a b l e to n o n - m e m b e r s .
     They were, however, totally o p p o s e d to the
     i n t r o d u c t i o n of the p r o p o s e d ID Scheme.


 TWO TIER PRICE S T R U C T U R E S      The S u p p o r t e r s O r g a n i s a t i o n s
   ex p r e s s e d c o n c e r n at the c o n t i n u e d e x i s t e n c e of a two
   tier price s t r u c t u r e o p e r a t e d at som e c l u b s w h e r e b y
   'away' s u pporters w e r e c h a r g e d h i g h e r a d m i s s i o n
   p r i c e s than 'home' s upporters.

    It w a s noted that c lubs had b e e n i n f o r m e d that
    the i m p o s i t i o n of such c h a r g e s w o u l d be
    c o n s i d e r e d a g a i n s t a club, if f o l l o w i n g an
    i n v e s t i g a t i o n by the FA, it w a s e s t a b l i s h e d that
    the d i f f e r e n c e in c h a r g e s had b e e n i n s t r u m e n t a l in
    c a u s i n g the trouble.

    It w a s furt h e r n o t e d that a n y propQsed a m e n d m e n t to
    FL R e g u l a t i o n s to p r o h i b i t t h i s p r a c t i c e w ould
    r e q u i r e a p p roval at an A n n u a l G e n e r a l Meeting.

    R e f e r e n c e wa s m ade to the n e e d for f a c i l i t i e s at
    c e r t a i n Le a g u e G r o u n d s to be i m p r o v e d an d the
    e x c e l l e n t wor k of the F o o t b a l l G r o u n d s I m p r o v e m e n t
    T rust in this respect.

   The f o o tball a u t h o r i t i e s noted the c o m m e n t s of the
   s uppo r t e r s o r g a n i s a t i o n s r e g a r d i n g th e s t a n d a r d of
   s t e w a r d i n g at W e m b l e y S t a d i u m and p r o b l e m s a r i s i n g
   therefrom.           It was ag r e e d that t h e s e p o i n t s
   w ould be taken u p w i t h W e m b l e y Stadium.


R E - A D M I T T A N C E OF E N G L I S H C LUBS IN E U R O P E A N C O M P E T I T I O N S
    C o n c e r n was e x p r e s s e d at the c o n t i n u e d b a n on E n g l i s h
    clubs com p e t i n g in E u r o p e a n C o m p e t i t i o n s .    However,
    it was felt that the M i n i s t e r for S p o r t would not
    s u p p o r t any a p p l i c a t i o n by Th e A s s o c i a t i o n for the
    c lubs to be re-admi tted, u n t i l such time as the
   M e m b e r s h i p Scheme was in o p eration.


O V E R - C H A R G I N G FOR M A T C H DAY P R O G R A M M E S R e f e r e n c e was
    m ad e to certain in c i d e n t s w h e r e s u p p o r t e r s had been
    o v e r c h a r g e d for a m a t c h p r o g r a m m e and it was noted
    that the prob l e m had been r e p o r t e d to the relevant
   Police     Authorities.
9.     NEXT MEETING            It was felt that m e e t i n g s of the
         C o m m i t t e e sh o u l d be called as n ecessary, r a t h e r than
         at s p e c i f i c times.       It was not felt tha t any
         a d v a n t a g e w o u l d be gained by g i v i n g g r e a t e r p u b l i c i t y
         to such m e e tings.


The M e e t i n g closed at 4.26 p.m.



JS/j s/1 14
MISC/MINSGEN/fsofaflmins
6.3.89




                                                             V




                                               (4 )
FSA RESEARCH PAPER FOR "FIRST WORLD CONGRESS OF SCIENCE
               AND FOOTBALL11. APRIL 1987
                         I

                   Tifc-lg.. —


Research t What's in it for Football Supporters?




Author s Rogan Taylor.



Address for correspondence s R. Taylor,

                             Chairman, Football Supporters’ Assoc.,

                             32 Rutland Avenue,

                             Liverpool LI7 2AF




     I
Key Words s Supporter-orientated research

            Supporters as consumers

            Supporter's organisation
Supporters as Consumers


On Saturday, 21st of March this year, Liverpool were playing

away at Oxford United.    Between five hundred and one thousand

Liverpool supporters — who had travelled the four hour journey

to Oxford — failed to get in to the match.    That this fixture

would "be a full house was easily predicted, given Liverpool’s

title—chasing position.    But, instead of making it an all-

ticket game and thereby ensuring that travelling fans knew

they v-ould get in, Oxford’s management decided against such a

course, virtually guaranteeing the disappointment of many.

It was a typical example of football's failure to take any

real account of the very people who fund the whole business.



Football supporters provide by far the most significant amount

of money in the ggjne.    Handing over some £50 million a season

through English turnstiles alone, they out—pay all other

financial sources combined twice over, including the input

from television fees, Pools money and commercial sponsorship

of all kinds.   And throughout the one hundred years of the

professional game's history — for the most a history of little

or no commercial sponsorship - supporters alone kept football

afloat.   For this reason, if for no other, supporters deserve

to be treated as responsible consumers.     But they are not.



The football supporter is a special kind of consumer of course.

Football clubs and their grounds are not Asda hyper-markets

 (although one can easily get the impression that this government

 thinks that they should b e 1.) and supporters are more than mere
                                3




purchasers of a football product.      As a football fan, one

does not pay just to watch a game; one pays to watch oneself —

and thousands of others — watching a game.       Everyone who goes

to football matches knows how significant and dramatic a role

supporters can play in the entertainment.       They can, it appears,

even influence events on the field of play.       To ignore this

special status as ’involved and active consumers1 , rather than

passive recipients, is to misread the essential nature of the

game itself and to misunderstand supporters entirely.       Yet both

the clubs and the game’s executive bodies have traditionally

viewed the paying public as just turnstile-fodder.       No wonder

there are now major problems amongst the crowdi



Today - despite the immense financial and other pressures

 under which football labours - supporters are not even paid

the lip-service due to ordinary consumers.       When have supporters'

opinions been polled on any significant feature of the game and

its presentation?       Have supporters ever been 'researched' to

find out if they would like an evening kick-off at 7«30 p.m. or

8 o'clock?      Have they ever been consulted about the venue of a

semi-f in al?    No business can hope to survive without even a

semblance of good consumer—relations and effective      consumer—

research.       Clubs should want to survey their "fans, not only

■because they need to, but also to show     they care:— supporters

just love to give opinions I
Polling Supporters* Views


It is easy to find out what supporters wants- just ask thenu

They gather together regularly in large numbers at preordained

venues, easy targets for quick surveys.     More elaborate

questionnaires can be utilised involving precisely the kind of

organisation I represent.     The Football Supporters Association

now consists of a dozen regional branches,    including three in

Scotland, and involves thousands of members and sympathisers

only too willing to take part in any research likely to benefit

supporters.     In fact, in conjunction with John Williams of

Leicester University's Sociology Dept., the F.S.A. has already

taken part in a complex survey.



There have been occasions when failure to poll supporters'

opinions has proved .disastrous.    Two particular examples


illustrate well what can happen when fans' views are unresearched

and ignored.i


(s.) Charlton Athletic decided unilaterally last year to move to

    Crystal Palace's ground.    This decision was taken without

    reference to their fans, or indeed their players and manager,

    all of whom were absolutely opposed to such a move.       Now,

   despite the team's success this season, half the traditional

   support is still refusing to travel to watch a 'home' game.



("b) Coventry City were involved, in 1981, in a plan to restructure

   radically their ground without any reference to the desires

   of their supporters.     According to the report produced by
                                5




Leicester University's researchers (Williams, et al, 1 9 8 4 ),

Coventry's executive, led "by Chairman Jimmy Hill, decided that

the    way to defeat hooliganism was to charge fewer spectators

more money for '"better facilities' and consciously move up

market to recruit new spectators.     It was decided without any

concrete research or reference to supporters' views on the

matter to make Highfield Road an all-seater stadium, and (it

was argued) to get rid of hooliganism at a stroke.       Jimmy Hill

announced these plans, stating:


      "I don't think there is any doubt there will "be less

      violence at matches if all the fans were seated"


                               (Coventry Evening Telegraph 6 .3 .8 1 )



The effect        "the manner of this announcement was to incense

large numbers of Coventry's traditional supporters, especially

those who for decades had stood peaceably on the terraces.        What

annoyed them most of all, however, was the complete absence of

any attempt to consult them before taking the decision.        Soon

there were demonstrations organised by fans and the club responded,

amazingly , by stating that consultation would serve no useful

purposeI




In the event, Coventry failed on two countsj to quell hooliganism

and to deal reasonably with their regular customers.       The club

soon discovered when Leeds visited them in September I9 8I that

seating areas were no protection against hooliganism - in fact,

they provide more space and more ammunition than the terraces,

and also add considerably to the visibility of any disturbances.
It was not too long 'before Coventry were ripping up the new

seats "behind, the goals and restoring the old terraces.



We note with some dismay that Jimmy Hill - Chairman at Coventry

in I98I and Director at Charlton Athletic until recently - is

now the self-appointed 'saviour’ of Fulham F.C. and its fans.



One must recognise, that there are considerations which will

worry any football club committed to researching its supporters.

Clubs cannot always act solely on any results they may obtain.

Financial constraints are often crucial (though that itself is

partly the result of consistent failure to look after supporters),

but even so, surely just to know the opinions of ones customers -

even if those opinions occa.sionally cannot be decisive - is well

worth while.   More open government inside clubs and the Football

League and the Football Association is absolutely essential if

professional football is to survive in its present form in this

country.


Football Supporters and Hooliganism



There is little time available today to take on the topic of

football—related hooliganism, and %\*e have all had the benefit of

Professor Dunning's paper on Monday last.    For a detailed approach

to the topic from the supporter's point of view, I can only refer

you to the F.S.A.'s document, 'Football Supporters Against

Hooliganism', fitit I would like to raise the general point that

effectively finding out what supporters do want is not a million

miles away from defeating the hooligans in the long term.
The only lasting crowd discipline achievable is self-discipline

through peer group pressure.        If the crowd feels welcome, involved

and well-served, it will largely discipline itself.



Consequently, wholly negative measures to control foofba.ll

supporters can only be useful in the short term.        Supporters

need to be positively mobilised and one significant       way of doing
that would be to establish, as the F.S.A. suggested to the Minister

of Sport at a meeting recently, a Football Supporters* Ombudsman —

the 'Ombudsfan' .   Such an office should be a repository for

complaints and suggestions from football fans all over the country

and also a funnel for research and feedback between fans and any

bodies interested in them.        The role would need a high profile

involving regular publicity in all football programmes and other

publications, providing contact numbers and addresses. He or she
                   \
would need voluntary regional representatives to monitor local

issues and events, and the F.S.A. is ideally structured and

prepared to assist any Ombudsfan.       Because we chose a regional

structure, the F.S.A.'s branches not only bring together so called

rival supporters, helping to develop cross boundary recognition

and solidarity, but also remain,      independent of the clubs in

their areas.   Such independence is vital if- any real dialogue is

to take place between supporters and their clubs.       Supporters'

organisations until now have visually been 'married* to their clubs
                           o n.
and if they tried to put^pressure for change or consultation they

were readily ‘divorced'.      We saw recently at Queens Park Rangers

how impotent a Supporters' Club can be when its Secretary is a

paid official of the Football Club.       Where were the protests
                                8



from QPR fans against the proposed and bitterly resented merger

with Fulham?     The supporters did protest - but not through QPR's

official supporter organisation — they protested vigorously and

successfully in a campaign involving supporters o f a number of

clubs,co-ordinated by the London Branch of the Football Supporters

Association.



Research Areas of Particular Interest to Supporters



Given the recent events involving Fulham FC and other mergers

no doubt already twinkling in the eyes of property developers,

three important areas of inquiry spring to minds


(!) Club-Community Relations s What role should a club play within

    the community it serves?     Football clubs have traditionally

    wanted to have their cake and eat it.      In successful times,

    they defend themselves by saying "We are a business - a private

    business, leave us alone".      In times of hardship^we hear them

    say^ "Help us out, we're an important part of the community".

    The time has come to open up access to the clubs and their

   facilities.     Such a course will soon be essential for all but

   the very rich, just to survive.

(2) .Club Funding s Research into the present system and possible

   alternatives is absolutely essential, given the vulnerability

   of clubs like Fulham.     Increasing public sector involvement -

   especially through local authorities - seems likely, and it

   would be extremely interesting to see research into the best

   ways of proceeding.     Only last week Halifax Town Council took

   over the running of tneir football club.      The players themselves

   will now be council workers.      Hopefully the Sir Norman Chester

   Institute for Football Research will be monitoring developments
   closely.
                                          9



    (3) What is "Commercial Success"? In conjunction with the above

          two areas, the research—"based, establishment of criteria "by

          which to judge the overall performance of clubs in their

          communities would "be of great value.      Any simple or limited

          definition of "commercial success" will "beg many questions.

          As increasingly unprofitable clubs come under pressure, we

          must develop the means to assess a clubs success which include

          the many other aspects of football in English society.



    In addition,these four supporter-related areas stand in need of

    considerable research effortss


    (a) Football and the Media.         We need a monitoring system which

          perhaps someone like the Ombudsfan could develop.



    (h) Policing. Which methods work best?          John Williams’ current
                         \
          project for the Department of Environment may provide some of

          the answers.       But one is certains supporter-police liaison is




:   (c)
          vital, and branches of the F.S.A. have already inaugurated

          regular meetings with police in different parts of the country.


          Facilities.    How does the provision of better facilities

          for men, women and disabled supporters affect the general

          behaviour of the crowd?



    (d) Membership Schemes.         The government recently announced its

          desire to see a membership scheme operating everywhere which

          includes fifty percent of the supporters attending matches.

          We need research into the effects of individual membership

          schemes.   We will want to know how clubs will make members

          feel to be members and what are the results of different
                                     10




         approaches.



    Finally, it would, he extremly interesting - and. I am sure most

    enlightening - to see research into the operations of the

    Football League Management Committee, the Football Association and.

    the international, self-selected, bodies who run the game at the

    highest level.     Too much discussion takes place and decisions

    taken in a private huddle, without reference or consultation with

    other interested parties.     Needless to say, the Football Supporters

    Association is ready and willing to involve itself at any level

    in research to provide more information and better ways of

    preserving the game we love.




      Reference


    Williams, Dunning, Murphy March I9 8 4 -* All Sit Down ; A Report on



t       the Coventry City All Seated Stadium 1982/83 .
SAMPLE MINUTES OF LONDON BRANCH FSA/POLICE LIAISON COMMITTEE
                                                                                                                          ...... x,.,..




                 MEETING OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION AND THE POLICE

                                                 NEW SCOTLAND YARD


                                     THURSDAY 27TH OCTOBER 1 9 8 8 AT 7 - 0 0 PM


P resen t w ere:

        S u p e r in t e n d e n t     D.   MARTIN             TO.2 0 (Chairman)
        In sp e c to r                 D.   TEMPORAL           B r i t i s h T ran sp ort P o lic e
        Mrs                            S.   O'BRIEN            F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
        Mr                             R.   MAYSTON            F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
        Mr                             B.   O'KEEFE            F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
        Mr                             B.   SPURREL            F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
        Mr                             D.   BRICKW00D          TO.2 0 ( S e c r e t a r y )




1.          MATTERS ARISING FROM PREVIOUS MEETING ( 7 . 7 . 8 8 )

(i)         MILLWALL FOOTBALL CLUB

             The l o c a l C h ie f I n s p e c t o r w it h t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r p o l i c i n g
             M i l l w a l l F o o t b a l l C lub h a s b e e n a p p r a is e d o f t h e im p lie d problem s
             r e g a r d in g away s u p p o r t e r s a c c e s s i n g on t i c k e t o n l y m a tc h e s .   The
             p rob lem s h o u ld b e g r e a t l y e a s e d w i t h t h e c o n s t r u c t i o n , c u r r e n t l y
             und erw ay, o f a p a s s a g e w h ich w i l l a l l o w v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s t o g a in
             d i r e c t a c c e s s t o t h e s e c t i o n o f t e r r a c in g , r e s e r v e d f o r them.

(ii)          'YOU'LL NEVER WALK ALONE' ADVERTISING CAMPAIGN *

             The p a r t i c u l a r a d v e r t h a s n o t b e e n u s e d s i n c e t h e p r e v io u s m e e tin g
             and t h e F o r c e P u b l i s h i n g Campaign Manager h a s s t a t e d t o Mr EIDMANS
             t h a t t h i s cam p aign a d v e r t i s u n l i k e l y t o b e u s e d a g a i n .

(iii)       'LOTS* CAMPAIGN

             The k in d rem arks made b y t h e FSA h a v e b e e n p a s s e d t o C h ie f
             S u p e r in t e n d e n t STACEY a t T otten ham who was g r a t e f u l t h a t t h e e f f o r t s
             g i v e n b y P o l i c e w ere a p p r e c ia t e d .

(iv )        FSA STEWARDING AT WEMBLEY STADIUM

             Mr MARTIN was g i v e n a c o p y o f t h e FSA N e w s l e t t e r , "R eclaim th e
             Game",          f o r h i s in fo r m a tio n .     The N e w s l e t t e r c o n t a in e d an a r t i c l e
             r e l a t i n g t o t h e e x p e r i e n c e s o f FSA members who a c t e d a s s te w a r d s a t
             t h e F .A . Cup F i n a l on 1 4 .5 * 8 8 a t Wembley S ta d iu m .

(v )        FOOTBALL LEAGUE ENQUIRY INTO DISORDER AT CHELSEA V MIDDLESBOROUGH
            2 8 .5 .8 8                           '      '

             The FSA e v i d e n c e s u b m it t e d t o t h e e n q u ir y was n o t u s e d . Mrs O’BRIEN
             sta te d         t h a t t h e A s s o c i a t i o n w ere i n r e c e i p t o f a l e t t e r from Mr Ken
             BATES,           Chairman o f C h e ls e a F o o t b a l l C lu b , i n w h ic h h e s t a t e s t h a t
             t h e P o l i c e w ere r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e d i s o r d e r b e c a u s e t h e y had n o t
             s te w a r d e d t h e p e r im e t e r f e n c e and had i n s i s t e d t h a t s e c t i o n s o f
             t e r r a c i n g b e u s e d f o r t h i s m atch w h ic h o t h e r w i s e w ould h a v e rem ained
             c lo s e d .      Mr MARTIN r e p l i e d b y s t a t i n g t h a t t h e s e a s s e r t i o n s had n o t
             b e e n fo u n d t o b e t r u e a t t h e d i s c i p l i n a r y h e a r i n g .
An a greem en t b e tw e e n P o l i c e and t h e c lu b on t h e l e v e l and l o c a t i o n
o f s t e w a r d in g a t C h e ls e a h a s now b een f o r m a l i s e d .


SCHOOL SEMINARS

Mr MAYSTON s a i d t h a t t h e FSA w is h e d t o im p le m e n t, a l o n g s i d e t h e
P o l i c e , a s e r i e s o f s e m in a r s w i t h in s c h o o l s w i t h t h e         aimof
p r o m o tin g f o o t b a l l .          He added t h a t t h i s w ould b e a l e a r n i n g
e x p e r ie n c e f o r a l l c o n c e r n e d . Mr MARTIN and Mr TEMPORAL b o t h a g r e e d
w it h t h e i d e a i n p r i n c i p a l , b u t b o th w en t t o g r e a t l e n g t h s t o
e x p l a i n t h e d i f f i c u l t i e s t h a t t h i s t y p e o f schem e may e n c o u n t e r i n
b e i n g im p le m e n te d .          The s e l e c t i o n o f t h e t a r g e t grou p and t h e
ca tch m en t a r e a may b e t h e two m ost im p o r ta n t d e c i s i o n s t o make.
I n s p e c t o r TEMPORAL s u g g e s t e d i t may b e e a s i e r i f t h e A s s o c i a t i o n
w ere t o t a r g e t Y outh C lu b s r a t h e r th an s c h o o l s .            Mr MAYSTON a g r e e d
w it h many o f t h e p o i n t s d i s c u s s e d and s a i d h e w ould p r e s e n t a more
d e t a i l e d r e p o r t on t h i s s u b j e c t a t t h e n e x t m e e t in g .

Mr MARTIN s a i d h e w ou ld a r r a n g e f o r t h e FSA t o s p e a k on t h i s s u b j e c t
w it h t h e Community R e l a t i o n s B ranch.


"FOOTBALL INTO 1990*S" CONFERENCE 29-30.8.88

It was agreed by Mr MARTIN, Mr TEMPORAL a n d w h o            all.
attended the Conference, that although they found it interesting,
the aims and objectives of the Conference were difficult to
identify.  A book relating to the seminar will be published in due
course.


SEARCHING OF SUPPORTERS - POLICE POLICY

When s e a r c h i n g a s u s p e c t , P o l i c e O f f i c e r s a r e o b l i g e d t o a b id e by
t h e Code o f P r a c t i c e o f t h e P o l i c e and C r im in a l E v id e n c e A c t 1984
(PACE). I t i s norm al f o r s e a r c h e s t o b e r e s t r i c t e d t o o u t e r g a rm en ts
when b e in g c o n d u c te d i n t h e s t r e e t .           Due c o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u ld b e
g iv e n to th e need t o se a r c h .             The FSA w ere c o n c e r n e d a b o u t r e p o r t s
from t h e i r members o f c e r t a i n i n c i d e n t s w here p o l i c e may h a v e b e e n
' o v e r z e a l o u s ' when f r i s k i n g s u p p o r t e r s .     Mr MARTIN r e p l i e d t h a t
O f f i c e r s s h o u ld d e a l w it h p e o p l e i n a r e a s o n a b le way and a l l o w them
t o r e t a i n t h e i r d i g n i t y when b e i n g s e a r c h e d .

Mr MAYSTON s a i d t h a t P o l i c e a t t i t u d e s tow ard s s e a r c h i n g a t f o o t b a l l
s t a d i a d i f f e r e d b e tw e e n F o r c e A rea s and i n some c a s e s a h e a v y P o l i c e
p r e s e n c e may c h a n g e t h e mood o f an o t h e r w is e good n a tu r e d crow d . I t
was e x p l a in e d t h a t i n d i v i d u a U - t o r c e s , w h i l s t a d h e r in g t o t h e Code o f
P r a c t i c e , a d o p t d i f f e r i n g p o l i c i e s i n r e l a t i o n t o s e a r c h i n g by
g i v i n g c o n s i d e r a t i o n t o t h e u n iq u e c ir c u m s ta n c e s w it h w h ich t h a t
F orce i s fa c e d .              T h is may i n c l u d e th e g e o g r a p h y o f a p a r t i c u l a r
g ro u n d , a v a i l a b i l i t y o f manpower, l o c a l t a c t i c s and t h e p r e v io u s
h i s t o r y o f m a tc h e s b e tw e e n t h e c lu b s in v o lv e d e t c .
5.   SAFETY LEVELS AT FOOTBALL STADIA - POSTPONEMENT OF TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR
      V COVENTRY 2 7 . 8 . 8 8                                   ~    ~ ~

     S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s f o r f o o t b a l l s t a d i a a r e i s s u e d by t h e l o c a l
     C o u n c il . They w i l l do s o a f t e r t a k in g t h e a d v i c e o f b o th t h e P o l i c e
     and t h e F i r e B r ig a d e .           I f f o r some r e a s o n t h e grou n d c o n c e r n e d i s
     n o t c o n s id e r e d t o b e s a f e , t h e l o c a l c o u n c i l can w ith d raw a s a f e t y
     c e r t i f i c a t e o r ch a n g e t h e term s o f an e x i s t i n g c e r t i f i c a t e , i . e .
     c l o s e t e r r a c i n g , r e d u c in g t h e c a p a c i t y o f t h e grou n d e t c . T h is may
     b e done a t any tim e a s p r o c e d u r e s f o r i n s p e c t i n g d u r in g a s e a s o n do
     e x is t.

     A S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e was n o t i s s u e d f o r t h e T ottenham H o tsp u r v
     C o v e n tr y m atch on 2 7 - 8 . 8 8 .  I t i s u n d e r s to o d t h a t t h e b u i l d i n g works
     w ere n o t c o m p le te and t h a t b u i l d i n g m a t e r ia l rem ain ed on s i t e .


6.   NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES

     The Governm ent seem i n t e n t on in t r o d u c in g l e g i s l a t i o n w h ich w i l l
     r e q u i r e a l l c lu b s t o p a r t i c i p a t e i n a N a t i o n a l Membership Scheme
     b e f o r e t h e s t a r t o f t h e 1 9 8 9 /9 0 s e a s o n .           A c e n tr a l body, n o t th e
     P o l i c e , w i l l b e handed t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y t o ru n t h e Scheme and
     p r e su m a b ly w i l l d e c i d e on w h ich s u p p o r t e r s s h a l l and s h a l l n o t b e
     i s s u e d w i t h Membership C a rd s.                   The FSA w i l l s e e k r e p r e s e n t a t i o n on
     t h i s c e n t r a l body.          I t i s ex p e c te d th a t a r ig h t o f ap p eal w i l l e x i s t
     f o r t h o s e r e f u s e d a m em bership c a r d .             I t i s h oped t h a t by r e f u s i n g
     cards         to       known       tr o u b le m a k e r s    th e  h o o l ig a n  e le m e n t    w ill      be
     p r o g r e s s i v e l y e x c lu d e d from f o o t b a l l g ro u n d s.

     A W orking P a r t y h a s b e e n s e t up t o lo o k i n t o t h e im p le m e n t a t io n o f
     t h e N a t i o n a l Membership Scheme and a t p r e s e n t no fir m p r o p o s a l s h ave
     b e e n made.


7.   POLICE COMMUNICATIONS WITH SUPPORTERS -                              I .E .    KEEPING IN OF AWAY
      SUPPORTERS

     The FSA b e l i e v e t h a t t h e s t e p s forw ard t h a t t h e y a c h ie v e d i n t h i s
     a r e a l a s t s e a so n h ave b een s l i g h t l y eroded t h i s s e a s o n . -M r ,.M A R T T fl
     ^M J>^JtffiU lduind&i^;ake^JbQ^meation^,this,-sub:iect--^at^the^next^meeting
     o f t h e Committee^ w h ose members h a v e t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r p o l i c i n g
     London f o o t b a l l g r o u n d s , on 1 5 th November 1 9 8 8 .


8.   FSA MEMBERS OBSERVING POLICING OPERATIONS AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

     I t was a g r e e d p r e v i o u s l y i n p r i n c i p l e b etw een Mr HOSKINS and t h e FSA
     t h a t two members w ou ld b e a b l e t o o b s e r v e a t y p i c a l S a tu r d a y P o l i c e
     o p e r a t i o n . Two p r e f e r a b l e d a t e s p u t forw ard by t h e A s s o c i a t i o n w ere
     3 . 1 2 .8 8 and 1 7 . 1 2 . 8 8 .
       F i x t u r e s i n London on t h o s e S a tu r d a y s a r e a s f o l l o w s :

         .
        3 12.88                                                  1 7 .1 2 .8 8
       A r s e n a l v L iv e r p o o l                          A r s e n a l v M an ch ester U n it e d
       M i l l w a l l v W est Ham U n it e d                    M i l l w a l l v S h e f f i e l d Wednesday
       Q .P .R . v C o v e n tr y C i t y                        Q .P .R . v E v e r to n
       Wimbledon v Southam pton                                  W est Ham U n it e d v Tottenham
       C r y s t a l P alace^ v M a n c h e ste r C it y         C r y s t a l P a l a c e v L eed s U n it e d
       B r e n t f o r d v B o l t o n W anderers                Fulham v P r e s t o n N orth End
       Fulham v B r i s t o l R o v e r s
       L e y to n O r ie n t v L i n c o l n C i t y

       Mr MARTIN e x p l a i n e d b r i e f l y t h e 'POD' w h ich i s s e t up e v e r y S a tu r d a y
       i n t h e I n f o r m a t io n Room. He added h e w ould d i s c u s s t h i s m a t t e r w it h
       h i s c o l l e a g u e s from TO.2 0 and I n f o r m a t io n Room and, i f t h e n e c e s s a r y
       r e s o u r c e s a r e a v a i l a b l e and o t h e r com m itm ents do n o t p r e c lu d e t h e
       v i s i t s , i t w ou ld b e p r o g r e s s e d .


9-     ANY OTHER BUSINESS

(*■)   ENGLAND V SWEDEN 1 9 . 1 0 . 8 8

       Some FSA members h a v e e x p r e s s e d c o n c e r n t h a t a t 7 . 2 0 pm on t h e n i g h t
       o f t h e m atch some o f t h e t u r n s t i l e s a t Wembley rem ained l o c k e d . The
       f a n s who queued a t t h e s e e n t r a n c e s w ere n o t g i v e n any in f o r m a t i o n a s
       t o w hat was h a p p e n in g , and c h a o s e n s u e d a s t h e y t r i e d t o f i n d
       a l t e r n a t i v e e n t r a n c e p o i n t s i n o r d e r t o g a i n a d m itta n c e b e f o r e t h e
       match s t a r t e d a t 8 . 0 0 pm.               Mr TEMPORAL a g r e e d t h a t some t u r n s t i l e s
       w ere c l o s e d due t o a l t e r a t i o n s c u r r e n t l y b e i n g u n d er ta k e n a t t h e
       S ta d iu m . He added t h a t t h e t e r r a c e s w ere f u l l t o c a p a c i t y and some
       f a n s w ere g i v e n s e a t s w it h o u t b e i n g c h a r g e d any e x t r a money.

SECRETARY’S NOTE

       On t h e n i g h t i n q u e s t i o n t h e s a l e a b l e c a p a c i t y o f Wembley                 was
       r e d u c e d t o 6 6 ,1 0 0 ( f i g u r e s u p p l i e d b y Wembley P o l i c e S t a t i o n )       and
       t h e a t t e n d a n c e was 6 5 ,8 2 1 .

(ii)   FUTURE MEETINGS

       A t f u t u r e m e e t in g s o f t h e FSA and P o l i c e , f o u r members o f t h e
       A s s o c i a t i o n w i l l a t t e n d . T h is w i l l c o m p r is e two perm anent C om m ittee
       members and two o t h e r members who w i l l a t t e n d on a r o t a t i o n a l
       b a sis.
    10.    DATE OF NEXT MEETING

           The next meeting will take place on Thursday 19th January 1989 at
           7-00 pm at New Scotland Yard.




    Distribution

    All present
    Chief Inspector HOSKINS
    File




m
                   MEETING OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION AND THE POLICE
                                                     NEW SCOTLAND YARD

                                       THURSDAY 19 JANUARY 1989 at 7.QO pm

 Present Were:

 Chief Inspector                       B. EVANS               T020 {Chairman)
 Inspector                              D. TEMPORAL            British Transport Police
 Mrs                                   s. O'BRIEN             FSA    (Aston Villa)
 „r                                        DIXON              FSA   {Charlton Athletic)
  r                                    M* KAHN                FSA    (Tottenham Hotspur)
 Mr                                    B. RPTTWPim.L          FSA         {Manchester United)
      '                                          BRICKWOOD    T020    (Secretary)

 1-   Minutes of the Previous Meeting (27.10.88)

          An^afflenctaent^£g^f
                             ade to item 3-                       Delete the name of ’Mr SPURREL’ and
          The minutes were then accepted.

2.    Matters Arising

          i)         School Seminars

                      The p r o j e c t is ongoing. It is hoped that the FSA will update
                      the Committee at a future meetings

                      Police Communications with Supporters

                      This matter was rais«u a t the meeting of senior officers with
                      |qeiir% POnSf>ilit^ f°r P0110^    London Football Grounds, on
                      15.11.00. The need to try to maintain good communications with
                      supporters at football grounds has been^eiterated.

       ii±)          FSA Members ObservingLPolicing Operations at Football Matches

                      J   J    a^ ? edw     Chief Inspector HOSKINS would liaise
                      directly with Mrs O'BRIEN on this matter in order to try to
                      arrant a .uttable date.                                       v              ®      *°
3*    Policing Methods - Recent Complainf-a
      M m a H tD lD T m T          J    m f. .                        _   .
       .       v                s»axa u w roA         were concerned by recent letters rer*-,-*™**
      S E £ 2 “ " rhic,h                                             « a w es a v i ^ r b y^    evi 0s :
       fficers employed on duty at football matches. A number of i n d i v i d u a l
      cases were then cited at grounds throughout the c o u n t r y where it seemed
      Accent people had been the victim of unnecessary p T u ^ t i o n                                   S
      S T £                 £          ttot hS 1,88 W ib U *°                     00 tollviaual c ^     bS
      said that the person concerned may have been seen to be misbehaving
      :                S- e                                                      * * * £   & 5 1 S S &
      office, have to be i le                                                 ««om         SLITS
                                                     h”   *■“ r m * to nake a f o E M i co”»iai«      *“ «•>
                                                               2
                    1? at 111 his experience Policing levels and methods of
     policing do not seem to differ for <5i                        *                                                        ot
     regardless of the number of supporters and their     d o ^ S m -iSuP?orf®rs
     gained from previous experiences. Mr TEMPORAL answeredt h a ^ e a c h ^ I ^ h

          i nit<i»            s    ™ f , , &,      ' ®t s ' s ?      r ^p»*ticuXftr
                                                                            S E                  St*cli i s
                                                                                               ou&            worked ©tit'
                                  wn»uAUuuH          between       tne    Clubs          and   Hi®            JTZ ...
     authorities.   It was added that the                                            ^                ^ v a n t police
     manpower as it is not economic.                                                                deploy unnecessary

     C rite ria fo r                  E,lections   and A rrests a t      F o o tb a ll


    £   ™ t S F , 2L f 3 £ f 2
    ground. They are worried that diff#»*-fno- ».«.         J? or e3©cted at a
    behaviour at different grounds can lead t o ^ i S S E f ^    standards of
    does not enhance the r ^ S m                               “ X *                                  “ W       f*?*
    national guidelines for policing f o o t b a l l ~ m « ^ h u ^ p-Llea fenac
    the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPm                      issued by
    being at the discretion of each i n d i v i d u a l i n t e r p r e t a t i o n
                                                                                               Jl T
    formulate a strategy given the unions          ^        Commander who must
    o f th e ir particular^ground                                        if                                     poll<:lnS
    available, local tactics and naAt                                                              location, manpower
   Therefore. I t would b . i l S a t f ^ s - i b t f                                              * 5 t "°        «<=-
   common standard fo r acceptable S a v io u r .                                                         “   to h“ve a
         V?T T A » T r*   .   t   «   4   . «



                                          C U e      m S |r a ^ s ^ “ db? aVt 0Ur. thre3h0l,i3 * « “ “
   nay be welcomed by some fans and asencies^lt”' ^ * ’ , Although ‘M s
   resentment by others and *»,. . aS®n?xes it may be viewed with
   TEMPORAL explained that ground S S S U t S E d^ffS’’^ ™ ?, balance- Mr
   their definition of acceptable S l i o „ r      “ fr°” °lub t0 club In

  It was asked by Mrs O ’BRIEN if names were taten of
  a ground. In answer Mr EVANS s      a      t     t     h    S    ?    «*»
  date, time and offence commif-d                       br“ f ^^ail* of day,
  Club.                                ‘“'“ 8 vwwu.j,*» are available to the

  Stewards & Liaison with Politv»


 greater l i a i s S ^ t w e e n ^ l i c e ^ d ^ t e Pr? bl®m to the FSA wh° believe
 that polio, encouragegreateru^of*tew;Nrds1$ T                                                 ™      £ f i * S“ d
 m particular) training for stewarL .cT I? •        S°me Clubs ^ e l s e a
 that the quality of stewards was den* ^ 4- nS0ing.  Mr TEMPORAL added
 KAHN said that it                                                                  ^      partioul" «>*■              Mr
 stewards but,as they are not as M . M * J                                                t        J                   °f
 problems m a y b e created.                                   ^ 7 1 --- '*—             *°            uiucers,iaore
using t h e ^ a m e ^ S S d s
expertise.                                                          ’theT may
                                                                    tney  S , " acquire
                                                                                 “ T    “a *“degree
                                                                                               d that of
                                                                                                       b*

ID Cards


tX                                     onE?in& campaign against theO n ^ m a ^ - ______ -
f S t b S f ^ S f t S T ’S f &                       w i ^ t o ^ n S L ^ f 0"                            -    -ter‘Ua
W i ll b e p e t i t i o n i n g s u p p o r t e r s a t t h e f o l l o w i n g g ^ e s T ^                  m ea b ers
                                                                   3
        M i l l w a l l v N orw ich C i t y                                    2 2 .1 .8 9
        L e y to n O r ie n t v Rotherham U n ite d                            4 .2 .8 9
        C r y s t a l P a l a c e v B la c k b u r n R overs                   1 1 .2 .8 9
        C h e ls e a v H u ll r s t ”                                          ~>o     o«

        I t i s n o t b e l i e v e d t h a t t h e p e t i t i o n e r s w i l l c a u s e any p r o b le m s t o « «
                                W il1 156 s i t u a t e d w i t h i n t h e g r o u n d s . Mr EVANS s u g g e s t e d




                                j w f s s s r s i s “ ticii,at^                                  that the * * —                   b.
        Reduced Capacity at Wemblev Sfc*ri-t»m                                                                =— -


                                                                                                                    «       87,000,
     the stadium.  The Football A ^ a T i o T h a J r t h ' i T c S                                             "g (S2 «f cX2
     ^locations to the FA Cup finalists by a direct prorcrtion
     S l l ' n S 8^         ^         r9slst® i                    » ' « and feel that more gSrtit f j £
                                         ? , % £ z • £ * - r 11 - * « ~ * « ^ S S o 2 2
     jurisdiction and added that the stadium i L dul'to                                                             11      poJic?
     w«l]thr . 1” u / l ^ ° 3°K-. He belIeved «>lj may -ake the » ta d i* s £ £ * L
    w e l l a s m akin g i t e a s i e r t o s te w a r d and p o l i c e .
    It- is tinfe'sw'               +-u~               s       .,
    r     a     w       s    5 r     J     £      l       «            £   ~       K             »    i   S     ?       “     “
    Chelsea FC                                                 -                    &        .   ?tt <*=*,
                                                                                                      <*K v

                                               *?»»»■                  .**» *a>el«« independent'                        wish to
involving Chelsea £     Mr £ m . £ e S X f ’t t a ^ r T *
appropriate forum to discuss t»ics r S a M n t ,t . meetln/. ls not « »
suggested that the group contact the c m * p *1, ™ j8?*0^     c*ub‘ ®e
Police Station who                    0hi,e! Su5«rlntendent at Fulham
supporters.                            m^LCu.. contact with Chelsea
„                                                                                  AUk-.             i-^-rr
c o L u t e ^ n f o ^ * d “r                                                             sf d sh«                    keep the
t h i s ^ r l m e n t proved successful


Any Other Business

i)              Non League Violence

                I h e FSA a c k n o w le d g e t h e g r o w in g t r e n d o f l a r g e num bers o f
                h o o l i g a n s who f o l l o w a non L eagu e C lub a s w e l l S l e ^ e C lubs
                The p o l i c e a r e aw are o f f.M s ^        aT«          ________ . . . .    ubs*
                to erradicate this problem.                        ...... *“* •i**W9A' «waurce«

                Greece v England 8.2-ftQ

                Mr TEMPORAL a s k e d t h e FSA members t o n o t i f y him                                   o r T020 np
                a n y g r o u p s t r a v e l l i n g t o th-f? f i x t u r e o r t-hJV-i                         .  ° ’ of
                the other Home Counties “                          this ^                        ' fl*tuces
            iii)        West Ham v Aston Villa 18.1.8Q

                       m i a ^ L T ^               to mention the events which resulted in Aston
                                                                     ? Sp,iU over “ • b a rrie r se p a r^ in g
                       fln lfl                                  Plteh>   <They « 0 ■»» encroach onto the
                       Sat         I      n                     game was not interupted).                   Mr EVANS said
                       ^         , l hf .Club                     the     explanation         th a t       the   e le c tric
                                          s.vminji'HL’ixy malfunctioned              resulting -r«                  '      i
                       K            T                                         than " e ^ r t i ^ l h ^
                      M T S aXgreater
                      existed     ,                *.*    • i t w realised
                                                                   T r e ^ aT problem
                                                                               8 C r
                      DotpnUfii         ® f     of tracing was made available and a
                                 •  rff51”* *** " T O ‘« S' The
                     -ducang the incident was excellent.
                                                            « * behaviour
                                                                FSA »!«« oftheftLs
                                                                           J?i7
                      lack of segregation in the seating a » 9..                                       highlighted
                      hoped that th^e problem^do » f r £ £ L . r £ “t£ ° ? A: ' *"*
                      match in w h ^ h w*-*-                         "--L "        refccYr for the Semi Final
                      match be «U t l < ^ t 7 _ £ “ ^                         “ ‘^ r U
                                                                                     h .,^             5    yDS g? t X e
                                       r   i s n f t T f t ? with 1,16 ^
                      tic k e ts ^ o f wSchSX    A^ J ^ 1 l% 5^ reThS e OCt - tt df ^
                                                                                    * ’* »                               S9a?
                      sold   to home                 m      d    ^    T                   e tickets were then
                      segregation.                                            US     creating problems   with

   10.    Date of Next Meeting


          ^ N e r i c o t t S ^ d ! t3ke PlaCe °n %UrSday l6th                                         1989 at 7 . 0 0 pm


  &>                       - / U l « 4                                                             Ms. 7.

                                                           >£cteA- A^c^sjV-eili.u/r

(J )     ^O^G/vat-                        ~

                /Oc-.'t-iLnr \             \vdo~- h'/^£}\s-i_jj                ov-i/ii^x^y'- t'’                 |/iq_




                             <2>              (Zj Cio..^
                                          (
                   C lL l-       L J t:   x' b x                  m   C



                             ^C>’ d1 e ^ r o H
                             o



                                                                          ^ 3 a j      ctj^

           8^
                   MEETING OF FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                                  AND THE POLICE
                                NEW SCOTLAND YARD
                       THURSDAY 16TH MARCH 1989 AT 7.00 PM

Present were:

      Chief Inspector              B.   EVANS       T020 (Chairman)
      Inspector                    D.   TEMPORAL    British Transport Police
      Mrs                          S.   O ’BRIEN    FSA (Aston Villa)
      Ms                           T.   M0RLEY      FSA (Bradford City)
      Mr                           B.   SPURRELL    FSA (Manchester United)
      Mr                           D.   BL0YCE      FSA (Liverpool)
      Mr                           D.   BRICKW00D   T020 (Secretary)


1.     Minutes of the previous meeting (19.1.89)

      The minutes were accepted.

2.    Matters Arising

       (i)      Policing Methods - Recent Complaints
                                                      X
                There was no update on this matter.

       (ii)     Stewards and Liaison with Police

                Two video tapes on the subject of stewarding produced by the
                Greater Manchester Police, have been received by this Branch.
                The tapes have yet to be viewed. A copy will be given to each
                of the officers who have the overall responsibility for
                policing London football grounds.

      (iii)     ID Cards

                The FSA campaign against ID Cards is ongoing.    Problems are
                being encountered as there are not enough FSA members willing
                to collect signatures at matches.

      (iv)      Reduced Capacity at Wembley Stadium

                Mr EVANS stated that the proposed changes to the design of
                turnstiles at Wembley have not yet been effected.      He added
                that the saleable capacity of the stadium for forthcoming major
                fixtures is as follows:

                           80.000 - Littlewoods Cup Final - 9-^-89
         x                 82,000 - F.A. Cup Final - 20.5.89
                           71.000 - Any other fixture

                The capacity of the stadium when the alterations have been
                completed is not yet known.
                                     2




    (v)      Chelsea Independent

             The first meeting of the 'Chelsea Independent' Group and Chief
             Inspector SCHUCK from Fulham Police Station will take place on
             3-4.89.

             A degree of friction exists between Chelsea  and the Group
             following the printing of articles in the Group's magazine
             which the club have taken offence.

    '(vi)    West Ham United -v- Aston Villa 18.1-.89

             Mrs O'BRIEN said that a copy of a letter from West Ham United
             was printed in a recent match day programme at Aston Villa,
             apologising to those fans who were unable to watch the match in
             'comfortable conditions'. The explanation given was that West
             Ham had allocated a section of terracing for Aston Villa fans
             based on an estimated number attending, but, in fact, the
             numbers attending exceeded this figure by some way.

    (vii)    FSA Members Observing Policing Operations at Football Matches

             A provisional date of 15.4.89 was set, with Arsenal -v-
             Newcastle United being suggested as a possible match to attend.
             Mr EVANS said he would liaise directly with Mrs O'BRIEN on this
             matter.

    (viii)   Greece -v- England 8.2.89 & Albania -v- England 8.3.89

             The FSA wished to know if any problems were caused by England
             fans at the recent away fixtures shown above. Mr TEMPORAL said
             approximately 100 people travelled to Albania, in addition to
             the FA official party, each of whom would have been screened by
             the FA. A handful of people did seek confrontations with other
             England fans but the incidents were stopped by the organisers
             of the trips before they escalated.   On the whole the FA were
             pleased with the fans' behaviour.

    'You'll Never Walk Alone' Advertising Campaign

    The FSA objected strongly to seeing this advert in a national newspaper
    recently, despite previous assurances made by the police that the
    particular advertising campaign would cease.     Mr EVANS said he was
*   unaware of the background to this problem but he would do some research
    and speak with the Department who are responsible for Metropolitan
    Police Advertising Campaigns.     He will report back at the next
    meeting.
k.       Car Parking near Football Stadia

         Mr SPURRELL was concerned by a recent incident involving a member of
         FSA whose car was removed by police whilst the individual was inside a
         football stadium attending a match (Arsenal -v- West Ham United).    It
         appeared that the police had cleared the street after the individual
         had parked. Signs were not visible to say the street was to be cleared.
         Mr EVANS explained that traffic and parking is regulated and controlled
         near football stadia by powers invested in the Commissioner of Police
         and are known as Commissioners Directions.   The Directions are renewed
         each year— and are formulated given the local geography and unique
         conditions of each ground and are implemented to allow access routes to
         be kept clear in order that traffic and crowds can flow.

     ^   Mr EVANS added that 'no waiting' cones and temporary traffic signs are
         usually in place by the morning of a match.

         Mr SPURRELL said this was the only incident of this type he was aware
         of any may just have been a 'one off'. It was asked if dedicated car
         parking facilities exist at any of the London grounds.        Mr EVANS
         replied he was unaware of any, with the exception of Wembley Stadium.

5•       Officers Travelling Outside Their Own Force Area

         Mrs O ’BRIEN said she was aware of instances where officers from a
         particular force will accompany fans from a club within their force
         area to clubs in other parts of the country. She believed this scheme
         was very successful.    Mr TEMPORAL explained that officers from forces
         other than the BTP do not provide escort duties for fans on the
         transport network.   He said an arrangement does exist whereby officers
         with knowledge of policing a set of supporters will travel to an away
         fixture in order to assist the local force with the identification of
         known troublemakers.   The officers are known as 'spotters'.  This is a
         reciprocal arrangement due to the high costs involved. No formal
         agreement regarding spotters exists.    Mr EVANS confirmed that it was
         not Metropolitan Police policy to send officers to away matches to
         escort football supporters.

         Keeping In Of Away Supporters

         The FSA asked if a common policy exists and, if so, how it is
         formulated, which the police follow when keeping in away supporters. Mr
         TEMPORAL answered no, but explained some of the factors involved which
         go into making a decision to keep back supporters.    He said that if
         several games take place in close        proximity it may be necessaryto
         stagger the supporters leaving each ground in order that each group
         will not clash on the transport system.    Thus a safe passage for all
         supporters and other members of the public using public transport is
         ensured. Mr EVANS added that the location of stations, coach parks and
         the nature of exit points at each, ground are also taken into
         consideration.




                                            *r
                                4




Mr BLOYCE asked if the police have to announce their intention to hold
back supporters. He cited a case at Millwall FC where fans were told
exactly what to do and were told at regular intervals of the current
situation regarding their exit from the ground.     He added that this
stopped the fans from becoming restless and agitated. Mr EVANS thanked
Mr BLOYCE for the comments and said he would bring this matter to the
attention of officers responsible for policing London football grounds
at their next meeting.    Mr SPURRELL said that at Arsenal    physical
structures close to the away supporters exits cause obstructions, thus
meaning a crush will develop, particularly if fans do not know if they
are being kept in. Mr EVANS said he would also raise this at the same
meeting.

Searching of Supporters

Mrs O ’BRIEN asked for a resume of police policy on the searching of
fans at football matches.    Mr EVANS explained that before a police
officer can undertake a search he or she must have reasonable grounds
on which to search the individual concerned.   (Reasonable grounds are
defined" by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 - PACE) . He
explained briefly that a search in the street is limited to the outer
clothing of the suspect and if a further search is required this must
be undertaken out of the public's view i.e. in a police van, inside a
room etc.

When officers perform searching duty at foQtball matches, they do so as
agents of the club and operate under the Ground Regulations which state
that 'articles which may be used as offensive weapons will not be taken
into the Ground' . Any fan who refuses to be searched      will not be
permitted entry. Some clubs, particularly Chelsea, now employ security
officers to undertake searching at turnstiles, usually supervised by a
police officer.   This releases police officers to other duties other
than football.

Mr TEMPORAL said success has been achieved with the use of hand held
metal detectors at turnstiles.    Fans carrying offensive weapons will
often discard them before they reach the point of searching.

The FSA are in agreement with searching at turnstiles whether it be
undertaken physically or with a metal detector. They also appreciate
that not everybody can be searched due to lack of police manpower and
the time this would take.     Mr BLOYCE asked if females have to be
searched by women police officers.     Ms MORLEY added that it seemed
females are not searched as often as males.      Mr TEMPORAL said that
WPC's do search female fans and he added that police are aware that on
some occasions females are used to carry weapons for male spectators.

Contact with Police Officers outside of London

The FSA wished to obtain a list for their own use in advising
Supporters Clubs of police officers who act as contact points for
football clubs outside of London. Mr EVANS said he will speak with the
officer who produces such a list.    He added he had no ojections but
emphasised the need for the FSA to exercise discretion as to the use of
the list.

Two examples of recent police action which diffused potential disorder
were cited by the FSA.    They asked that thanks be forwarded to the
forces concerned.
(i)      Nottingham Forest -v- Queens Park Rangers 18.1.89

         At the conclusion of the match, Mr CLOUGH, the Manager of
         Nottingham Forest, struck fans who ran onto the pitch. Police
         action prevented an escalation of the situation.

(ii)     Oxford United -v- Chelsea 2.1.89

        Action by stewards and police officers prevented serious
        problems when the section of terracing reserved for visiting
        supporters became full, with many still trying to gain access
        to the ground.

Mr EVANS thanked the FSA for the kind remarks and said he would pass on
the comments to the forces concerned (Nottinghamshire and Thames
Valley).

Any Other Business

(i)     -FSA Branch Meetings

        Mrs O'BRIEN invited Mr EVANS to address a forthcoming FSA
        Branch Meeting which take place on the first Thursday of each
        month at the University of London, Malet Street, WC1. A formal
        letter will be sent in due course to Mr EVANS confirming this.


(ii)    Tottenham Hotspur -v- Aston Villa 1.3.89

        It was asked if there was a reason why this fixture played on a
        Wednesday evening, was designated 'all ticket’ for Aston Villa
        supporters, (although a turnstile accepting cash was open on
        the night).   Mr EVANS said he would speak with the officers
        responsible for policing Tottenham and would report back the
        answer at the next meeting.

        Mr BLOYCE asked if fans without tickets who travel to 'all
        ticket' matches are permitted entry to the match. Mr TEMPORAL
        replied that this is a recurring problem and the final decision
        rests with the officer in charge of policing the particular
        match.  He may deem it safer to admit the fans to the ground
        rather than turn them away as they may cause trouble
        elsewhere.

(iii)   Policing of Euston Complex

        Euston Complex usually has       several sets of supporters
        travelling through it on a given Saturday. Mr BLOYCE asked how
        many officers would police Euston Station on a Saturday.     Mr
        TEMPORAL said the BTP police football supporters at Euston from
        around 7-00 am on a Saturday to sometimes the early hours of
        Sunday morning.
(iv)    Season so Far

        In general the season so far has been relatively quiet.     The
        BTP have experience a trend of bad behaviour by small groups of
        fans from clubs in the north of England, particularly at local
        derbies.   Mr TEMPORAL then cited a few examples of this
        including an incident involving fans of Liverpool and Tranmere
        United.

Date of Next Meeting

The next meeting will take place on Wednesday 17 th May 1989 at 7 .00 pm
at New Scotland Yard.
                           THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
 v       i
                                       London Branch
                                                                    POLICE COMMITTEE
                        (jro




CRYSTAL PALACE                    v      BIRMINGHAM CITY                  13 May 1 9 8 9 - R e p o r t o n e v e n t s

             C o n t e x t o f m a tch
                      L a s t m atch o f s e a s o n f o r b o t h t e a m s .                 For P a la c e , i t       c o u ld have
m ean t t h e d i f f e r e n c e b e t w e e n a u t o m a t i c p r o m o t i o n t o D i v i s i o n One a n d a
p l a y - o f f p l a c e : a c o m b i n a t i o n o f a w in               f o r P a la c e and d e f e a t           f o r M a n c h e s te r
C i t y a t B r a d f o r d , w i t h a n a g g r e g a t e m a r g in o f s i x                 g o a l s o r m o re ,       w o u ld mean
p r o m o tio n f o r P a la c e a t C i t y ' s              exp en se.          F o r B ir m in g h a m , t h e i r r e l e g a t i o n
s e a le d w eeks b e fo r e ,              n o t h in g w as a t     sta k e;       how ever,       t h e i r s u p p o r t e r s h ad
p la n n e d t o        'c e le b r a te '      th e o c c a s io n w ith         th e    'B ir m in g h a m C i t y R e l e g a t i o n
P a r ty ', a n d many o f th em cam e t o L on d on                         in     f a n c y d r e s s . T h is        h ad b e e n
w e ll p u b lic is e d           i n B ir m in g h a m .


             C h r o n o lo g y
1 .0 0       - 2 .0 0 p m : N orw ood J u n c t i o n .            Many p u b s e n f o r c i n g d r e s s r u l e s ,          th erefo re
                      e x c l u d i n g B ir m in g h a m     (" B lu e s" )      fa n s in     fa n cy d r e s s.        H ow ever,
                      o t h e r p u b s a l l o w e d th em i n w i t h o u t p r o b l e m s , a n d i n many p u b s
                      P a l a c e a n d B l u e s f a n s m ix e d h a p p i l y .
2 .1 5 - 2 .3 0 :          Away s u p p o r t e r s *       e n c l o s u r e a t S e l h u r s t P a r k ( c o r n e r o f H o lm e s -
                      d a l e E n d) s a i d       to    be lo o k in g      f u ll at th is          sta g e .
2 .4 -5 : A r r i v i n g a t S e l h u r s t P a r k , a n o t a b n o r m a l num ber o f p e o p l e a t                        th e
                      c o r n e r o f H o lm e s d a le Road a n d P a r k R oad f o r t h e t im e o f d a y .
                      P le a s a n t a tm o sp h ere a s B lu e s f a n s i n                f a n c y d r e s s w a lk e d i n        o p p o site
                      d ir e c t io n to P a la c e         fa n s w it h o u t p r o b le m s .
3 .0 0 :      X ic k -o ff.           F a n c y d r e s s an d b a l l o o n s r e l e a s e d      by P a la c e fa n s c o n tr ib u te d
                      to    'th e b e s t a tm o sp h ere a t P a la c e                 f o r a l o n g tim e * .        At t h i s t im e
                      3 ,1 1 6 s u p p o r t e r s w ere i n th e aw ay e n c l o s u r e .                  (T h is p a r t o f th e
                      ground h o ld s 5 * 0 0 0 but h a s a s a f e t y                    c e r tific a te       o n ly f o r 3 , 5 0 0 ) .
3 . 0 5 • B lu e s fa n c lim b s t o                t o p o f f l o o d l i g h t p y l o n a n d down a g a i n - n o t
                      a rrested .           At around t h i s         t i m e t h e g a t e s o n t h e H o lm e s d a le e n c l o ­
                      su re a re c lo s e d ;           p o lic e a d v ise       la te c o m in g B lu e s fa n s to           'g e t in
                      down a t t h e b o t t o m ' o f P a r k R o a d , e n t e r i n g a t t h e W h it e h o r s e Lane
                      end o f th e g r o u n d .            Some do s o ,          o t h e r s c l i m b g a t e s t o H o lm e s d a le
                      e n c l o s u r e a n d o p e n them fro m i n s i d e .
3 .1 0 :      By t h i s       t im e s k i r m i s h e s v i s i b l e    in     th e s e a ts a t      th e fa r r ig h t o f th e
                     A r t h u r W ait s t a n d , w h e r e t h e tw o s e t s o f f a n s a r e s e p a r a t e d b y a
                      n arrow n o -m a n ’ s l a n d .           S e a t s h a d a p p a r e n t l y b e e n r e m o v e d fro m
            THE FOOTBALL SU PPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                        London Branch
        w




      th e l a t t e r ,    m a k in g m o b i l i t y        e a s i e r b e t w e e n t h e tw o s e t s o f f a n s .
      I n v ie w o f t h i s ,         th e a r e a        seem s t o have b een u n d e r -ste w a r d e d .
P a la c e ta k e le a d .
      C e le b r a to r y p it c h       in v a s io n      by a h a n d fu l o f P a la c e fa n s f o llo w e d
      by la r g e - s c a le        in v a s io n    fr o m c o r n e r o f aw ay e n c l o s u r e .            B efo re
      p la y can resu m e,             B lu e s f a n s c l o s e         on P a la c e     f a n s i n A r th u r W ait
      s ta n d and f i g h t i n g        b e g in s.
      P itc h     in v a d e r s app ear to            in c lu d e     som e e n t e r i n g p i t c h a r e a t o
      a v o id a d e v e lo p in g cru sh a t th e                   fe n c e s in     t h e aw ay e n d , c a u s e d
      l e s s by o v e r c r o w d in g th a n b y t h o s e a t t e m p t in g t o in v a d e th e
      p itc h .      S e v e r a l p e o p le in j u r e d i n th e c r u s h .
      B irm in g h a m C i t y p l a y e r s ,         V in c e O verson and Ia n A t k in s ,                 come t o
      corn er o f p itc h            in a tte m p t         t o c a lm s i t u a t i o n .       One o f them may
      have been a s s a u lt e d :           a man i n a y e l l o w             s tr ip     w as s e e n o n t h e
      ground, but u n c le a r in                   th e    g e n e r a l c o n f u s i o n w h e t h e r t h i s w as a
      p la y e r or fa n .           A f t e r 1 - 2 m in u te s ,         p la y e r s a re tak en o f f p itc h *
      M ovement o f f a n s i n tw o d i r e c t i o n s o n A r t h u r W ait t e r r a c e :                       many

     m o v in g aw ay fr o m t h e f i g h t i n g ,              a s m a l l e r num ber m o v in g t o w a r d s
      it.       B lu e s f a n s c lim b a d v e r t i s i n g h o a r d in g s t o r e a c h P a la c e f a n s ,
     som e u s e th em a s w e a p o n s t o                 th ro w i n t o     th e crow d.
     In ju red fa n s s tr e tc h e r e d             a w a y fro m a r e a w h e r e c r u s h o c c u r r e d a s
     in v a d e r s c lim b e d       fen ces.
     Some f a n s g e s t u r e d t o o t h e r a r e a s o f g r o u n d ( H o l m e s d a l e home
     ter r a c e )    to    in c ite      o th e r P a la c e        fa n s.     No v i o l e n c e    ensued;
     H o lm e s d a le c h a n t e d      * 0 ff-0 ff-O ff'.
     I n v a s i o n s p r e a d u n t i l m o u n te d p o l i c e a r r i v e d , a t l e a s t             6 / 7 m in u t e s
     a fte r      sta r t   o f d istu r b a n c e .          P o l i c e h o r s e s w e r e o u t s i d e o n H o lm e s­
     d a l e R d /P a r k Rd c o r n e r d e a l i n g w i t h B l u e s f a n s , h a d t o g e t t o
     o p p o s ite c o r n e r o f ground f o r a c c e s s t o                   p itc h .       No d o g s w e r e u s e d
     by p o lic e .
     At a b o u t t h i s      t i m e s t e w a r d s w e r e f o r c e d by B l u e s f a n s t o o p e n t h e
     m a in g a t e a t      th e     c o r n e r o f t h e aw ay e n c l o s u r e t o l e t             m ore i n .
     Many B l u e s f a n s now o n A r t h u r W ait t e r r a c i n g p r e v i o u s l y o c c u p i e d
     e x c l u s i v e l y by P a la c e f a n s .            P o lic e     crea ted       tw o s e g r e g a t e d b l o c k s
     a t r i g h t end o f t e r r a c e ,            each b o rd ered by a l i n e                o f p o lic e .      A rc
     o f p o lic e h o r s e s d isc o u r a g e d            f u r t h e r i n v a s i o n w h i l e t h i s w as
                       THE FOOTBALL SU PPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                                   London Branch
                       w



                  o r g a n ise d .
                  D a v e M ackay,          B ir m in g h a m M a n a g e r , a p p e a l e d     f o r c a lm ,
c 3«40:        M atch r e s u m e s .        P a l a c e g o tw o up w i t h own g o a l i n s i d e a m i n u t e ,
                  W r ig h t c o m p l e t e s h a t - t r i c k .       P a la c e le a d 4 - 0 by 4 .0 0 .             Mood o f
                  B lu e s f a n s r e p o r t e d l y ch a n g ed by tim e o f . t h i r d               g o a l, a lth o u g h
                  fig h tin g        to o k p la c e b etw een fa n s i n p o l i c e               c h a r g e room .      News
                  s p r e a d s t h a t M a n c h e ste r C it y a r e         lo sin g      1 -0 a t h a l f tim e .
4 .1 5 :   H a lf tim e ,         P a la c e le a d 4 - 0 .       No f u r t h e r    in c id e n ts v is ib le .
4 .3 0 :   Second h a l f b e g in s .            Away s u p p o r t e r s v o c a l an d w a v in g f l a g s ,            e s p e c ia lly
                  i n A r t h u r W ait s t a n d ,          b u t no m o r e .
4 .4 5 :   News s p r e a d s t h a t M a n c h e s t e r C i t y h a v e e q u a l i s e d a t            B r a d fo r d t o      c lin c h
                  p r o m o tio n .       Home f a n s now s u b d u e d ,           te n s io n n o tic e a b ly r e la x e d .
5 .0 0 ;   B ir m in g h a m p u l l b a c k t o 4 - 1 .
                  D u r in g l a s t      t e n m in u te s ,    m o u n ted p o l i c e r e t u r n ,     s ta tio n e d     in    front
                  o f n o - m a n ' s - l a n d o n A r t h u r W a it t e r r a c e , w h e r e B l u e s f a n s a r e lo u d
                  but not th r e a te n in g .              A knot o f fa n s in             th e e n c lo s u r e ,     s ta n d in g
                 a t t h e b a s e o f t-he f l o o d l i g h t p y l o n ,             a re g e s tu r in g p r o v o c a tiv e ly
                  t o home f a n s .
                  H o lm e s d a le t e r r a c e     t h i n s o u t a s home f a n s l e a v e e a r l y t o a v o i d
                 p o t e n t ia l tr o u b le .
                 Home f a n s o n A r t h u r W a it t e r r a c e a s s e m b l e o n t o u c h l i n e i n r e a d i ­
                 n e ss fo r f in a l w h is tle              and    'tr a d itio n a l*        en d -o f-se a so n p itc h
                 in v a s io n .        S tew a rd s a p p ea r c o n te n t to          c o n t a i n them        on t o u c h lin e .
                 For l a s t        tw o m i n u t e s ,    p la y i s   c o n c e n tr a te d on tu n n e l s id e          of
                 p itc h ,       a s th o u g h r e f e r e e h a s a d v i s e d p l a y e r s t o k e e p aw ay from
                 fa r s id e .
5 .1 5 :   M atch e n d s w i t h p i t c h         i n v a s i o n b y f a n s fro m A r t h u r W a it, th o u g h t h i s
                 is        s m a lle r th a n i n p r e v io u s s e a s o n s .
                 F a n s l e a v i n g H o lm e s d a le End f o r s t a t i o n             file     p a s t B irm in gh am
                 c o a c h e s an d f a n s w i t h o u t i n c i d e n t .           At S e l h u r s t s t a t i o n    fa n s
                 a sse m b le on o p p o s it e p la tfo r m s w ith o u t s i g n i f i c a n t c o n f r o n t a t io n .


N .B .     P o lic e   s e e m e d u n a w a r e o f t h e n u m b ers o f B irm in gh am s u p p o r t e r s t r a v e l ­
                 lin g        t o L o n d o n , a l t h o u g h W est M id la n d s P o l i c e h ad t o l d             th em t o
                 e x p e c t 3 » 0 0 0 o r m o r e , a n d b o t h c l u b s a n d home s u p p o r t e r s w e r e
                 a w a r e o f t h e .' p a r t y *        (w h ic h w as r e f e r r e d t o       i n t h e m atch p r o g r a m m e ).
                      THE FOOTBALL SU PPO RTERS ASSOCIATION
                                  London Branch




                 la   th e c o n t e x t o f H ills b o r o u g h         it   was u n d e r s ta n d a b le t h a t c a u tio n
                 s h o u l d h a v e b e e n e x e r c i s e d i n j u d g in g : when; t h e c r o w d o n t h e
                 H o lm e s d a le a w a y s e c t i o n h a d r e a c h e d c a p a c i t y ! a p p a r e n t l y 3 1 1 6
                 w ere i n        t h e 3 5 0 0 - c a p a c i t y e n c l o s u r e w h en t h e g a t e s w e r e c l o s e d . .
                 P o lic e    c o n t in g e n c y p l a n s h a d a p p a r e n tly - in v o lv e d h o u s in g o v e r s p i l l
               o n t h e A r t h u r W a it t e r r a c e ;        b u t t h i s had a l r e a d y b e e n e n t i r e l y
                 o c c u p ie d    by P a la c e     su p p o rters.


                 FSA POLICE COMMITTEE
                 1 7 May 1 9 8 9


I n fo r m a tio n c o l l e c t e d    fr o m :
D a v e C s o n d o r — C h a ir m a n , L o n d o n B l u e s S u p p o r t e r s C lu b
T r a c e y M i t c h e l l — S e c r e t a r y , L .B .S - C «-
S t e v e B eau ch am p e - FSA W e st M id la n d s B r a n c h
B a r r y Wood — FSA W e st M id la n d s B r a n c h
A d r ia n Brown — FSA L on d on B r a n c h
A ndrew Brown — BCFC s u p p o r t e r
J o h n E l l i s — FSA L o n d o n B r a n c h
Ron N o a d e s — C h a ir m a n , C r y s t a l P a l a c e FC
                                                                      WMfinrfl1 rfffirffflirtft




•*'          *




                                        UHiTE HORSE LAk/F

                                               'SAWSBvWs Ewa
                                                   Sc o o




                                                               o ►»




                                                                      O




                              l




11 0 0        o
          JSOO           kn*j£~ <^c*\ faU cz    $$0Q

—■      / * f. r. '/-■
3     ~ c ' ' '
     MINUTES OF MEETING ON 24TH APRIL 1988 FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION AND
                       POLICE, AT NEW SCOTLAND YARD, 7 . 0 0 PM


PERSONS PRESENT

       S u p e r in t e n d e n t MARTIN      TO. 20                   Chairman
       P .C . DOUGLAS                         B r i t i s h T ransport P o lic e
       M iss S . WELLS                        F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
       Mr D. RAKE                             F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
       Mr J . ELLIS                           F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n
       Mr B . O'KEEFE                         F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n



1.     ENGLAND VERSUS HOLLAND MATCH

       S i t u a t i o n r e g a r d in g a l l t i c k e t m a tc h e s d i s c u s s e d . G en er a l agreem en t o f
       t h e a d v a n ta g e s o f a l l t i c k e t m a tc h e s , b u t t h e n eed f o r p u b l i c i t y p r i o r t o
       t h e m atch was e m p h a s is e d . The F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n i n d i c a t e d
       t h a t t h e t o u t s a t Wembley c a u s e d p r o b le m s , and w ondered p o l i c e a c t i o n
       c o u ld be u n d erta k en t o im prove i t .               S i t u a t i o n t o be lo o k i n and r e p o r te d
       back.

2.     MILLWALL IN THE FIRST DIVISION

       I t i s g e n e r a l l y e x p e c te d t h a t t h e crow ds w ould i n c r e a s e . Some
       d i f f i c u l t i e s have been e x p e r ie n c e d i n t h e p a s t by members o f t h e F o o t b a l l
       S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n a t t h e g r o u n d . T w o fo ld , f i r s t t h a t t h e t i c k e t s
       i s s u e d by M i l l w a l l do n o t have any t e a r o f f p o r t i o n t o p ro v e who s h o u ld be
       i n what s e a t b e c a u s e th e w h o le t i c k e t i s c o l l e c t e d a t t h e e n t r a n c e , and
       s e c o n d l y t h a t t h e s e a t i n g d i r e c t i o n s i g n s w i t h i n t h e ground a r e v e r y poor
       o r non e x i s t e n t . They handed i n a l e a f l e t i s s u e d a t C r y s t a l P a l a c e , w hich
       g a v e a d v i c e t o v i s i t i n g f a n s . S i t u a t i o n r e g a r d in g M i l l w a l l t i c k e t s and
       s i g n s w ould be lo o k i n t o and r e p o r t e d b a c k .

3.    STEWARDING AT THE CUP FINAL

       The F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n have i n d i c a t e d t h a t t h e Wembley
       a u t h o r i t i e s have a sk e d t h a t t h e A s s o c i a t i o n p r o v id e a number o f p e r s o n s t o
       a c t a s c h i e f s te w a r d s a t t h e F o o t b a l l Cup F i n a l - L iv e r p o o l v s W imbledon.
       The f o r c e p o l i c y r e g a r d in g s e l f p o l i c i n g was e x p l a in e d and t h e q u a l i t i e s
       o f s te w a r d s and c h i e f ste w a r d s d i s c u s s e d . S h o u ld t h e F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s
       A s s o c i a t i o n w ish t o ta k e up t h i s o f f e r and p o s s i b l y e x t e n d i t t o o t h e r
       f o o t b a l l c l u b s . An o f f e r was made t h a t some form o f g u id a n c e r e g a r d in g
       t h e s u p e r v i s i o n o f s te w a r d in g on a l i m i t e d b a s i s c o u ld be a r r a n g e d by
       TO.20 i n t h e f u t u r e . D e t a i l s o f w hich w ould n e e d t o be e s t a b l i s h e d n e a r e r
       t h e t i m e . The F o o t b a l l S u p p o r te r s A s s o c i a t i o n s a i d t h a t t h e y w ould ta k e
       t h i s back t o t h e i r com m ittee and d i s c u s s iT~and w ould be r a i s e d a t th e
       n e x t m e e t in g .

4.    PALACE VERSUS VILLA MATCH

       A c o n f r o n t a t i o n betw een s e t s o f f a n s was d e t a i l e d by t h o s e p r e s e n t and a
       p o s s i b l e b rea ch o f s e c u r i t y a t one end o f C r y s t a l P a l a c e ground was
       d e t a i l e d . C ir c u m sta n c e s e x p la in e d t o s a t i s f a c t i o n o f t h o s e p r e s e n t .
5.   QPR VERSUS WEST HAM MATCH

     C ir c u m sta n c e s s u r r o u n d in g p i t c h i n c u r s i o n g i v e n by S u p e r in t e n d e n t MARTIN.

6.   EUROPEAN CHAMPIONSHIPS

     S u p e r in te n d e n t MARTIN e x p l a in e d th e a r r a n g e m e n ts f o r European
     C ham pionship. P o s s i b i l i t y o f I r i s h s u p p o r t e r s d i s c u s s e d .

7.   BANK HOLIDAY MATCHES TIMES

     H is t o r y o f su ch d e c i s i o n s d e s c r i b e d and c u r r e n t s i t u a t i o n r e g a r d in g
     c o n s u l t a t i o n w it h c l u b s e x p l a i n e d .

8.   SEARCHING OF AWAY SUPPORTERS

     The r e a s o n s f o r s e a r c h i n g o f away s u p p o r t e r s d i s c u s s e d t o t h e s a t i s f a c t i o n
     o f th o se p r e s e n t.

9.   NEXT MEETING

     To be h e ld on 7 t h J u l y 1988 a t 7 .0 0 pm.
                MEETING OF THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                                AND THE POLICE
                               NEW SCOTLAND YARD
                      WEDNESDAY 17TH MAY 1989 AT 7.00 PM

Present:

       Chief Inspector B. EVANS        -         T020 (Chairman)
       PC              A. DOUGLAS      -
                                                 British Transport Police
       Mrs             S. O’BRIEN      -         FSA (Aston Villa)
       Mr              S. DIXON        -         FSA (Charlton Athletic)
       Mr              M. KAHN         -         FSA (Tottenham Hotspur)
       Mr              B. SPURRELL     -
                                                 FSA (Manchester United)
       Mr              D. BRICKW00D    -         T020 (Secretary)

1.     Minutes of the Previous Meeting (16.3.89)
       The minutes were accepted.
2.     Matters Arising .
                                                   f

(i)    Contact with Police Officers Outside of London

       A list of Football Liaison Officers for the 1989/90 season will be
       compiled shortly; a copy will be forwarded to the FSA.
(ii)    'You*11 Never Walk Alone* Advertising Campaign

       Mr EVANS explained that he had been given assurances that this
       advertisement will not be used again from the Head of the Metropolitan
       Police Public Affairs Department. The external agency which ran the
       campaign for the Met have been forwarded a letter to the same effect.
(iii) FSA Members Observing Policing Operations at Football Matches
       An unforseen commitment, arranged at short notice, prevented Mr EVANS
       from attending on the day arranged, for which he apologised.        A
       suitable date early next season will be arranged in due course.
3•     Crystal Palace -v- Birmingham City 13.5.89

       Mr SPURRELL distributed copies of a report by the FSA Police Committee
       on the disorder which occurred at the above match. (A copy of the
       report is attached at Appendix A). The content of the report and the
       disorder surrounding the game were discussed and the following comments
       made.
 The FSA w ere w o r r ie d t h a t i t seem ed t h e p o l i c e w ere n o t g e a r e d t o
 p o l i c e t h e l a r g e number o f Birmingham f a n s a t t h e m atch , e s p e c i a l l y a s
 f o o t b a l l f a n s knew a s many a s 6 ,0 0 0 may t r a v e l .                     Mr EVANS and Mr
 DOUGLAS b o th e x p la in e d t h e s o u r c e s from w h ich in f o r m a t io n r e g a r d in g
 t h i s m atch w ere g a in e d . B oth t h e M e t r o p o lit a n and W est M id land s P o l i c e
 a n t i c i p a t e d a maximum o f 3 t 500 f a n s t o t r a v e l and n e c e s s a r y r e s o u r c e s
 w ere d e p lo y e d a c c o r d in g l y . T h is e s t i m a t e was b a s e d on h i s t o r i c a l d a t a ,
 t i c k e t s a l e s from t h e c l u b , r e le v a n c e a t t a c h e d t o t h e f i x t u r e and
 i n t e l l i g e n c e g a in e d from o t h e r s o u r c e s . Mr EVANS e x p l a in e d t h a t p o l i c e
 m ust a c h i e v e a b a la n c e when d e p lo y in g manpower t o p o l i c e a crowd
 a d e q u a t e ly .    Under m anning may r e s u l t i n d i s o r d e r and i n j u r i e s t o b o th
 o f f i c e r s and members o f t h e p u b l i c , w h er e a s o v e r m anning i s c o s t l y and
 w i l l r e s u l t i n d i s r u p t i o n t o p o l i c i n g i n o t h e r a r e a s o f t h e com m unity.
 I t was a g r e e d t h a t t h e FSA a r e i n a p o s i t i o n t o p r o v id e a v a lu a b le
 a d d i t i o n a l s e r v i c e t o p o l i c e r e g a r d in g t h e number o f f a n s t r a v e l l i n g t o
 m a tc h e s .      W ith e f f e c t from n e x t s e a s o n t h e p o l i c e w i l l u t i l i s e th e FSA
 a s a s o u r c e o f in f o r m a t io n .

 One FSA member w i l l b e a p p o in te d t o a c t a s l i a i s o n t o t h e P o l i c e .

Mr DIXON rem arked t h a t i t seem ed t h a t d i f f e r e n t p o l i c i n g i n i t i a t i v e s
a r e a d o p te d a t S e l h u r s t P ark d e p e n d e n t on w h ich o f t h e two team s a r e
p l a y i n g a t home.            A t C r y s t a l P a l a c e m a tc h e s , v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s a r e
h o u se d on t h e s i d e o f t h e t h r e e s e c t i o n t e r r a c e n e a r e s t th e m ost
v o c i f e r o u s home s u p p o r t e r s who s i t i n t h e A rth u r W aite S ta n d .                    S e a te d
v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s a r e l o c a t e d d i r e c t l y b e h in d t h e v o c i f e r o u s group
th u s c r e a t i n g a c o n f r o n t a t io n - s i t u a t i o n ' :      In c o n t r a s t t o t h i s , a t
C h a r lto n home m a tc h e s, v i s i t i n g s t a n d in g s u p p o r t e r s a r e p la c e d i n a
c e n t r e p en f u r t h e r away from t h e A r th u r W aite S ta n d , t h e r e f o r e r e d u c in g
th e r is k o f c o n fr o n ta tio n .            Mr EVANS ack n ow led ged t h i s a s an a p p a ren t
v a l i d p o i n t and w ould d i s c u s s i t w it h s e n i o r o f f i c e r s a t N orbury.

I n r e s p o n s e t o d i r e c t q u e s t i o n s Mr EVANS s a i d h e assum ed t h a t t h e CCTV
was i n o p e r a t i o n on t h e d a y , and t h a t a t o t a l o f 26 f a n s w ere a r r e s t e d
a t o r in th e v i c i n i t y o f th e ground.

I t was a g r e e d by e v e r y o n e p r e s e n t t h a t t h e               p o lic e    resp on se      to    th e
d i s o r d e r by Birmingham f a n s was e x c e l l e n t .

Mr EVANS th an k ed t h e FSA f o r t h e i r i n t e r e s t and c o n c e r n and s t a t e d he
w ould d i s c u s s t h e comments made by t h e FSA, and p a s s a cop y o f t h e i r
r e p o r t t o C h ie f S u p e r in t e n d e n t HUBBARD a t N orbury.

S e a r c h in g o f S u p p o r te r s e n t e r i n g Q ueens P ark R an gers F .C .

The FSA r e c o g n is e and w elcom e t h e s e a r c h i n g o f s p e c t a t o r s a t f o o t b a l l
g rou n d s a s n e c e s s a r y t o e n s u r e t h e s a f e t y o f s u p p o r t e r s . However, th e y
h a v e b e e n c o n c e r n e d by s e v e r a l in d e p e n d e n t c o m p la in t s r e c e i v e d from
t h e i r members o f t h e a g g r e s s i v e a t t i t u d e and a c t i o n s o f o f f i c e r s
p e r fo r m in g s e a r c h e s a t Q ueens Park R an gers F .C .

Exam ples w ere c i t e d o f o f f i c e r s p e r fo r m in g s e a r c h e s o f i n n e r c l o t h i n g
and w h ere more th an on e o f f i c e r c o n d u c te d a s e a r c h o f an i n d i v id u a l a t
one t im e . Mr EVANS r e p l i e d t h a t any p e r s o n a g g r ie v e d by t h e a c t i o n s o f
p o lic e      o ffic e r s     c o u ld p u r su e a     c o m p la in t       th r o u g h th e r e le v a n t
a u t h o r i t i e s . He added t h a t h e w ou ld p a s s t h e i r comments on t o th e
s e n i o r o f f i c e r s a t S h ep h erd s Bush P o l i c e S t a t i o n .
 Mr DIXON a sk e d i f t h e r e was a p o l i c e p o l i c y on t h e number o f t im e s a
 p e r s o n may b e s e a r c h e d e n t e r i n g a f o o t b a l l g r o u n d . Mr EVANS was n o t
 aw are o f s u c h a p o l i c y b u t s t a t e d t h a t i t was p o s s i b l e f o r an
 i n d i v i d u a l t o b e s e a r c h e d more th an o n c e .     He added t h a t o f f i c e r s h ave
 t o b e s e l e c t i v e a s t o whom th e y s e a r c h a s i t « w ou ld b e manpower
 i n t e n s i v e and tim e con su m in g t o c o n d u c t a s e a r c h o f e v e r y b o d y e n t e r i n g
 a m atch.

 Car P a r k in g a t S e l h u r s t P ark

Due t o t h e ground s h a r in g schem e i n o p e r a t i o n a t Se l h u r s t Park (b etw een
C r y s t a l P a la c e FC and C h a r lto n A t h l e t i c FC) u n iq u e p ro b lem s e x i s t w ith
r e g a r d t o c a r p a r k in g i n t h e v i c i n i t y o f t h e g r o u n d .    An exam p le o f
t h i s a r o s e r e c e n t l y when an FSA member p a r k e d h e r c a r n e a r t h e ground
e a r l y on a S a tu r d a y m orn ing i n o r d e r t o b o a rd a c o a c h t o a t t e n d a
C r y s t a l P a la c e away f i x t u r e .       On h e r r e t u r n i n t h e e v e n in g s h e
d i s c o v e r e d t h e c a r had b e e n moved. On s p e a k in g t o t h e l o c a l p o l i c e sh e
was in fo r m e d t h a t t h e c a r had b e e n rem oved t o a n e a r b y r o a d .           At th e
tim e o f p a r k in g , no s i g n s o r r e s t r i c t i o n s w ere i n f o r c e .

Mr EVANS e x p l a in e d t h a t a c c e s s r o u t e s        t o t h e grou n d m ust be k e p t c l e a r
f o r r e a s o n s o f p u b l i c s a f e t y , and             t h e r e f o r e t h e rem oval o f some
v e h i c l e s may b e n e c e s s a r y .  He added              t h a t by m ovin g t h e v e h i c l e s a s
o p p o sed t o to w in g i t t o a p o l i c e pound             d o e s s a v e t h e d r i v e r from p a y in g
a f in e .

The i n c i d e n t i n v o l v i n g c a r p a r k in g n e a r A r s e n a l Stad iu m d i s c u s s e d a t
t h e p r e v io u s m e e t in g h a s now b e e n r e s o l v e d t o t h e s a t i s f a c t i o n o f t h o s e
in v o lv e d .

The H ills b o r o u g h E n q u iry

For t h e f i r s t tim e s i n c e i t s fo r m a tio n t h e FSA h a v e b e e n nom in ated a s
o n e o f t h e a g e n c ie s t o su b m it e v id e n c e t o t h e enquiry.                    T h is h as
f a c i l i t a t e d t h e n e e d t o su b m it o f f i c i a l B ranch docu m en ts t o a firm o f
S o l i c i t o r s a c t i n g f o r t h e FSA, i n c l u d i n g m in u te s o f p r e v io u s m e e tin g s
o f t h i s C om m ittee.

Any O th er B u s in e s s

E g r e s s p o i n t s a t M i l l w a l l FC

A t t h e r e c e n t M i l l w a l l - v - T ottenham m atch ( 2 9 . 4 . 8 9 ) t h e w h ole of the
I l l d e r t o n Road T e r r a c e was a l l o c a t e d t o v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s . At half
tim e s u p p o r t e r s w ere n o t p e r m it te d t o l e a v e t h e t e r r a c i n g t o use the
t o i l e t f a c i l i t i e s a t t h e r e a r o f t h e t e r r a c e by o f f i c e r s deployed at
th e e x i t g a t e s .         Mr EVANS s a i d he w ould d i s c u s s t h i s w ith the senior
o f f i c e r s c o n c e r n e d and r e p o r t b ack a t t h e n e x t m e e t in g .

D i v i s i o n a l End o f S e a so n F o o t b a l l C o n fe r e n c e s

Mrs O’BRIEN r e q u e s t e d i f             i t w ould b e p o s s i b l e f o r an FSA member to
a t t e n d t h e C o n fe r e n c e s a s    an o b s e r v e r o r e v e n i n a c a p a c i t y to have an
in p u t.     Mr EVANS s a i d t h e          C o n fe r e n c e s a r e o r g a n is e d by t h e Association
o f C h ie f P o l i c e O f f i c e r s     (ACPO) and h e s u g g e s t e d t h e FSA write to the
fo llo w in g p erson

I n s p e c t o r M alcolm HOWELLS, G r e a te r M a n ch ester P o l i c e , PO Box 22                       (S.
W est PDO), C h e s t e r H ou se, B o y er S t r e e t , M a n ch ester Ml6 ORE.
                                                             4



 (iii)    Ticket Touts

          The FSA h a v e made r e g u la r c o m p la in t s r e g a r d in g t i c k e t t o u t s , t h e y f e e l
          t h a t t o u t s may become t h e t a r g e t f o r v i o l e n c e a t t h e FA Cup F i n a l on
          2 0 . 5 . 8 9 d u e t o t h e p o ig n a n t c ir c u m s ta n c e s s u r r o u n d in g t h e o c c a s i o n . Mr
          EVANS s a i d t h e p o l i c e ack n o w led g e t h e p e r e n n ia l p ro b lem c r e a t e d by
          t o u t s and t h a t t h e p o l i c e o p e r a t i o n w i l l ta k e t h i s i n t o a c c o u n t .

 (iv)     West Ham United FC

         The t e r r a c i n g a t W est Ham r e s e r v e d f o r v i s i t i n g s u p p o r t e r s i s d iv id e d
         i n t o t h r « e s e c t i o n s by f e n c e s w h ich c o n t a in narrow g a t e s t o a llo w fa n s
         t o move b e tw e e n e a c h s e c t i o n .        A t t h e c o n c lu s i o n o f t h e FA Cup 6 th
         Round t i e on 1 8 . 3 .8 9 a g a i n s t N orw ich , a p u b l i c a d d r e s s announcem ent was
         made a s k in g t h e N orw ich f a n s t o move tow ard s t h e r i g h t hand s e c t i o n o f
         te r r a c in g .   As t h e f a n s c o m p lie d w it h t h e r e q u e s t , s e v e r e p r e s s u r e was
         c r e a t e d a t t h e g a t e s a s many f a n s t r i e d t o s q u e e z e t h r o u g h . T h is c o u ld
         have r e s u lt e d in in j u r ie s to fa n s o r even a d i s a s t e r .              Mr EVANS thanked
         t h e FSA f o r r e c o g n i s i n g t h i s p o t e n t i a l p roblem and a g r e e d t o p a s s th e
         comments t o o f f i c e r s r e s p o n s i b l e f o r p o l i c i n g t h e g r o u n d .

(v )     Villa Park

         A t t h e E v e r to n - v - N orw ich FA Cup S e m i- F in a l ( 1 5 . 4 . 8 9 ) , p la y e d a t V i l l a
         P a rk , f a n s who b r o u g h t f l a g s i n t h e s t r e e t s from s o u v e n i r s e l l e r s had
         them c o n f i s c a t e d a s th e y e n t e r e d t h e gro u n d , a s t h e f l a g p o l e s were
         c o n s id e r e d t o b r e a c h t h e ground r u l e s w h ich s t a t e ’ any a r t i c l e s w hich
         can b e u s e d a s an o f f e n s i v e weapon w i l l n o t b e ta k e n i n t o t h e ground'
         T h is may c r e a t e r e se n tm e n t among some f a n s .                   U n f o r t u n a t e ly i t was
         a g r e e d t h a t t h e s a l e and p u r c h a s e o f su c h a r t i c l e s was a m a tte r o u t s id e
         o f p o lic e ju r is d ic tio n .

(vi)     Forthcoming International Matches Involving England

         Mr DOUGLAS a s k e d what l e v e l o f i n t e r e s t had b e e n shown am ongst FSA
         members and o t h e r f a n s to w a rd s E n g la n d ’ s fo r th c o m in g m a tc h e s a g a i n s t
         S c o t la n d (Hampden Park 2 7 . 5 . 8 9 ) and P o la n d (Wembley 3 . 6 . 8 9 ) .            I t was
         a g r e e d t h a t f a r g r e a t e r i n t e r e s t i s b e in g shown f o r t h e P o la n d game
         th a n t h e on e a g a i n s t S c o t la n d .

         Sue O ’BRIEN

         On b e h a l f o f a l l t h e C om m ittee members, p a s t and p r e s e n t , Mr EVANS
         th an k ed Mrs O'BRIEN f o r a l l t h e h e l p , a s s i s t a n c e and a d v i c e t h a t sh e
         had g iv e n t o t h e C om m ittee.     He w ish e d h e r w e l l f o r t h e fo r th c o m in g
         b ir th o f h er c h ild .

8.       DATE OF THE NEXT MEETING

         A d a t e f o r t h e n e x t m e e tin g w i l l be s e t f o l l o w i n g t h e p u b l i c a t i o n o f
         t h e i n t e r im r e p o r t by J u s t i c e T a y lo r on t h e H ills b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r .
REPORT ON 50% MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES
                        m
      f                 m                                   L o n d o n Branch
                                                    157Robinson Road, London SW17 9NS
                                                 Telephone nos: 567 0811/554 8077/543 6597
few




 Dear Sir

 T h e L o n d o n B r a n c h of the F o o t b a l l S u p p o r t e r s As s o c i a t i o n is
 c u r r e n t l y p r o d u c i n g a s u r v e y on the m e m b e r s h i p schemes and a d m i s s i o n
                  *      ^2 ? s l ° ™ d s this season.               I w ould be obliged if y o u
 c o u l d sen d m e - t h e f o l l o w i n g i n f o r m a t i o n : -                  6       I

                        ~ f y ° K r membe^s h i P scheme; costs, areas of the g r o u n d
 set      aside     f o r members, m a j o r p r o b l e m s t h a t h a v e a r i s e n etc.

 2)       Normal     a d m i s s i o n p r i c e s f o r h o m e and awa y fans.

 h o w m u c h ^ e r I>VXCes are i n c c e a s e d f o r p a r t i c u l a r games, a n d    if so, b y



 iLson!.                             PI‘0 8 r a m n e ’ ^     ifthlS    haS *“ « “ «» •!»>• la»t
                                                                  r '



h s r J i 1 ^ 6 J ° . thatlk y o u f o r y o u r help.          Please contact me if you
h a v e a n y e n q u i r i e s r e g a r d i n g this request.

Yours      sincerely



Dave Fleming
Publicity Officer


D a y t i m e no.      0 9 5 9 32222 x 2 5 5 2
H o m e no.            0 3 2 2 4 49792
••


            or
       Registration r
      The implementation and effects of Membership
      Sonemes at Football L ea g ue Clubs, 1 9 8 7 .




     (London^olT F°°tbaU Supporters Association
••
     Contents
      v
      INTRODUCTION


      “ O r i g i n s of the S c h e s s s

      - Tsipleaentation

      - R e a c h i n g the 50X

      - Effects

      - Deterring Hooliganisn?

      - Other Inplications

      - A t t i t u d e s of the clubs


     CONCLUSION




     A p p e n d i x On p.

     Letter from the Football League
     advising clubs on implementation o
     membership schemes.

     Aa& find i x   Two

     Membership Schemes, Admission
     Prices and Programmes.-




     Text:  Mike Tichor
     Printing:  Martin Laoay (01-703 4100)
                                                    — ••          Nevertheless, the League accepted .that 50X was .better, ,;:;
                                                                  fron their point of v i e w ..than ^lOOX..,. and therefore }had ^
                                                                  no option but :to implement' this w atered-dcwn-.version^of;
                                                                  the governnent’s original ;.idea^ i.On ,5th .March,-1987.
                                                                  they wrote- to !the 92 League 'clufcs«(5ee^Appendi::
Introduction                                             t        informing then of the outcome of their meetings-with;
                                                                  ^ g o v e r n m e n t and setting out roughly how the^schemes
This report looks at gone of the effects of the                   s iiuld be implemented-. Jtprovision »was to be^made for
nenbership schenos introduced at Football League clubs
                                                                   those clubs which felt it impractical,,to ,intToduce -a
in the first half of the 1987-88 season, outlines some
of the problens that have ocqured due to their                     50X schene.        They were ,to be permitted to
                                                                   representations to a : ooB»ittee'consisting of the               .
iwplecentation. ir.d tries to assess their success or              League, the football Trust, and .•.independent advisors ,
otherwise.  The information contained relates, with one
                                                                   and if the local police were in agreement, would be
or two exceptions, to all First Division clubs and                 allowed to set aside’-less ■of- their- ground for nenbers,
London clubs outside the First Division. Evidence   was
                                                                   as long as these nea'sures "could be*showr.- to_-be; an
compiled from questionnaires sent to the above clubs,
phone conversations with then, press coverage and the              •adequate, alternative'^-.                 ^ <[,. .      - ,,.
experiences of individual supporters.                             The schenes were due to be in place for the start of
                                                                  the 1987-88 season.
Originsof theSchsnes
                                                                   * At least three different definitions of *50X                      have
Before the start of the 1887-88 season, all Football
                                                                   actually been implemented —    see below. .
L e a g u e clubs were instructed to introduce schenes which
would enable then to restrict entry to certain parts of
their grounds to people designated as 'nenbers' of the
club. The target for all clubs was for 50X of their
g r o u n d capacity* t o be set aside as nenbership areas,        Implementation
 to w h i c h no-one else would be adnitted.     Guidance as to
                                                                   The guidelines laid down by the League were not
 h o w t o inplejient the schenes cane fron the Football
                                                                   specific enough to ensure uniform implementation (aind
L e a g u e , but the rnpetus behind the decision was the
                                                                   were not intended to be).    This was inevitable, d e -
determination c f tho government to be seen to be doing            the very great differences existing between Football
 something’ about too 1 i^an ise in the aftermath of the           League clubs in terns of location, size and layout
 H o y s e l disaster a n d ether events of 1885 (specifically
                                                                   grounds and size of attendances.     Naturally, each club
 at L u t o n snd B i rain.gham).                                  had its own ideas about how they should go about .
                                                                   putting the schene into practice, and seme weu-e core
The attractiveness of Meuoership Schemes to the
                                                                   enthusiastic about the =whole-. concept t h a n ^ o t h e r s ,..
government was enhanced by the introduction of the ban
on away fans at Luton in the 1986-87 season, which was             However,‘despite the .large variations.;in ,the
                                                                    attitudes, a few general points can,-be,;nade. about,,the.,
widely perceived is a success in combatting
hooliganism.  At first, the government proposed that ■              schsnes they ease up with.    !-
all clubs should follow Luton's exacplc, and cpen their
grounds only to those people who were nenbers of the                First of all, many involved>some -1
                                                                    to become .a member. .;Fron the; infornation;,available ^to
club, or, possibly, of another club.  However, after                „s t-he s c h e n e s . at: Preston North. E n d , ; , C o v e n t r y , , ,
hearing the arguments of the League, the clubs and the              Nottingham Forest ;ana.Southanptcn,,are-ut.he^onJy ones ,,
police that such a comprehensivo 100X Membership Schone             which are totally fr e e . » H o w e v e r some f,clubs d-cided_to
would be inpractical, this was dropped in favour of the             grant nembership.autonatically, to supporters .who^wer
SOX scheme.                                                         season-ticket holders, or.already. nenbers .of other, ;
                                                                    ifroups (e.g., travel, clubs);. &nd\in this -sense, the/,,,too ,,
 The logic behind this move was not precisely d e a r . It
 is easy to se<“ how a 100X scheme eight work to prevent            paid nothing.                              ;             r
                                                                                                                             ' ■ - 1'‘
 hooligan ir,a (leaving aside for the moment other                  Variations' in price       h a v e   b e e n   l a r g e , ranging from,a.50p
 arguments against such a schene) - nenbers are the only
 people allowsd inside any football ground, and have to
 identify theaseIves as such before entering.    Anyone
 caught Misbehaving risks the penalty of having their
 nenbership oard withdrawn permanently, and therefore
 being exoluded fron all grounds m the future.                       «!oa9 pattern to what c l u b s - have ;been;offering. their,s ,
 However, a 50X scheme has no such ultimate sanction.                supporters.   Typioally. thisidnvolves          combination, of..,
 Anyone excluded fron being a meEber can still enter the             sone of the following:           -•}•;*<• ;r
 parts of the ground that are not designated for meabars
 and is still free, within the restraints that existed               - Reduced admission price to sone or .ail:matches 1 ■ -
 prior to the scheue’s introduction, to etude                        conpared to 'non-member'. areas of the ground   .-
 hooliganisn.
                                                                             ^ ^ ^ e r to the idetrl 5eT"down in their guidelines,
                                                                             ^ H P n o u t resorting to punishnent. Given the nany
                                                                             d i f f i c u l t i e s involved in organising the schenes and
                                                                                putting then into practice, there is no doubt that this
-    Discounts on nerchandise sold in the club shop                             has been the only realistic course of action.

- Priority access'to tickets for away Hatches and
subsidised travel     ■                       ' ,                              Effects
-  Priority access to tickets for C u p Finals and other                       At sone clubs, the effects of the schenes have been
big ganes                                                                      nininal. This nainly applies where a recognized block
                                                                               of supporters (usually season-ticket holders) have been
- Access to facilities at the ground on natchdays                              granted nenbership automatically, and this nenbership
(e.g. licensed premises)                                                       confers few privileges that were not already
                                                                               available.  However, very few even of these clubs have
                                                                               nanaged to avoid having to issue cards to their
                                                                               'nenbers'.

                                                                               Elsewhere, the B a i n changes have been to the uses of
                               5 » ‘b5“ SitwtiJ*tS'»Sd         .               particular areas of grounds.     In several'cases, the
                                                                               designation of nembership areas has neant that ether
                                                                               parts of the ground have had to be nade available to
                                                                               home fans who do not wish to become nenbers, and this
    Reaching. The SOX                                                          has usually neant that space for away fans has been
    There has been a certain anount of confusion, to 'say                      limited. One example of this is at Loftus Road.
    the least, about the exact neaning of 50X . I n tnei                       Previous to the 1987-88 season, away fans had been
    original instructions, the League laid down that it                        acconnodated in the School End, and were also sonetines
    should‘nean "at least SOX of each ground -j capacity as                    given the whole of the West End of the South Africa
    deternined by the conditions of                  * 8 ^ LeLue               Road Paddock.   The' East End of this paddock has now
    certificate". However, on Septenber 22nd 1 9 8 7 , League                  been nade Henbers Only.     Q.P.R.'s system depends on
    secretary GrahaniKelly“stated that 21 clubs had                            non-nenbers having nowhere in the ground to stand
     a oh*eved 50% of hose; capaoity, and another 41                            (there are no other benefits) and so Rangers fans are
     achieved V40X ( letter t o :the F.S.A. Hatiional                          not allowed in the East End of the paddock, but for
     Saeretary). In addition', there was no specification                      sone reason this has not been kept open for away fans
     "onceming: the distribution of ;seating and standing                       as had sonetines been the case in the past. Therefore
     areas between cenbers V and non-nenbers                                    the nembership scheme has led to both hone and away
     example, it was not laid down. that all Berbers ;areas                     fans getting less acconnodation, with a substantial
     should include both seating and standing). In at leas                      anount of terracing now unnecessarily cordoned off.
     one case (Wimbledon), 5fDX has b e e n taken to nean 50% of
    “average attendance (not capacity), or even 50X of                          Perhaps the nost drastic consequences of this sort of
      average nunber of hone supporters.                                        implenentation have been seen at Old Trafford,
                                                                                however.   With the Stretford End now Henbers Only,
     rMv«n this lack of direotion at the top, it is perhaps
     not surprising that the clubs- themselves havo put their                   other- United fans have now been allowed one half or the
                                                                                Scoreboard Paddock, previously sot aside alnost
     own interpretations on jthe requirements. The* ® “a3!L oh                  entirely for away fans.    This has aeant that the area
     also been considerable variations in the speed at which
     the schenes have beenJinposed.          For example, Manchester            for away fans is now far too snail to accocnodate tne
     Snited decided to nake the whole of the Stretford End                      numbers of people who follow the bigger teans to
     Groundside 'and the United Road Paddock Menbers Only                        Manchester, and sons of the ganes have 'sson chaotic
      areas fron the v e r y first day of the season. This                       scenes.   When United played Chelsea on 31st August
      innediltely achieved ar50X^schene                      n ct.,t             (Bank Holiday Monday), Chelsea fans were still queuing
                       hut it also-led to severe problens (see                   for entry after half-tine, and conditions inside the
     : b e l o w ) ^ ’Byrcontrastv Other clubs designated areas far              away section were extremely (perhaps dangerously)
      snalier? t h a n :5ox' to^begin l«ith (e.g. Sheffield                      overcrowded.   Sinilarly,- when Tottenhan vent to Old
    ■ Wednesday)or intrpduoed.schenes^with no areas                              Trafford On 26th Septenber, sone travelling f»ns i?/w
    ; immedlately'designated■(e.g. Portsmouth).            ^                     held valid tickets ter the Batch were refused entry co
                                                                                 the ground because the away section had been filled.
    ■"S e W r a l * ’6 i ^ V ‘faiaed< tb.; introduoe schenes at all (e.g.        On this occasion, these fans were then held by police
     ? A r s e n a r ' * West^Han.'SBarnsley) . 'A t ;the tine of nritin*.       in the car-park outside Old Trafford until the end of
       no club^hk^yet^been pena'lised'- for n o V introducing a                  the natch.   With both United and away fans denied entry
       sohene but several have been called on to explain                         to the ground (with all the potential for trouble vhich
       their reluctance and there have been threats of action                    that involves) while the Stretford End hes been far
       reported in t h e % r e s s . . In general,                               from full, it is'hard to see how United’s nenbershjp
       has proceeded by trying to encourage «.he clubs to get                    scheme has had any positive ofreots, end the ninuses
                                                                                 are all too obvious.
                                                                                         m

                                                                                              for the kind of services ;thef'are:of ferihgj'^fir^some^”^ ■
                                                                                              cases (e.g, Portsmqlvith)^;‘U t .seens fron<the:llni't'edW ?         8
  JOa t
      "f*h a q at- 1 a -a i»      fI                            »®v»CQt*flODe                 information that they were ab'le']to' supply :*that'-,',e,^'stfV:I?’-'
  be m i s t a k e n i f t h e y ‘? h o u g ^ t h a t ° S e o o ^ n g 'a ^ e B b e ^ ^        o ^ f e r p ^ n n ?w? be . g asked >.0 :pay '(£3 .00) without "being '
  would guarantee anything                   Th*                  •       Eenber                f                H I1S:'1"/tetUr" ^whatsoever , !since no -areas '• !
  doubr t h \*s i - <-u                            cost obvious reason to
                                                                                              of the ground have :(at:the ;t'iBe-bf'writing) been"'                *
 Watford. Oxf1ord-h:„‘d SB        “ er„%1SSuttin? £ ; iJ.TSntS n0         hJ--h               Pulhf»ateh f°r ;me®bers^ /Contrast, .this attitude'with                 '
 a c r e m e m b e r s t h a n can be a c e o w o             d n      "i                     Fulham, where again no areas::have; been set aside', but' -'1'''
 M emb e r s hi p Areas!        T h i s a l s o a p p l i e s to L u t o n * i n n ,          the scheme costs only 50p to j o i n . ;
 s c h e m e , w h ic h claias ov*r ?n n n n                \     Lu to n s 1002
 ground only holds 16,000.                    h'owever^they a r e * ^ thf ir                  '‘^ J lly! with' 'those' who have become members having
 of a special case.                           However, they are something
                                                                                                        °f Privileges' previously:taken for granted,
                                                                                              -uffpr^H ^aV®: r®“alned outside the schemes have
 In addition, many clubs count season-ticket- h n i n . «                                     oufferecT also.        There is no doubt that the logistics of
                                                                                              f o o t b « n iP ®°£eines have made the process of going to a
                                                                              ’r >            football match much more complicated, and in many case®
                                                                                              U rs e e m H " w 1V? ’ ^ th f°r nenbe” and non-members! and
 S 3 S L f t M S : S?8                                                             *          it seems l.kely that this will' have had the effect of
                                                                                              t h r o u ^ n? hr SUal.fanS - Whether their reluctance to go
 ssswrasui*                                                                                   through the sometimes iengthy and/or expensive
 of the ground designated as members only, 'the ^                              * Part         in thfU lnnff ? gCtK a tloket/nembership card is overcome
                                                                                                           7p!rn V -an acc®PtaJ>ce that the schemes have
                                                                                              made a significant impact cn hooliganism remains to be
 as .e.bcrs makes a complete mockery of the whol£ S e a

                                                                                                        H h o .h^ e j ° inet|. mombership, schenes can only
 D e t e r r i n g Hno1i g a n i s n ?                                                        have increased the sense in which they feel
                                                                                               controlled' at a football match.         After security
 Since the idea of Membership Schemes was 1-0      i                                          fencing, increased policing and closod-circuit
 reduce instances of hooliganism, this has to be tha                                                             "ec®ssity to have a membership card to
                                                                                              addition          ? -t!”f natch can seem like just another
juadged°ritl ^            tY   "hi°? US SU°CeSS « faiLre is'6                                              restrictive measures.        Once again, o n l y
'conSSiioJ;                              ^Le^hirbien-nMnlt^                                   time will tell if this feeling is stronger than the
                                                                                              impression that safety and comfort have been improved. 1
--  it wouLhehfreeSeae   1n a t” ?^l:runreta n° t t i r j
such a c h a n g e . As we h a v e ^ r i e d t^ show   m a n y ^ 6^                          For the moment, however, the casual fan has been                 „
                                                                                             fronr« M n h eB/h1Cted in the "umber of different areas ■
                                                                                             from wp.ich s/he can watch the match at most grounds,
                                                                                             and in many caseo will find her/himoelf paying more for
s?.ssnws a n r > & s r                                                                                      h " ne®bcrs. • This highlights another irea
            °n Ee®bershlP schemes will have to wait at                                       affnrH H K        Ve ?®en cashi.ng in on the opportunities
         U n t U the P0 li<=e and the football authorities                                   wsft       by creating two classes of supporter, which is '
                                                                                             what the soheoes hr.v© effective!v HnnA       o
              *uthorities have 8 ive " their view,   in the
light of the fact that arrest figures were falling in
any case p rior to the introduction of t h e \ c ^ ™  even
this may net be conclusive.                  scr.ene, even

O ther    I 2iaations
           tip                                                                               non-nember/            differe"tial between m e t e r s ^nd

Whether Membership Schemes have been successful in                                            S:s                                                           the
     :e s x s                                                                                gu is® of a^^ben'efi't^'fo^BeBbersT*^0”'*                     ^ '

                          ,s s i 2                                                           Like the restrictive security nsasures,^ '"these :ori

                                                                                                                                                            the
                                                                                         successful in their stated aim of reducing hooliganism.
j.                   „ . r5 " f % . J L ' ^ s x T h . r 11’
had previously been free, e,g    the riirht- t-n
travel or t° sit or stand i n ^ e r ^ i n ^ r L s ^ f t h * ^                            l i e ^ i t h ^ h s ^ n t ' i’Dpo? ta:|?t iiPii^ations of the Schemes
ground.  Taere is no reason why clubs should charge                                      -m ! JJlth .^he interpretation of the eonceptrof
their supporters nore than a noninal adninistretion fee                                  «i«Sl»r* fin                      MeEbershiP ‘inplies n o r e ‘thin :
                                                                                         simply a financial transaction which may or nay not
      abrade.                                b#C°?® a        of. say
      assunedS,thitypaying°f nenb^                 s^iety ^ i s ^ * "    and in sone cases d r a s t i c ^ f f “ct ^ 1 h*d;an innediate,;
                                                                         have had to pay aore     it h® ! fc' ‘ In «®neral,s.fans. -
                                                                         for the. to go to football-natchesEa?h E0« c°»PUcated
      such principles see” to applv ^ % 0r delegates-           »°
                                                                                ^aVe been restricted furthpr            w 1* 'liberty'-rand
      influen ’ i8h C° allow supporters [o°h»a U °lubs’ "h°             Menbership Schenes have a c t i v * ^ e r and in sone,cases
      influence over the running of fh.f    !?® any direct
     -his with nany County CrieUnt- ^e ir affairs (contras*-            seeing a natch when there' Jm*rLln-r'JVantad pe°Ple
                                                                        ground.   At a tine sh«n f n ^ n “ for then in the - •••
     aeans just that), No cllS Z L ° } Ui* Where 'Men^rship-
                                                                        encouraging all the spectators ^ " ® ® ds t0 be
     afforded by the introduction of th'" the °PP°rtunity               matches, this does not see» ffi,           Can to 00ne to
     kno"ro M ° le aUitude to supporJers          S°heE®S to r^ h L k   solution. On the other hunH               an attractive
    although they w e T ^ p e l i f - ® ^ T th° ^P^ne'nJ a U o V *      anti u h ® ®o h e n e s ha v e b e en e f f e c t i v e ^ little evidence
    League's guidelines       For th,3y ®noouraged to in ?he            anti-hooliganisn neasure                      ,       6 as an
    accurate to call the Present                   “ is Bore            l a w - a b i d i n g fans .who h av e s uf f e ^ d . “  *“ th®

    conferr       ‘^ “bership • schemes •«eSK Registratio«
    handed h "° rights on supporters' o n * ® B b e r s hiP * has
     ,nded do«n at the discretion       nly Privileges'

    introduc tinn'of Sthe ‘scheoe^                        ^    °'
    —        —    ership. - - s J »            thisnsense.ftjed


   V=- c ' a J 0
               h'!:Sper
                      ai^ t- o
                             d- - d •r“« J « , h i p schene several
                                               to season 1986-87



  A t t i t u d e s of the Clu bs



  'SS not-eHor thy ""how *1jttietthe c l u b ^ h e ^ ^ survey- it
  to know about their o w n               " hecselves seened
  w h a t s oe ver
  details of'thefr T c L T s * ™ T * ^ " ^ d ab^ut the*
  the percentage of the gr^und^oveJed'b          relation to
  Manchester Unit»d Hi      i .       ®red by then,
 relations so o o S n l l ' l l l l g U i r ' « public
 “ere unable to give any detail-       1Ubs' said that they
 general iepresaion was that nn«t-°V?r the phone. The
 c a n t e d to the ideas beh „d ? h e ° ^ S are less than
 their operation as an unnool           schenes and regard
 a «eleone anti-hooligan neasure*7 ™ 1Sanoe rather than
 so in so nany words,          Rsure, and sone of thee said


s ^ n ^ ^ r i ^ h ^ r s o ^ ^ ^ r 5- 6 that
x&S*;i»fsi,x; r s £
Eisinterpretat ion.                 tion being supplied or through

Conclusion


ben e «U s CUrr*"‘df” " ti» hv*ryS“h 2 j M^ ' ershiP Sehenas
       its are all long-tern i „        • Tho lntcnded
-PPorters- confidenfe^         ^
                                          6' 1

APPENDIX 1 (Letter from tha
rootoal.-. League advising club^ nn
s c h e m e s ) tatl°n °f B e m b e ^ h i p




                                                                                                                                         ext season.                                •• *o p .*«* of season tickets, etc., for


  fT         71
              J U -,
                                                                                                                                        *• Sa™         i       ’^ e r i S ^ *
       /,r0oyttl         THb       FOOTBALL                        LEAGUE               LIMITED
                                                            "coirr*»eo emec                                                                                                                                ,plaJls for —          ^
                                            LYTHA M - 5T                 A N N E   5                                                               -Se attached document. These -lln, *   ;afd-away supporters as per
                                                               LA.NC 5                                             •«C » «T **r:                   possible and they must b, ' r ^   , * ? be P ^ u c e d as sbon as
                                                              FYSUC.                                             '-.o-ar.rc^
                                                                                                                                                  Ith.r*’ ^°Cal Britlsh Transport Police t h . ? ' 10" W l t h t h « local
 1/Z7                                                                                                                                                   relevant organisations s u - h «« i ’ ?
                                                                                                                                                    cognised supporters clubs    Thes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  local authority and
                                                                                                                                                                                           ocal coach operators and
                                                                                   5 th M arch,     I   9P7
 ■o ALL CLUBS
                                                                                                                                                  f"«           lPC»I%oU^!1iai5con“ld0n ‘nd the club*- "ith “dvlce
                                                                                                                                                  arrangements at      U r l ! ^ , i Z i i 'r            r”p ' * u ‘u * S "
Ocas' Secretary,
                                                                                                                                          *’     ^         r   ^   “- s r s s ' j z x z s r ? ”                            -

                                                                     29 th January        1987                .                                  advice on thi, study..         ” :0ffIc«rs have agreed to assist with the
infers yen that thm r                    C ° r r icials on M o nd a y                   v %/              a I urther
^ o u ^ U s Hog ; h a v e ! n n I PT      tn C                       Mr ^ c h f r ^                     1 CaJ1                     • ■ -<»i     . Football '.Trust grants “win- h
s'Por: or hovsmber lols”                            P r o p o s e onbo<tl,d In                          'hi Hon‘
                                                                                                                                           ' - • de°£ndiUbS'f0'r the i - t a U a c L r o f c ^ ^ h 1' C° Di^ ^ o n . Three -and
                                                                                                                                                 depending on the particular n..rf         =losed circuit television
* -•                   - - - - -                    ^         ■      s     r   -s      a s     's   s   :s r s s -
                                                                                                                                                               m   ^       as-KS.*&5«55sas.
^«uS?         ^          LS f
                            a0 U   0   vs!1: lin8S detaUed * ° « u b , at the meetings on 29th

       ^                       are     askeri    t*   - j
                   for specific designated a r L ^ o f " V ? tr°dUCe ',e",be^ h i p scheaes •
                   of the 1987/88 season, n l l l ° ^ h        fff0Wlda ^ *hr beginning-
                                                                                                                                       . The Management Comitt*. n.-M
                                                                                                                                   -    - P o r t bade to th, Covernaent

               S r                                          s a s * " * ® 5 -" s r s a
   „ cT'.                                                                                                                                                                Vours sincerely,                 =


               50J Membership SchLe^vilTbrable    to b T th® Pequire5,«nts for '
                Special Committee consisting of rem.     rePr«entations to
              The Football Tp , « ^ d i L e ^ r / J T ^ ^ 9 frora «»»• League
              P l cS. Sf r e d ,by th* SPeci*l Committee ? h l * \ ^ ' after discu« i o n ,
              Cli£            they are unaW « to nieet the 5n*                  and the local          ’
               . b v i l l be e x p e c t e d t o sho w t h » t - ft. r e t i r e m e n t , th e n the
              alternative measures.                   Should this                      tBkin‘ ^equate               *
              t V c T ^ b/ th8 ®»«™ent.                             if th. cIubT' thelr position ^
             procedur
             Procedures r * ' failing
                        for   t h , 'y * a y t0
                                              b " 1bb1(,
                                                   ° “ « l U *b A*
                                                                £ t0
                                                                   t“ a
                                                                      " e£ * " 0 t under
                                                                        ch»rge      a W e F.A.
                                                                                          t 0 C Onv in= *
             Membership.                        *           ln,PJ-e>»ent the recommendations on



                                                                                               /Con td.2
                                           ”^ Cw h e £ h ethis
                                               whether     X ^ ;has
                                                                 UbVhadn athe So,,th
  APPENDIX 2                                                                                   off terrace, adnission),./discounts- 4                                                     3i
                                              « ginL1Can| 6ffeCt on attendances                 in .he club, shop,vguaranteed
                                              in the Horth ®onparison "ith clubs               fnr   IT f?r.Cup finals; and-ipriority ‘
                                              in the Horth has yet to be seen
  Header ship Schemes, Adnission                   Frogranne prices have also                  ror all-ticket ganes,, reduced-prioei.                    ®enefits"for<C 1ubcard •holder's’^
  Prices and Progrsuues                       risen sharply in the last couple of            . train travel to .away,, ganes,;free                       i n o l u d e l o w e r adnissionv.prices
                                              seasons, and so these are h sl                   adnission to reserve ganes and-.;
                                                                                                                                                         than    conparable'
                                                                                                                                                         f O T^W A •1 W' ■>L     non-nenbet
                                                                                                                                                                                 1_I            .Areas'
                                                                                                                                                                                         '-.-''.a
   It seens reasonable to connent at          shown in the data.                               «nrfrKS -°!he reXtras- (e>g V birthdays
                                                                                               and Christnas cards),..; In theory, .“
   this stago on sone recent trends in
   adnission prices, as these have                                                             tickets for any;.away,.ganeVare s o l d r
                                              Henbership Schanes                               to nenbers on ly .'v T w o ,passport-. ~ t
   often gone hand-in-hand with the
   implementation of Henbership                                                                photos requ ired^a^.,         . :.c -fi-'                 ooaaun-ncKet noiders)y free a ■ 1■■■-
   Schemes. The significant point is          Arsennl
                                                                                                 Cost:   £15.50      .""
   that nany clubs now see fit to vary                                                                        - *~         x~ *«.;::f■ it a3;v         in> club shop:         Seas on -1 ie'icet-•»
   the price of adnission to their            Ho schesne inplenented as yet                                                                           ■ > o 5 fr?”are^au.tonatically--ehroil'ed
  ground between different types of                                                          ■                         ^         Bencliesv^iJ                 i < ^ ard- 5 hrdSholders'’'as are parer
                                              h»v6nK are one of the dubs"which                East Stand Fanily^Area,^Percentage?
  Batches (i.e. big ganes beconing                                                                                                                     n, ®hi-ld^ n 'in >the ;;Panini:,Fanily .
                                              they have
                                                   have so
                                                        s o far
                                                             ^ not
                                                                °n t0 explain with
                                                                               "hy            "°t^nown, but. probably, around’- .                     .C 1u b *y. .Tb eJGo.od is on sRo'ad^pWd oolt‘5:S-f&
  aore expensive), between hone and           cney                  oonplied                   15-20X. of totai. c a p a J c i t y ^ N b ' ^ , ^     :>?.?.???.ts .installediibefore the. ■
  away supporters and between nenbers         the directive fron the League     The           terrace areas are designated'’--                        •             |t 5| s eSs on 1fsp ^i'f fc£ll'ya!
  and non-nenbers.   Hot surprisingly,                                                      . nenbers only,.,4       ,
  all these changes have involved                          °f schene
                                           a problen, and any th*11                   ”     V'-'v           -W.34                                      ^ ° r t he; F an i ly^Club'f^Ub'-Sfijrt->{**»« srli
  price increases rather than               arelessly introduced could
  decreases, and the arrival of                                                                  Coventry fHf;Yv                               -;
                                                                                                                                                .
                                          efffcti7 ha"6 th° saB0 drastic
  membership schenes has given sone
                                          United
                                          “ Ued, bhS         at Manchester
                                                   e w u s e of the difficult
  ciubs an opportunity to raise
                                                                                             Menbership is free «nd offers*n^3'^3
  Prioes generally.   It seens to us                g the N°rth Bank into                    belief its ■other",than .that, of: sitting,
  that the policy of raising prices       nenbers and non-nenbers areas.                     or standing in ia nenbVrs-on’ly'J         '>T
 for Preniu* Ga nes1 is a nisguided                                                                                                                   Area Covered:       Main; S t a n d ^ f u p p e ^ v ^
                                                                                             area. :This 'tyjie-of "schSne'woul’d1:* "               iand^lower) , Hew Fanily:.enclosure,
 one, which penalises the loyal and                                                          seen to be the •fairest' on'‘   offerV*.''c';
 the casual fan alike.    For the         Char It.oq                                                                                                           ?tree t .StandffBu llens^Road#
fegular atte:ider, big natches are a                                                                                                                 ;Paddook.?'y'Ho’';infornatiohVonff!sI*o-sass
                                                                                             Cost:       HOTHIHG            -Vi'.i-;                 :P,erpehtages:’
                                                                                                                                                                   il:i'e'.V?; par'i' ,
;^eleone opportunity to see the top
-Yearns after watching the nore                                                                                                                     :.U7erp0<q ;y j;.-;                                       <
mundane fixtures, and their loyalty
                                          a      S      t    t   r   A   f    f   g   1'     Areas Covered/ - '•"West-Stand;': W est^
                                                                                             Terrace and Main' Stand enclbsure:-'RV
 should not be rewarded by charging
                                                                        .is
   ^             the Privilege.   Ho                                                                                                                 .noad, Stand are enrolled--^'*                  ■
club that we know of (except for                     J a r i K . j i S E * th-               Derhv finnn^^
Nottinghan Forest in one instance
 this season) reduces their prices       between th    nain difference                                                                              - i n h 1V ' °-          ?-eBbers' and guests
                                         the different^ sche"*s seens to be                / Derby s systen- is1^.unique-to 'the i«'-'              iin s^h.is- area'-. '• ■
ror Cup ganes against teans fron                                                             League and they believe that 'it’1is'’'K
lower divisions and the sane             access tof   barS "hich th^                         one that others will follow                             Cost: Hothing_on.top,of.nornal
principle should apply. For those                                                            Menbers of their Key Club gain                          .seas.on-1 ipLket?pricesj/^j4
casual spectators who nay attend                rel,a^nton Neobers Club —
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■■ - ■.
                                                                                             entry to the Hornantori-End'by’    '                    Area-j Covered: 1 15X^6f'itotal^ground ■
       i f top “atches, increasing       £3.00 (£1.-00 for 0.A.P.s
the adnission price would not seen                                                           inserting a key.into a ,'black box',                    capacity, p,y ,000 nenbers for -7,000 r
to be an effective forn of public
                                         andew t f * season“ticket'holders
                                         and lottery   agents)                               which .ehepks whethe t; the;:key' ""is1 "11'*■          p1aoes-.'»;,tT .            7«ks>; 7■■nr,><?.
                                                                                             valid or not. '' The only'pebple' ••                          ( r.  ;■ ,       JS, O/.'O , - ;        ■
fnia^ ° n? ‘ Why shoald they return      Vulisnts Club —     £10.00 (£5.00                   adnitted to the Key Club are adults'
for the less attractive gases when       U.A.r.s, 203! discount for                          acconpanied by :a‘ child;                              Lutnn fnffn         ^                .,
tneir custon has been exploited in                                                                       -•                            Sishiaiat.
this way?                                season-ticket holders and lottery                                                                                             ><<?■t r - : - : . y
                                         agents). Ho children allowed                       Cost: £5.00 ”(£2.'50 b'.'Arp1  ;s>:'and 'r               Most people will be faniliar with..
     It has to be said that these                                                           juveniles)'         isto-.if:. . ..--s.ri t?
practices do not only apply to the                                                                                                                   Lutoniis 100X jnenbershi^) jschene.!-:
                                         Area Covered:           44.SX of Hone
cxubs surveyed here.   Sone of the                                                                                                                   ? 2 e*P?intf't0 n°ter!this-iseason ;is •
                                                                                            Area C o v e r e d : 1 Figureis :
                                                                                                                            giveri‘by the'          :that;(thej costtoojoin (-has risen     -
more grotesque exanples have been                           7>m o            *.»»o          club indicated that the schene                           fron £1.00c5to c£5.00. ■;.,j     .. ,
                                                                                            covered 65X ‘of Hone 'Capacity, •iav         ;                                                     .1^.Vl".
Cnn l0Wer d »Lision clubs in the F.A,
^up, e.g. Aldershot's £8.00 for                                                             12, 300 places with ‘13,000'?nentiersV'                 U'         j'id.                                          ■
                                         Chnl*^                                             However, since' t H e ;schene’- ; ‘-»«R.f I             Han.chest.ftr                                         ^
198 saR? &d? ifsion against Oxford in
1986-67 and Sutton United's £5 00                                                           apparently only"covers' one'end of'UJ
against Middlesbrough this year.         HO DATA SUPPLIED BY THE CLUB                       the grouid, alnost' entirely'sSated ;'•                 BenefitSiinoiude.ticket.priority,
The principle is equally                                                                    this seeua unlikeljr to say ;the'fliyni                 reduoedHadnission;to.hone.natches «
wrong-headed at the snaller clubs.       Chelsea's schene has been in pia««                 least.- "
                                                                                                                                                    exclusivenentry-1of.fanily stand,. -r:.
k?nH nf n°tJ-°®able is that this                                                                                                                    priorityjbooking-.andrreduced prices
Kind of policy is practiced alnost       L°nbe%Tral yearS’ and entitl"s i's                                                                         for seats purchased:iniadvance,
                                         to reduced adnission Prices tty nn                                                                         free,adnission to reserve eanes.                              .
 one free visit to the Manchester
 United nuseun, discount at the oljjb             Area Cove r e d :^^a^jllori Road
 shop.  Tvo passport photos                                                                 cake this clear tofl^^porters at      MtTrB-^bvered:  West Stand and other
                                               ‘-‘Terrace and LV P r ^ H g r Seating of     the start of the         which
 required.                                        the Executive Stanch Percentage                                                  season-ticket holders
                                                                                            resulted of course in the vast         approxinately 30X of total
                                                  unknown.                                  najority of terrace fans joining
 Cost:    £5,00                                                                                                                    capacity.
                                                                                            the schene. The club has nade
 Area Covered:  Stretford Groundside                                                        something like *30,000 clear profit
                                                 Oxford United                              on the nenbership schene, offering
 and United Road Paddock.                                                                                                          Tottenhnu Hnt-.«»ppr
                                                               f                            nothing to the supporters except
 Percentage not disclosed (this                  Schene covers both sides of the
 infornation was specifically                                                               what they were previously entitled     HO DATA RBCE1VBD FROM CLUB
                                                 ground, which neans that United            to as of right i.e. a place on the
 refused over the phone on the                   have 62X of the Hone Capacity
 grounds that "you could be                                                                 terraces!  Q.P.R.'s seens to be        Menbers get a reduction in prices
                                                 covered.  Unlike Wiobledon, a club         confortably the worst schene in the
 anybody'). ,                                                                                                                      for the Preniun Ganes, a free
                                                 with a sinilarly snail ground, they      ; whole country.
                                                 have stuck fairly rigidly to the                                                  newspaper (.Spurs Net/s) and access
                                                 guidelines as a result of which,                                                  to organised away travel.
 Hewcastle Unil-.nd                                                                        Cost:    £3.00
                                                 they have nore nenbers than places.
                                                                                                                                   Cost:  £5.00 (cheaper for Juveniles
 No schene yet in operation due to                                                         Area Covered:   Loftus Road Fanily
                                                 Cost:   £3.00                                                                     depending on how nany ,ioin fron one
 the.building.of the new West                                                               Stnnd, Loftus Road Terrace, South
                                                                                                                                   fanily).
 Stand. Eventually tney hope.to .                                                           Africa Road Paddock. There are
                                                 Area Covered:      Main Sttrd, Osier       roughly 10,000 nenbers.  Percentage
 cover,30X of total capacity, but                Road Side.      62X of Hone Capacity.                                            Area Covered: Various areas of the
 the details have yet to be ,                                                             ; unknown, but probably at least 50X
                                                                                                                                  ground are covered, anounting to
 finalised.                                                                                 of hone capacity.                     25X of the total capacity (11,000
                                                Portsiiont-h                                                                      places).  Tottenhan have far core
                                                                                                                                  nenbers than places.
 ggrwioh City                                                                             ; Sheffield.. ledneaday
                                                No details given of advantages of
 ||'nefits include free Travel Club             being a menber.   Season-ticket             Horth Stand is designated as
                                                Holders and 'discount                                                             Watford
 cenbership,, priority booking for                                                          nenbers only and this is the only
 seat tickets, free adnission to                ticket-holders' are enrolled              ' benefit which nenbers receive   A
                                                autonatically.  Fron the figures                                                  Supporters Club, Junior Hornets and
 reserve gases, discount at club                                                            sinilarly sensible schene to those    season-ticket holders qualify
.shop. Two guests are allowed in                given it seens unlikely that there          at Forest, Southanpton and
                                                are any nenbers who are not                                                       autonatically for nenbership, and
3;ith each nenber, subject to                                                               Coventry, but with a snail
                                                season-ticket holders.                                                            no special nenbership cards are
Availability of space.                                                                      adninistration fee.                   issued, although it is apparently
 Season-ticket holders aro                      Cost:    £3.00                                                                    possible to join the .schene even if
^tpiiatically enrolled as nenbers.                                                        i Cost:   £1.00                         you do not belong to any of these
                                                Area Covered:      50X of Hone                                                    groups.   Watford in theory only
Cost:    £5.00                                                                              Area Covered: Horth Stand.   9,882    allocate seat tickets to away fans
                                                Capacity.      12,500 places, 12,500        places, which is roughly 15X of
                                                nenbers                                                                           if they are aenbers of their own
Area Covered:  City Stand, River                                                            total capacity.                       club.   In practice this is not
End Stand and Fanily Enclosure are                                                                                                strictly applied (especially given
                                                                                              /
nenbers only.  50X of total ground              Sueen'fl Park Ran^i-pi                                                            that not’every club has a schene).
capacity (including the'                                                                    Southampton.
season-ticket holders).  13,000                                                                                                   Cost:    £5.00
places, 11,000 nenbers.                         Entertainnent is provided for               3,000 season-ticket holders have
                                                chi ldr en/nenbe’rs in the Loftus Road      autonatically been designated
                                                Stand, incorporating “clowns,                                                     Area Covered:  Upper tier of Rous
                                                                                            necbers and other seats in the West   Stand, Fanily Areas and '3?' Block.
tLattinghan Fnrwgi-,                            jugglers and first tean players             Stand have also been allocated for
                                                signing autographs". Otherwise                                                    25.3X of total capacity is
                                                                                            nenbers. These do not seen to have    covered.  Watford have nore nenbers
                                                there are no details of any                 been taken up with nuch enthusiasn,
The only benefits seen to be that                                                                                                 than places.
                                               benefits.     Menbership is free for         even though nenbership is free
menbers.sit or stand in areas
                                                season-ticket holders and                   there are no extra benefits for
designated solely for their use
                                               supporters club nenbers.      This is        being a nenber.  Southampton's
 (which after all is supposed to be                                                                                               Winblcdnn
                                               nainly for the purpose of                    lukewarn response to the idea is
the point of the whole idea).
                                                increasing the nunbers of people in         supported by the local police,
Forest are to be connended on                                                                                                     Winbledon have the snallest ground
                                               the^official supporters club in the          although they are one of the clubs
taking such a responsible attitude                                                                                                in the First Division and this has
                                               light of opposition fron the Q.P.R.          in trouble with the League for not
towards their supporters,; giving              Loyal Supporters Association, an                                                   nade it virtually inpossible to
then '-the .-/protection* of^nenbership''-                                                  doing enough to inplenent the         inplenent a strict 50X of ground
                                               independent .supporters group.     The       scheae.  Supporters clain that the
areas ;(:but'.without foisting-aS'whole ■      incentive-for Q.P.R. fans to becone                                                capacity (this would i ean that all
range j.of.other^Cppssiblyi'vinwanted) 1                                                    need to becone a nenber to sit in     the hone terracing capacity would
                                               nenbers is sinple -- there is no             certain areas of the ground has
  benefits'.> on vthen -at ^exorbitant' - ;                                                                                       have to be nenbers only - this
pr ICeS ^      iI-..,*,j ,    -l.■iCi'. -w.7   terracing available anywhere in the          reduced attendances.                  didn't stop Q.P.R., but Winbledon
                                               ground for non-nenbero.     Two guests
                                                                                                                                  declined to resort to such a
Cost:    KOTHIHG          ."‘" •v ^            are allowed in with nenbers, but             Cost:   H0THIHG.                      schene).  In the light of their
                                               unfortunately the club onitted to
                                                                                                                                  situation, the League asked
                                                                         ••
                                      V iv
  p£S          i     ^       ‘£   S   - S      - -         .


  f u' a ' j . ’j        s        r    >          “S; ■                       js^ a -g s s x r
                                           3   £•              b.»«t SilJ                                  b”
  figures shows just what* * n «*■»<■*
  the SOX aark has become.® n°nsense
 Wmbiedon's nenbers are entitled t-r.
                                                                            X " «: ors / ' hth<
                                                           • 50p administration fee.   f'r     S
 away travel with the club, „ H n                          example, a four-natch voucher for                    - All premium games involve an increase of between 5 Df> »nH    nn
 as access to the nenbership areas                         the terraces costs £12 ■in                           in admission prices, occasionally even £3 Bft ^           ? f2 -00
                                                           normal admission prlJe'i? ’£f ” eas
 Cost:     £3.00                                           At the moment no areas of S i
                                                           only" which ^ d e s i g n a t e d      members
 i l l L C° r ^ d:       900 seats    in Ma i n
                                                          K   ■■inMh^
                                                          Howevo-       u UUiC
                                                                           i u ’i
                                                                                w uint h ^ h League,
                                                                                       the   r L ^ ais°
 eJclosuJ;          snra° r in S°Uth Stand
.support                 °f aV6rage hone                  and imaginative way of c o p i " * * ^ 6
                                                          virtually'no" &t aH Club                  has

                                                                                                                Averages:
Some season-ticket holders have                           f o r c e d ' t ^ m o v e " ? « r{gS?d’2W * 0r
been designated, as nenbers, but                                                                                Seat Prices:   £7.00
otherwise no schsne has been
implemented,
                                                                      e e. K s ; i „ r d t jr s s t *
                                                          advance income.        It sfen^ail'                   Terrace Prices':    £3.50
                                                          that their ne ar-neig hbourS at
                                                                                                                Programme Prices:      77p
                                                          the scheme t o T h e ^ e t t ^ r ‘W n«
He looked at various other schemes                        Fulham are e o n d e ^ & ’n ^ 1*                  .   Programme Price increase on 86/87:   9 p ( = 11 R9 i   - H n„hi  n.
at clubs outside the First                                                                                      rate of inflation)                    P   1   n.bsx    -. double the
                                                          seeking to exploit their
                                                          supporters.
                                                               ••
                                    .SEATS (£)          TERRACE (£)             PREHIUH GAMES?   PROGRAMME (Increase on 88-87)
                                                                                                                                                               'ss:;ss rs

Arsenal:I-tJ & 1?                                                               Yes                          60p
CHARLTON                                                                        Yes                          80p (10p)
                                                                                No                          £1 (30p)                    Terrace £3 for
COVENTRY' /-                                                                                                                            Menbers_______
                                                                                No
DERBY•
                                                                                                             80p (10p)                  All seats taken
                                                                                                                                        by season-ticket
                                                                                                                                        h o l d e r s ______
                                                                CO :   r.'t-   1,0                           60p (-)
LIVERPOOL^;

iLUTON    %*'<■■ **•           a-          s-;ii
                                                                                                                                        1002 nenbership schene.
ir' - ■      '         ■»f-i,.*V.       to',1                                                                                           Luton dropped their
                                                                                                                                        Preniun Gane policy duo
                                    4.80, 5.80                                                                                          to poor attendances.  At
                                                                               No                           50p (10p)                   £7.00 to stand it’s
■ N E W C A S T L E ' S t 5 1 ;.^.                                                                                                      perhaps not surprising.

                                                                                                                                       One stand only in
NORWICH                                                                                                                                use
                                      50                3.50                   Yes                          7Op (lOp)
                                                                                                                                       Premiun games do not
NOTTH FOREST                          50           50   3.50                                                                     *)    apply to nenbers
                                                                               Yes                          60p (-)
OXFORD                                                  4.50                   No                                                      Seats £8 for away
                                                                                                                                       fans
PORTSMOUTH
                                                                                                            80p (20p)                 Prices up 50p for
                                                                                                                                      away fans
                                                                               Yes                          7Op (10p)                 Seats for away fans
                                                        3.50                                                                          nore expensive

SOUTHAMPTON                                50                                  No                           80p (-)
SPURS                                 50        11                             Yes                                                      Terrace £3.50 for
WATFORD                                                                                                                               ‘ nenbers
                                                                               No                           £1 (30p)
WIMBLEDON
                                                          50                   Yes
WEST HAM                            5.50                                       No
MISCELLANEOUS DOCUMENTS
    I     A   :a
                   THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                                  EUROPE EUROPE   '89
                            THZ BACK TO EUROPE CAMPAIGN

                                  POLICY STATEMENT

EUROPE EUROPE ’89 has been launched by the FSA in order to enable
ordinary football supporters   to participate in activities^, and   ••
discussions  on policy, that will enable English clubs to return to
European competition.

We can not condemn strongly enough the activities of some of the
people who followed the England team to West Germany-   However,we still
feel that it is in the interests of a long term solution to the problem
of football associated violence if English club sides are re-admitted
to European competition sooner rather than later.  This is because it
is our view that the ban has  hindered the development of the policies
required to deal with this sort of behaviour, and may even have
been a cause of the extent of the violence and vandalism that occured.
It is certainly the case that policy making has taken on a more insular
form, with the introduction of membership schemes and close circit
TV being the main planks of government policy, despite the fact that
they do not even address the problem of people following their team
abroad. Indeed,they even ignore the fact that most of "the violence
associated with football occurs away from football grounds themselves.

It appears to us that the government is more concerned with appearing
to  solve the problem than with developing policies that will tackle
the problem on a l o n g xterm basis. Their methods have failed, and their
response is to represent their ideas in a more extreme form.     We
believe that we need new ideas and that the supporters are the people
whose experiences should be used to help develop a completly new
approach.

Why listen to us?
Since the Heysel and Bradford disasters we have worked tirelessly
to build a network of supporters commited to 'reclaiming the game'
for ordinary  'fans.-    The Alternative Football Network now
comprises of well over 50,000 people        who regularly exchange
information and experiences.  By gathering information from supporters,
and by helping them to organise, we have been proved right in our
criticisms of existing anti-hooligan measures and have shown that we
can channel the energies of supporters into more constructive activitie:
and set new role models for younger fans.

We have also been right before.       We said,long ago,that the ban on
English clubs                     would increase the likelihood of violence “
when England played abroad. European games would become more of a
novelty and the England fans would be given a reputation to live up to.
Furthermore the possibility of attacks on English fans by people out to
prove themselves could not be ruled out. We put our views to two
sue ^ s s i v e Sports Ministers, both chose not to believe us.
We also carried out extensive research into     the operation of membership
schemes  during last     season     and came    to    the conclusion that for m
clubs they were irrelevant and, that where     they had been introduced
in an il^-considered way, they could    lead   to dangerous overcrowding.
The sports minister dismissed our research     only a few days before
serious problems arose at      QPR-

We have been saying to the various authorities for years,    that there
could be major incidents inside Wembley stadium if problems of ticket
di stribu ti on and stewarding were not sorted out. We were either
ignored completly or told that our complaints would be dealt with.
Again, events at    the England v   Scotland game proved us right.

We have already shown that fans can work together
We were responsible for ensuring that the anti-mergers campaigns
involving QPR, Fulham, Wimbledon and Crystal Palace, brought together
supporters of these clubs, and others, in a common campaign for the
good of football. We showed that football supporters, supporting-
di ff er en t teams, can get together in a trouble free atmosphere in
order to protect     the game from those they perceive as acting
against its interests.

We established the 'Left on the Shelf' campaign in order to defend
a his to ri c piece of terracing at White Hart Lane. Again we brought
together     supporters of different clubs, at botn meetings and
demonstrations. These included a 4-0 minute peaceful demonstration
inside the football ground after Sp u r s ’ last home game of the season.
We showed that a large group of supporters can direct their energies
into something constructive and that there is a passion and commitment
in football that is at present bei ng ignored.

We have also contributed to the establishment of an alternative
football media.Faced with the inaccuracies and sensationalism of
much press reporting, supporters have begun to produce their own
magazines and n e w s l e t t e r s ,many receiving national prominence.
These are regularly exchanged between supporters of different clubs
and have become an invaluable source of communication. Again
supporters have shown that if you want to be more than a spectator
there are other things to do than fight.

How do we get back in?
The long term solution rests with the supporters themselves.    Our
organisation has to continue to grow and extend its influence.      The
next generation of football supporters must follow our way of
su ppo rt in g football, not that of the hooligan celebrities given
prominence by the media. We have to unite supporters in a common
campaign to rid football of the-s-e-rthuggish leeches.

The government must encourage short term measures that will address
the real problem. Luton Town's membership scheme   is no more likely
to pre vent hooligans travelling to West Germany than it is likely
to prev ent violent people travelling to the Costa Brava or smashing
up rural town centres.
T h e r e is a case for tighter control of E n g l i s h football supporters
.travelling abroad.                   We would cer t a i n l y be p r e pared to acc e p t more
r i g i d corftrol          of supporters             in Europe than we w ould in
d o m e s t i c f o o t b a l l , s i m p l y because the need is greater and the p o t e n t i a l
d a m a g e to the game less. All ti c k e t matches for                    England games is
n o t u n r e a s o n a b l e , n o r perhaps for English club matches.              Controls
o v e r w h o w o u l d be allo w e d to p u r chase these tickets would also not
be u n r e a s o n a b l e .      A method of p r e v e n t i n g tickets beincr transferred
w o u l d h a v e to be developed. This could involve controls on ticket touts,
b u t a n o t h e r s u g g e s t i o n has been to issue vouchers to supporters w h i c h
w o u l d be e x c h a n g e d for tickets in the country in w h i c h the r espective
m a t c h w a s b e i n g played, on p r o d u c t i o n of some form of identification.
C o n v i c t e d thugs could be pre v e n t e d from t r a v e l l i n g abroad simply by
r e q u i r i n g them to report to a local police station on the day of a
game. _                        T hese            only ideas at present, but they seek to
a d d r e s s the real            prob l e m s - a n d will, of course, be revised and
d e v e l o p e d d u r i n g the c o n s u l t a t i o n process. We w o u l d also
l i k e to see the FA runn i n g its own package tours in order to
p r o v i d e c heap travel that w o u l d d i scourage i n d e p e n d e n t travelling.

The o t h e r cause of the Heysel d i s a s t e r mus t also be addressed. The
v e n u e f o r E u r o p e a n finals should' not be d e c i d e d upon until a f t e r the
Competing         f i n a l i s t s are known. Safety standards should be as rigourous
as t h e y a r e for Brit i s h sports grounds.

 The F A ’s d e c i s i o n no t to a pply for a return to Europe this year is as
 sad as it was inevitable.                F o r years they hav e refused to listen to
 the v o i c e of the s u p p o r t e r     a n d they are now l e t t i n g the thugs
 dictate- t h e i r actions.           It is als o an admission) that their a n t i - h
 o o l i g a n m e a s u r e s have, failed.     The y must, a l o n g w i t h the Footb a l l
^League,. s t a r t to l i s t e n to the ordinary supporters. They must
a l s o s t a r t to take up a more a c t i v e stance in e n c o u r a g i n g       supporters
 to be m o r e i n v o l v e d in the gan£s           d e c ision m a k i n g processes.
 T h e y m u s t a l s o s t a r t to tackle the issue of racism in order to counter
 the i n f l u e n c e of fasc i s t groups.

W h e r e do w e go from here?
F irst, w e h a v e to p e r suade the FA to a p p l y for a d m i s s i o n in 1989,
p r e f e r a b l y w i t h the support of the government. This, we accept,
w i l l r e q u i r e a m a j o r shift in pub l i c opinion.   We w ill be c i r c u l a t i n g
this s t a t e m e n t as w i d e l y as possi b l e over the f o r t h c o m i n g season in
o r d e r to e n c o u r a g e supporters to put their own ideas to paper. We
a r e l o o k i n g for supporters to p u t forward t heir own suggestions
b a s e d on t h e i r own experiences.

W e w i l l be s e e k i n g urgent meetings with the F o o t b a l l League, the FA,               —
a n d the g o v e r nment. We will also be     w r i t i n g to U E F A wit h a view to
a m e e t i n g w i t h them.

W e w i l l b e v i g o u r o u s l y o p p o s i n g initiatives w h i c h we see as   counter
p r o d u c t i v e an d .damaging to the interests of football.

We p l a n to h o l d a n u m b e r of p u b l i c events    in d i f f e r e n t parts of the
c o u n t r y in o r d e r to    encourage supporters        to get together to discuss
w a y s of r e c l a i m i n g the game.

I f y o u a g r e e w i t h us, or even     if you do not, pl e a s e w rite to us
w i t h y o u r views, we intend to         make them heard.
S E F P 0 R T E E S •. A RE OFTEN PORTRAYED AS THE CAUSE OF FOOTBALLS PROBLEMS
IN FACT WE ARE NOT. WE ARE THE PEOPLE, PERHAPS THE ONLY PEOPLE,
WHO CAN S4VE IT.
               0

WE CAN DO IT, BUT WE NEED YOUR SUPPORT.
R E C LAI M THE G A M E . EUROPE EUROPE '89 I



I SUPPORT/ DO NOT SUPPORT* EUROPE EUROPE '89

I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE THE FOLLOWING COMMENTS




N A M E . ..

AD DRE SS



(^Delete as applicable)


I WISH TO JOIN THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION AND
SUBSCRIBE TO ITS NATIO NA L NEWSLETTER.
I enclose memberhlp subscription^for the period to 31 M a y ( of £2 (min)

N A M E ...... ..................................................

A D D R E S S .....................................................



AGE:     under 16          □   16-21 □   over 21   D
DISABLED:          YES □       NO □
    BASIC FACILITIES FOR DISABLED FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS v SURVEY.

 The purpose of this survey is to gather opinion from DISABLED
 FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS regarding facilities provided at football
 stadia.
 Please complete one questionnaire per ground visited, (more
 forms are available from the address shown below.)
 Return this form to the F.S.A. upon completion.
                                    ..ooOoo
 Part 1.           Your name:
                  Address     :


                   Telephone:
                  P.S.A. membership no. (if member):

Type of disability. (Please delete those not applicable):

                  WHEELCHAIR         BLIND       OTHER

How many matches &o you attend per season (approx) ?

                  0 - 5              6 - 1 0            10 +

Part 2.           Football Ground visited ___

a) Does ground cater for wheelchairs?                            YES /   NO
b) If yes, how many?              1 - 5        6 - 10          10 +
c) Is wheelchair area covered?                                  YES /    NO

d) Is access to wheelchair area            VERY GOOD/GOOD/DIFFICULT/V.DIFFICULT ?
   (if difficult or very difficult, briefly explain problems)




e) Is the view of the pitch from the wheelcha ir area GOOD/REASONABLE/
   POOR/NGN—EXISTANT?

f) Are there commentary facilities for the blind?                     YEi
                                                                      YES /   NO
           THE F.S.A., 59, OAKU'OOD RD., HALEHOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 IXD
                                                                   rtr'Mdt




                  Been To Wembley Before?
 Then you’ll be prepared for:

 - D a n g ero u s O vercro w d in g
 ~ D iso rg a n ize d o r N o n -E x is te n t S te v a rd ln g
 - S h a a b o 1i c T ic k e t A rra n g em en ts
 - D i s r u p t i n g Toilets
 -   O v e r p r i c e d i,na I n a d e q u a t e   a nd Dr in k


dn   sea-onJ ike Football Supporters Association compiled a
S      ' 0"                   at the- 19SS Cup Final. „here »a„y
u  k    “ ” ‘>“ '1' « o . p « l serious injury tteou,h crushing
hich T h f Hdr m authoritles claim that the problems
highlighted have „ou been alleviated - fans* experience
PLEASE LFTWfKeJ'Mnijf y°U SUffeT- iny of the above toda/,
..           ‘ ^NOW, sc that we can continue to campaign for
0 ^ and6!';     °0n,f0rt °f           supporters at Wembley.
            ihlS Is yOUr
Football’s National       first trlP* wa,C(i*e to English
                      Hone...


                                !
JIT FuS*f; ca“Pai2ns for supporters on many Issues other
overleaf ^ ‘3tadlUn “ join Ui! now by completing the form


           Watlg»&Ii           59 Oakwood Read, Halei^?, Liverpool, L26

           London:         42 Sydney Road, London U13
                                                      ---- -




                                                                  •
                                                                  -
                                                                  ;';;/-H-;-f:t".y?t-:-•
                                                                                       J-y~Yvv
                                                                                           :V;V-




                                    L*-r-




          ':LL&4oaqv-                                          «-i ’?f:X;'.;i'.T. "■?; tc v^




 Are ;you tired, of the media portraying all football
 supporters as hooligans ?
   'V
 Are you fed up with the media telling us that
 everyone who goes to Germany will be there for trouble ?

 WE ABE I

W e ‘don’t want that view to go unchallenged. If you agree,
then join us.

We are an organisation dedicated to representing the
views of football supporters and promoting goodwill
between supporters nationally and internationally.

If you're interested, please contact:
FSA National         59 Oakwood Road, Halewood, liverpbbly L26
.FSA London r- ,: k 2 S y d n ey ^ S o a d , ,- E a liiig , .^London, Jrfl 3 > • *
                                     S-^OH:,AA   .\\Csi_                             -liftij.

                                  •JJ -
                                      t
 Door de Engelsc en NederlsChdse media worden voetball
 supporters^ikwijls afgeschilderd als relschoppers. Wii
 weten dat dit niet waar is, jullie toch' ook ?

De Football Supporters Association is enn organisatie die
 e belangen en mzichten van voetbalsupporters behartigt
en goodwill kweekt tussen de supporters onderling, zowel
nationaal alts international!.

Vele van onze leden zullen deze zomsr de Europese
Kampioenschappen bezoeken en zouden graag ir kontakt
komen met Nederlandse, Duitse, Itali.aanse fans',* ens' om
samen de wereld het ware gezicht te tonen van voetbal-
supporters.

Spreekt het bovenstaande je aan, neem.dan kontakt op m e « £
Football Supporters Association
fc^don branch,                  National,
£2 Sydney Road,                 59 Oakwood Bo ad,
Ealing, London, W13             Halewood, Liverpool,   L26




 This leaflet has been sponsored by McGregor Cory
 Shipping Company, Bridgewater Hoad, London E 15 2JZ
 and Basalstraut **1 , 3072 AA Rotterdam.
