8 8 - C O N S U L T b. v . ( i . o . )
de z o o m 18
3 4 4 8 dh w o e rd e n
the netherlands
phone   : (0)3480 * 10245




        August 29, 1989




        Mr. R.W.Whalley
        Secretary to the Inquiry into
        the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        LONDON SW1H 9AT
        ENGLAND




        Dear Mr. Whalley,


        Thank you for sending us a copy of the Interim Report of the Inquiry into the
        Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.


        We have carefully studied the report and have noticed that it in essence
        supports the concept of safety and crowd control which we are applying for
        the stadiums we develop.


        Our philosophy basically consists of the notion that three levels of safety
        and crowd control are to be distinguished with regard to stadiums. These levels
        are:


        1. Safety in general with respect to:
                  0 lay out        : - configuration of stands
                                    - number, width, and location of entrances/exits
                                    - gradients
                                    - width of aisles
                                    - maximum number of seats/standing spectators
                                      between aisles
                                    - location and number of toilets, refreshment
                                      facilities, etc.
                                    - etc.
8 8 - CONSULT




                0 materials   : - unbreakable

                                -                  non flammable
                0 emergency exits

                0 structural safety
                0 etc.



      2. Safety in relation to preserve order in the stadium:
                0 segregation of groups of spectators
                0 measures to prevent invasion of the pitch
                0 all materials to be permanently secured to the ground
                0 possibility to close-off sections of stands/terraces
                0 no removable units
                0 monitoring devices
                0 public address system
                0 easy access unto stands/terraces for police from pitch-side
                0 preferably all-seater stadiums
                0 etc.


      3- Safety in relation to situations of collective panic:
                0 entrances/exits only in lower sections of stands
                0 passage (escape route) between pitch and stand, but no fence.
                0 concrete walkway at street level with additional exits
                0 no obstructing elements in exits (regular or emergency)
                0 sufficiently wide passages
                0 access routes wide enough to allow passage of 270 persons per
                  minute
                0 emergency evacuation possible within 3 minutes
                0 minimum of one escape route per 850 spectators
                0 etc.


      It is our philosophy that all matters related to stadiums should be confronted

     with these three levels of safety precautions, such that a higher echelon

      safety observation can overrule proposed measures for lower echelon safety
      considerations. In such cases an alternative solution will have to be found.
*   8 8 - CONSULT




         We are even inclined to believe that this basic philosophy of three levels

         approach of safety and crowd control could or should be applied in matters

         such as introduction of identitycards, membership schemes, ban of sales of

         beer inside stadiums, etc. as well.



         As indicated before, we would be pleased to be of service to your Inquiry

         whenever you feel we could render a useful contribution to stage 2 of the

         inquiry. If the Inquiry would feel it to be of use to visit the Utrecht

         stadium we would be pleased to show you round and explain on the spot the
         details of our concept.



         Meanwhile we remain,



         Sincerely yours




         '8B-Consult

         Hen W.J.Agten
