                                                Research and Laboratory
                             Health &           Services Division
                                                Broad Lane
                             Safety             Sheffield S3 7HQ

                             Executive          Telephone 0742 768141
                                                ext
                                                Telex 54556 (HSE RLS G)
                                                Facsimile 0742 755792




Professor L Maunder
Head, Department of Mechanical                  V o u r reference
  Materials & Manufacturing Engineering
Stephenson Building                             O u r reference     SME/956/02 B
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne
                                                Date
NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE                                                 1 December 1989
NE1 7RU



Dear Professor Maunder

At the 4th meeting of the Technical Working Party on Tuesday, 28 November 1989,
I mentioned two further topics which are relevant to our remit.

1.   Safety Management

     I have been provided with a note regarding the safety management
     components of the guide which has been drafted by a member of HSE's
     Accident Prevention Advisory Unit. Fortuitously, the author, Mr D Moore,
     has the experience of previously being a safety advisor to a local
     authority working party on safety in sports grounds. Also, safety
     management procedures are one of the special interests of the Unit in
     which he new works. Attached is a copy of his note in which he lists
     several requirements which might be considered for inclusion in a
     re-drafted guide. I should add that this is an initial attempt by
     Mr Moore and does not as yet constitute an official HSE view. However, I
     think many of the points made are worth considering and will give you a
     'feel' for the safety management approach.

2.   Cccpetent Persons

     I also mentioned the term, much used within the HSE, 'competent person'.
     It could well be useful to include, within Chapter 1, comment on the
     competence of those required to interpret the guide. In the new
     Regulations on Pressure Systems, reference is made to the competence of
     the firm and the individual. I enclose a photocopy of the relevant
     passage frcm these Regulations which may help you to consider whether a
     similar passage could be recommended for the guide.

Yours sincerely




C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1

cc Mr J Sweet
The Green Guide and Safety Management in Sports Grounds

1.     Being only a "guide" clubs are not bound by its contents, may use it for
defensive purposes only and may apply very liberal interpretations of it.

2.     To be effective at establishing the use of safety management procedures
the Guide would have to educate football clubs to the true extent of their legal
responsibilities including those under the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974, the Safety at Sports Grounds Act and Common Law.To presume^ that   clubs
have a satisfactory prior knowledge of such responsibilities could well be a
precursor to failure.

3.     While the Green Guide does make reference to the need to manage safety
details are only briefly described within its 17 chapters. The majority of the
document describes standards for the physical structure of sites and only a
limited description of the software needed to ensure crowd safety is included, ie
the systems and procedures that management with overall responsibility for safety
have devised, implemented and monitored within their premises to ensure that they
can protect the safety of attending crowds during normal operations and
reasonably foreseeable adverse scenarios.

The existence and efficacy of such procedures are, as described, probably more
important than standards of construction and the Green Guide might be
reconstructed to reflect this position and ensure that clubs place the correct
emphasis upon safety management.

4.     In particular the Guide might describe the following requirements in
greater d e t a i l :

(a)     the need for a senior member of the company management team to be named as
         having ultimate responsibility for safety within the ground;

(b)     the requirement to produce written details with regard to the company’s
         policy upon spectator safety including the clear acceptance of
        responsibility for the subject and details of how that responsibility is
        to be discharged;



                                        3
C/REPORTS5/DM5
clear written arrangements for the delegation of individual
responsibilities to different levels of management within the company from
the senior directors to stewards. The identity of a co-ordinating "safety
manager" must be described in writing and specific details of his role and
functions laid down;

the delegation of appropriate authority and power necessary to accompany
such responsibilities;

a clear division of responsibility and functions between the club and
attending police officers so as to ensure club officials carry out club
responsibilities;

specific standards of spectator safety which are to be achieved should be
drawn up by the clubs senior management team and promulgated to all staff
and other parties, such as local authority officers, who are involved in
crowd safety;

an appropriate monitoring procedure that will be used to routinely report
to the cl u b ’s board of directors upon the standards of spectator safety
actually being achieved should be described. All staff should be made
aware that they will be held accountable for their actions or inactions
that are revealed by such monitoring procedures;

the use of formal, written safety management plans could be described
where in a pre-assessed set of procedures for dealing with a number of
different adverse scenarios are visually laid out including details of
communication channels available, exit directions and distances, means of
access for emergency vehicles, levels of first aid and fire fighting
available for locations etc. Such scenarios might include the late
arrival of fans, disorderly behaviour inside a ground, general riots,
emergency evacuation due to fire or bomb scares, emergency treatment of
fans due to structural collapse or other causes of major injury, treatment
of fans in situ where necessary, coping with incendiary devices and smoke
bombs within a crowd, methods of dealing with other projectiles and
localised build-ups of crowd pressure to excessive levels;




                                4
(i)     procedures describing how incidents that occur within grounds including
        near-misses are to be investigated and incorporated into a clubs accident
        prevention effort and safety management plan;

(j)     the Guide could describe in detail the level and types of training that
        are to be achieved by club staff and organisations available to provide
         it. It could for example, detail the legislative and organisational
         knowledge that senior managers should possess through to methods of
        dealing with fires and the principles of crowd behaviour and control that
        would be more useful to those at the front line of safety;

(k)     the frequency and type of practice drills that are to be undertaken
         perhaps including target response times could be described, eg emergency
         planning drills for total evacuation, failure of primary means of
         communication etc;

(1)     details of the actual amount of first aid facilities and personnel
         required and its suitable location within grounds would be of benefit.
         Football clubs must produce written formalised arrangements for the
         attendance of adequate numbers of first aiders and not be allowed to rely
         upon the good will attendance of voluntary organisations;

(m)     more precise details regarding the location and contents of a grounds
         central control point and the required co-ordinating activities of the
         ground safety manager from that point during matches would be of use.

        In particular a standardisation of the means of communication used within
        grounds including close circuit television and "parallel redundant" means
        of public address could be described;

(n)     senior management could be encouraged to set up formal procedures whereby
         the clubs ability to plan, carry out and monitor standards of spectator
         safety is routinely reviewed and assessed with regard to the adequate
         commitment of resources including personnel and finance. Such safety
         committees might involve inputs from a number of different parties at
         routinely planned intervals;




                                         5
C/REPORTS5/DM5
(o)      in addition to the routine monitoring of spectator safety the benefit of
         arranging for external audits of the standards being achieved, perhaps via
         local authorities or the private sector, might be described.

Conclusion


From my experience of   advising football clubs upon safety I conclude that the
present format of the   Green Guide coupled with the sometimes ineffective
enforcement of safety   legislation has not always promoted the provision of
appropriate standards   of safety within grounds.

It is my belief that the Guide would benefit from a fundamental review and
reconstruction so that the aspects of safety management currently dispersed
within it are drawn together into a clear, precise, logical and enforceable
description of the standards of stadia construction and "active management" that
are required.




                                        6
C/REPORTS5/DM5
