 From: M J Pyne                                         cc Mr Howarth
       Operational Policing                                Permanent Secretary
       Policy Unit                                         Mr Boys Smith
       Room 528, QAG                                       Mr Pugh
       « 273 - 2433                                        Mr Edmundson
       30 April, 1998                                      Mr Granatt
                                                           Mr Warner
                                                           Mr Owen

 Home Secretary

 HILLSBOROUGH CORRESPONDENCE

 Issue

 To reply to correspondence about the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny
 from Mr T J Burkett, one of the relatives of those who died at Hillsborough.

Timing

2.       It would be helpful to reply before the adjournment debate on Friday 8 May.

Recommendation

3.       A draft letter for Home Secretary signature is attached behind.

Consideration

4.       The attached correspondence has been received from Mr Burkett, who was
present at the House of Commons on 18 February when you met the families prior to
your statement. His letter understandably reflects the disappointment and frustration
felt by the families following the announcement that the inquiry into the disaster was
not to be reopened.

5.    An adjournment debate has been arranged for Friday 8 May to discuss the
outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny.

Handling/presentation issues

6.       No further issues.



                                       M JPyne
  DRAFT LETTER FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE

 T J Burkett




 Thank you for your letter of 23 February about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of
 the Hillsborough disaster. I am sorry that you have not received an earlier reply.


 I am very conscious of the disappointment and frustration felt by the families at my
 decision not to hold a fresh inquiry. I recognise that it will be difficult and painful for
 you to accept my decision. I have, though, considered the Judge’s report carefully and
 I accept the conclusion which he has reached that the evidence submitted to him does
 not add anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor
 Inquiry and the Inquests.


The original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he
entirely accepts Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith himself
condemned what he described as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s “disgraceful
lies” that fans had opened Gate C.


I do share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in Chapter 7 of
his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing theirjob


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. In January, the Home Affairs Select Committee made some
 important recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures. I
 have recently announced my response to the HAC recommendations including my
 intention to reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures
 and to remove the existing double jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and
 disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also endorsed the Committee’s
recommendation that forces should show greater commitment to their powers to
verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a request
to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.


I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a
public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party
was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an inquiry has been
completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would
have spared the families of those who died unnecessary distress when the Taylor
Inquiry had covered substantially the same ground as the Inquest.


I understand that for the families the grief will never end, but I hope that they will
accept that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a rigorous and comprehensive
examination of the submissions put to him. As you know, I am ready to talk to the
families to explain my decision. I met a delegation whilst in Southport on 7 March
and I am arranging another meeting in Merseyside. I will also be opening an
adjournment debate on Hillsborough in the House of Commons on 8 May.
                                                       *W ~
                                                                Ca: M/' Hsuzri1^ ,

                                                        HP
    Jack Straw           fC W a
                                                       T.J. Burkett
    Home Secretary         , »        ,
    The Home Office   ^           ^ 1
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate o U ^ y < .
    London               l
    SW1H9AT                  C X j^  A    u   ^

                                                       23rd February 1998
                                      J?A
Mr Straw

Please find enclosed the preposterous document you laughingly called “a most
independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny”. I am returning it to you and perhaps you
would like to pass it on to som eone else you think you can kid.

As I said to you in Committee Room 13 (the day you trampled on what little hope I had
of finding out the truth about who was responsible for the death of my son) you have
lined yourself up alongside those who have lied and deceived to cover up their own
shortcoming’s. You have lined yourself up with those who’s consciences are totally
devoid of any common decency. You have tarnished yourself to support those
spineless creatures responsible for the deaths of 96 human beings and unimaginable
mental and physical suffering of hundreds of others.

\wish I could have been a fly on the wall when you and the idiot you call Stewart-
Smith got together to plan what was to be written into this so called 'report.

In conclusion, I take some consolation in the fact that I honestly believe one day,
somehow, the truth about Hillsborough will come out. When it does, the rest of the
world will know, as I do now, that in spite of your title Mr Straw, you are not an
honourable man.
