 From: Paul Pugh                   cc: Mr Michael *
         Head of Operational           Mr O’Brien *                   Mr EdmundsfJrT
       Policing Policy Unit            Mr Howarth *                   Mr Butler
       Room 529                        Lord Williams *                Ms Clifford
       Queen Anne’s Gate               MrOmand *                      Mr Warner *
       5 0171-273-3141                 Mr Boys Smith                  Mr Owen *
       6 February 1998                 Ms Wheldon
                                                                (‘ with copies of the report)
                                       Mr Middleton



Home Secretary                                                                         —


HILLSBOROUGH

Issue

Publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and your response to that report.

Timing

2.    Pressing. The provisional date for publication is 18 February. You need
before then to confirm that the Attorney General and the DPP are content.

Summary

3.     The report is unequivocal that, in the Judge’s opinion, there is no basis for a
further public inquiry, a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest, or
reconsideration of previous decisions in relation to criminal or disciplinary
proceedings.

4.     There are two issues which give rise to questions about how matters have
been handled previously: the circumstances in which alterations were made to some
police officers’ statements; and technical evidence about the state of the terraces.
But in neither case does the Judge consider there are grounds for further
investigations or proceedings.

5.      My advice is that you should accept the main conclusions of the Judge’s
report, although there are some points on which you may want to take a slightly
different view to his. We should as far as possible draw a line under the
Hillsborough disaster. It would be doing the families a disservice to hold out the
hope of further inquiries or investigation - although some of them will not see matters
like that. They will see this report as yet another betrayal, and we can expect them
to be very critical of the report, the judge, the scrutiny process and you.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
 Recommendation

 6.       A draft letter for you to send to the Attorney is attached at Annex A. A first
 draft of an oral statement is also attached at Annex B. A steer from you on whether
 you are happy with this outline would be useful. There are proposals about handling
 in paragraph 21 onwards: some aspects will need the agreement of the Speaker
 and the business managers.

 Consideration

 7.     When you announced the scrutiny on 30 June, you said that Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith would have two tasks:

            (i)         to advise you whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                        significance to justify a further public inquiry.

            (ii)        to identify for the Attorney General, the DPP and the Chief Constable
                        (as disciplinary authority) any evidence that might be relevant to their
                        decisions that had not previously been considered.

8.      Chapter 7 of the report sets out the judge’s conclusions on these issues. He
has come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis on which there should be a
furthsr public inquiry, nor any basis for a renewed application to quash the inquest
verdict, nor any material which should be put before the DPP or disciplinary
authorities which might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already
taken.

9.      He has considered in great detail the allegations about video evidence and
about medical evidence, which were the two main issues on which claims for a new
inquiry or investigation rested. In relation to video evidence, he concludes that all
the material now available was available at the time; that there was no concealment
of evidence; and that it is simply wrong to suggest, as lawyers acting for the Family
Support Group have done, that the police deliberately and falsely blamed their
failure to see the overcrowding on a defective camera.

10.     The allegations about medical evidence have all been aimed at the decision
by the coroner not to enquire in detail into the treatment of victims until after 3.15pm.
The judge concludes that the arguments about this 3.15pm cut off point show a
complete misunderstanding of the coroner’s reasons for determining that point in the
first place, and that none of the evidence now offered - the great majority of which
was available to the inquest - provides any reason to question that decision.

11.    The judge’s evidence and reasoning are set out in great detail in the report,
and I can see no basis on which his conclusions could be faulted. On these central
points, therefore, there seems no question that his findings should be
accepted. I think the same applies to most of the other issues which he has
examined, including claims for an inquiry into the rescue operation after the disaster,
allegations that West Midlands police putting improper pressure on some witnesses,


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
 broader allegations of bias by West Midlands police or the coroner, inconsistencies
 in evidence put forward by the police at various points, and the suggestion that
 South Yorkshire police have never accepted responsibility or apologised for the
 disaster.

12.    There are two issues, however, which I think we need to consider particularly
carefully, because there might be an argument that you should take a different view
from the conclusion arrived at by the judge. There is a third, general conclusion
which also calls for a response from you. The three issues are:

            (i)         the circumstances in which alterations were made to South Yorkshire
                        police officers’ statements.

            (ii)       expert technical evidence about the state of the ground.

            (iii)      the judge’s conclusions about whether it is right to have an inquest
                        after a major inquiry.

Police statements

13.     Part 2 of Chapter 4 of the report sets out the details of the way in which the
original self-written statements by several hundred South Yorkshire police officers
came to be amended before they were submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. Officers
were originally asked to prepare such statements for the purposes of the force
collecting and presenting its case to the inquiry.        In the middle of this process,
however, it was decided that the statements would be used by the West Midlands
police as part of their fact-finding on behalf of the inquiry.

14.    The officers’ statements were submitted as a matter of routine to the solicitors
acting for the South Yorkshire police. Over of 400 statements were submitted, of
which over 250 attracted no comment at all from the solicitors, 60 had comments
which consisted of pointing out some minor mistake or ambiguity, and about 100
involved amendments of some significance. The purpose of this exercise was to
exclude any evidence which might be regarded simply as opinion, comment or
hearsay, or to remove abusive language. In Appendix 7 the judge looks at ten
amended statements in detail, and he concludes that in at least some cases it would
have been better if the amendments had not been made or that they inadvertently
removed matters of fact.

15.     The Taylor Inquiry team were aware of this process. The judge’s conclusion
is that the inquiry were in no way inhibited or impeded by the amendments, nor was
anything excluded which might have had any influence on the verdict at the inquest;
and he does not consider that there is anything in this process which might amount
to misconduct or malpractice.

 16.    It is certainly right that this process did not save South Yorkshire police from
the stinging criticisms of Lord Taylor. I do not think that you should dissent from the
judge’s main conclusion on this issue. Although in theory it would be possible, if the


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
 Chief Constable and the DPP agreed, to have a further police investigation as to
 whether any of this process amounted to criminal or disciplinary conduct, the
 outcome would be a foregone conclusion and would achieve nothing. But I think
 you might want to express a view that it was an error of judgement at the time to
 attempt to tinker with statements and that it would have been better to have allowed
 the statements to go forward in their original form so that the inquiry could form its
 own views about all the points contained in the statements, whether or not they were
 a matter of opinion or fact.

 Evidence about the state of the ground

 17.    Chapter 6 deals with evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
themselves containing an expert technical opinion about the state of the ground.
That opinion was not available to the inquiry or the inquests because it was
produced for the purpose of anticipated civil proceedings and for resolving between
the police, the club and the local authority their respective liabilities for compensation
payments to victims. The conclusions of that expert opinion about the inadequate
height of the crush barriers and about the capacity of the terrace suggest that
Taylor, if he had been aware of this opinion, might have criticised the club and the
local authority in more stringent terms than he did. It would suggest a greater
degree of liability on those parties. The judge is clear, however, that this would not
have altered Taylor’s central conclusions that the primary cause of the disaster was
a failure of police control.

18.     It is just conceivable that, if substantiated, the technical opinion might suggest
evidence of criminal negligence on the part of those responsible for maintaining and
licensing the terraces, but this is extremely unlikely. The opinion has not been
tested in court or otherwise validated; so it is simply the view of one expert. I have
spoken to those in the CPS who will be advising the DPP, and their view is that there
is insufficient here to merit further investigation.

An inquest after a disaster

 19.   The judge does not accept any of the criticisms of the coroner in this case but
he comes to the firm conclusion that it is unsatisfactory to have an inquest where
there has been a major disaster and an inquiry chaired by a judge, which will
inevitably have covered much the same ground. Much of the concerns expressed
by the Hillsborough families over the years have arisen because of their sense that
the inquest was unsatisfactory and in some sense exonerated those who were to
blame. It would probably have been better if the inquests had never taken place,
because Taylor’s inquiry conclusions would then have stood as the last word on the
disaster. It is possible that much of the subsequent agonising would have been
avoided.

20     A Home Office Working Group report on disasters and inquests published in
March 1997, recommended that after a major disaster, where there has been an
inquiry, the role of a coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of the
inquest when the public inquiry is established and limiting the circumstances in


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd-doc
which the inquest can be resumed. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith firmly backs that
 recommendation. The report's recommendations have not formally been adopted by
 Ministers. This awaits consideration of comments from those to whom the report was
 made available on publication. Implementation of the recommendations, however,
 requires primary legislation and the main obstacle to progress has been lack of
 Parliamentary time and a suitable legislative vehicle. Some coroners are likely to be
 concerned that the medical cause of death may not be adequately dealt with in a
judicial inquiry. Certain civil litigation lawyers may prefer to see a 'one-stop shop'
judicial forum for resolving all the medico-legal issues arising from fatal disasters. But
there would seem to be no reason why you should not agree in principle with the
 points which Lord Justice Stuart Smith makes, subject to the view of the Lord
Chancellor.

Handling

21.    If you agree with this analysis, publication of the report would, as far as
possible draw a line under speculation about fresh evidence or new inquiries. That
will come as a great disappointment to the family support group, but there is no way
to avoid that. There is a thread running through the report that where evidence is
inconsistent or involved witnesses giving contradictory views, at all points the judge
finds more credible or reliable the evidence which goes against the Family Support
Group’s view. But in each case, looked on its individual merits, the judge’s
conclusion seems right. The judge recognises the issue himself in paragraph 4
chapter 7 of his report where he says:

            “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
            especially since they had had their hopes raised that something more could
            be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had
            to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in
            the light of the evidence which had previously been considered.”

22.    However painful it may be for the families, we have to draw a line somwhere,
and I think this is the right point. It will be important, however, to avoid any
impression that closing the book in some way suggests that those responsible for
the disaster have been exonerated or escaped blame. We need to emphasise that
this report very firmly endorses Taylor’s conclusions about responsibility for the
disaster. You need also to emphasise that the police have accepted responsibility,
which the report brings out at the end of chapter 6, and that financial compensation
(for what that is worth) has been paid.

23.     That will not overcome the frustration that no individual has personally been
held to account, which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith acknowledges in paragraph 3 of
chapter 7. In that connection we need to highlight the importance of putting right the
shortcomings in the police disciplinary arrangements, as proposed by the Home
Affairs Committee. We will also need to emphasise the far reaching changes to the
safety and security of football grounds and to the policing of football, which resulted
from the disaster. And there will need to be some recognition, as set out above, that
there are shortcomings in the inquest system, which Ministers are looking at.


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
 Openness

24.    When you set up the scrutiny you emphasised the importance of openness
and said that you would do your best to ensure that the evidence considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith would be published. Most of the key material is contained in
the appendices to the report. We have prepared a schedule of other material
examined by the scrutiny (Annex C). We will provide separate detailed advice about
how much of this should be placed in the Library of the House - much is already in
the public domain.

25.   The judge also sets out in Appendix 1 to his report the people who gave
evidence. He proposes that the transcripts of their evidence and their written
submissions should be made public.

26.     He refers in paragraph 5 of Appendix 1 to written evidence of other witnesses,
 most of which he is content to make public, but some of which is in the form of
 reports about one of the victims, Kevin Williams. The judge does not consider that
that should be published as it relates solely to the death of that individual. That
seems right. It also raises a general point about other material, including Appendix 9
of the report. It must be right that material relevant to the general causes of the
disaster and related matters should in principle be made public; the same should
apply to material concerning individual victims where that has been put forward by
the families or others as central to their case about the general issues. But I think
that material which is specifically about individual victims and their treatment
should be provided only to their families directly and privately, rather than
made more generally available. For that reason, I do not think that Appendix 9 of
the report should be published in its present form. It contains details of 14 individual
cases, attempting to answer those specific points which their families have raised
with the judge. I know that in preparing his report the judge considered whether it
was more appropriate for the relevant sections of Appendix 9 to be sent privately to
the families and for the published text simply to indicate that that had been done.
He concluded that the balance was in favour of publishing in full. My view is that the
balance lies the other way, and that we should arrange for relevant passages from
Appendix 9 to be sent directly to the families, with the published version of that
Appendix stating simply that it contains details of individual cases which have been
provided directly to those concerned. Families could then themselves decide
whether they wanted details of their individual cases to be shared more widely. In
that one respect, we would be less open than the judge proposes. An urgent
decision on this point is needed, because it will affect the printing of the report.

27.    In other respects, I think we should be more open. That concerns in
particular material provided by those listed in paragraph 6 of Appendix 1. The judge
regards these people as having provided assistance, rather than evidence, and does
not propose to put records of those discussions or other written material arising from
them into the public domain. I think this is a distinction which it would be difficult to
explain in public; and as the list includes the coroner, Dr Popper, the chief
constable, and other key figures involved with the inquiry or the inquest, it would


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp05 54pd.doc
 appear as if material was being deliberately concealed. I therefore favour as far as
 possible putting their “evidence” into the public domain too.

Arrangements for publication

28.    The provisional date for publication is 18 February. That gives just enough
time to sort out the logistics of publication. It also avoids publication before Liverpool
play Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough on 14 February.

29.    You have agreed that you should publish the report by laying it before
Parliament and making an oral statement, as you did when you announced the
scrutiny. As you did then, it would be right also for you to see the families
immediately before you make your statement and be prepared to meet them
afterwards - although a hostile reception is inevitable. Merseyside MPs should also
be briefed. These arrangements will need the Speaker’s agreement.

30.    Although it will prolong the process, I think you should be prepared to offer a
debate on the report. When you announced the scrutiny, Dr Brian Mawhinney
asked for an undertaking that the House could debate the matter further when Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith had concluded his investigation. You undertook to discuss that
with the Leader of the House. In response to a later intervention by Dennis Skinner
about compensation, you said that “the issue could be raised in the debate that I
promised to discuss with my Right Honourable Friend the Leader of the House in
response to the Shadow Home Secretary”. In the light of those comments, and
because of the detail and length of the report, I can see some value in offering a
debate rather than having to deal with inevitable attempts for adjournment debates
and/or PNQs.

31.    I attach at Annex B a first version of an outline oral statement. It is very
rough, but gives some indication of the ground which I think we ought to cover.

Next steps

32.    If you accept the general advice in this submission, the next steps are to write
to the Attorney General and the DPP, securing their agreement to the line which you
propose to take. I do not anticipate any difficulty with this, since the conclusion
essentially is that they should take no further action. A draft is attached at Annex A.

33.    When we have a definite date, arrangements can be made for a meeting with
the families. We will also need to prepare a detailed media handling plan.




                                     PAU


f:\oppu\hou\longs ub\pp0554p4doc
                                                                                     ANNEXA


                  DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY




The Right Hon John Morris QC MP
Attorney General



HILLSBOROUGH


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is
any new evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office
was provided with a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now to
agree our response to his conclusions.


A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially
he had two tasks.


           (i)         to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                       significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and


           (ii)        to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
                       constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be
                       relevant to your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been
                       considered.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear.                He considers that there is no
basis for establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. Nor is there
any basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. Nor does he
consider there is any material which might require re-consideration of previous
decisions in relation to criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
and detailed. Having considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his central
conclusions are right.


When I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the
judge’s report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he
considered as possible. Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to
his report. Most of the remaining material which he has considered is already in the
public domain, such as transcripts of public proceedings. There is some material,
however, which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to but which has not so far been
made public. This includes particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and
1997 about whether the evidence available would support criminal proceedings. I
would be grateful for your views on whether that advice can be placed in the Library
at the House.


When the report is published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and
the reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public
inquiry. It is important that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw
a line under speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that
both your and the Director’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility
that, should anything new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I
should give as firm an indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you
agree, I consider that I should say on publication of the report that you and the
Director have considered its conclusions, and on the basis of the material which it
contains, the Director consider that there is no basis which would justify fresh
criminal investigations, and that you consider that any application to the High Court
for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of succeeding. I would be
grateful for your views.


There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your
views.         The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers
submitted to the inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail,
setting out exactly how and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
effect on the outcome of the proceedings.           There are bound to be questions,
however, about whether anything in this process might amount to misconduct of a
criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that it would not.
It would in theory be possible to instigate a further police investigation to confirm this
conclusively, but I think the outcome would be a foregone conclusion, and I do not
consider that such an investigation should be instigated. I would be grateful for your
confirmation view on this point.


The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire
police about the state of the ground. He suggests that the condition of the terraces
and the over-estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that
information had been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have
attributed a greater proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority.
However, it is clear that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would
have had any material effect on the balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.


One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is unsatisfactory
to have an inquest where there has already been an inquiry, chaired by a judge, into a
major disaster. This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on
disasters and inquests, whose report was published last March. This recommended
that, where a major disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify
that a judicial enquiry into the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into
the deaths, the role of the coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of
the inquest and not requiring its resumption except in the most exceptional
circumstances.


Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice
Stuart Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity,
there are no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require
primary legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove
one of the causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.



f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
Publication of the report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here.
I will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have
escaped blame - the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise
also that we are putting right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system
which in part enabled the officers in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want
nearer the time to clear with you the text of my statement, but I would be grateful for
your urgent agreement in principle to what I propose.


My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the
week beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested 18 February. The
report is very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for
MPs to read in a short time.       But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and
requests for further debate. If Ann agrees, I would like to head off those protests by
indicating that we would be prepared to make time available for the House to debate
the report.


I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of
the Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0554pd.doc
                                                                                ANNEX B

                                    DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT

                                    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



With permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2.         On 30 June 1997 I announced to the House that the Attorney General, the
Director of Public Prosecutions and I had agreed that it was in the public interest to
establish an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there was any new evidence
relating to the disaster which was not previously available.          Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, was appointed to conduct that
scrutiny. His terms of reference were:


           To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
           Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


           (a)        to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


           (b)        to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the
                       purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;
                       or


           (c)        to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                       disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
                       evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
                      justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
                       Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
                       (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
                       considered by them which may be relevant to their respective




f:\oppu\hou\pq\pp0556pd.doc
                        duties;   and to advise whether there is any other action which
                        should be taken in the public interest.


3.         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today.


4.         He had two essential tasks. The first was to advise me whether any evidence
not previously available was of such significance as to justify a further public inquiry.
The second task was to identify for the Attorney General, the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire police any evidence that
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


5.          With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time some new
information may become available which was not known at the relevant time. There
were many thousands of people present at Hillsborough on that awful day and
millions more watched it on their television screens. There will always be some new
shred of information which might be gleaned. But that does not always mean that
the previous outcomes would have been any different. We must be satisfied that
any re-opening of previous proceedings would be merited, and that any new
information is not simply new, but also material to those proceedings.


6.         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
which has been put to him. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information
presented to him, whether that information came from individuals or official bodies.
His clear conclusion is that there is no basis on which there should be a further
public inquiry, nor is there any basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
the inquest, nor is there any material which should be put before the Director of
Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to re­
consider the decisions they have already taken.              He concludes that none of the
evidence which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence
which was available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.




f:\oppu\hou\pq\pp0556pd.doc
7.        I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s report very carefully. We have decided that his conclusions are right.


8.        Few events in recent history have been subject to such lengthy and detailed
examination. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered fully
the causes of the disaster and made wide ranging recommendations about crowd
control and safety at sports events which have had a profound effect on safety at
football grounds and the policing of football matches.


9.        The deaths that occurred were also the subject of inquests conducted by the
Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire. The inquests, conducted in two
parts in April and May 1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991, involved
over 80 days of public hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West
Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether
there were any grounds for criminal or disciplinary proceedings. That investigation
involved the taking of more than 5000 statements. At a later stage in November
1993, there was a judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings, which upheld the
inquest verdict of accidental death and the conduct of those proceedings. We have
now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.


10.        The main causes of the disaster are clear.         They were identified by
Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to
a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main
reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”. The South Yorkshire police
have accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. They, together with
the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Local Authority, who were also
criticised by Lord Taylor, have paid many millions of pounds in compensation -
although money is little compensation for the loss which so many families have
suffered.


11.         I fully understand why those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough should feel
betrayed by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for



f:\oppu\hou\pq\pp055 6pd.doc
the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which
resulted from the Taylor Inquiry mean that it could never happen again.


12.        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough
families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


           “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally
           been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
           even to the extent of losing their jo b”.


13.        There are serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system. The Home
Affairs Committee produced a report on 15 January which makes recommendations
for change. I will be responding fully to that report soon. But what happened after
Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current
arrangements.


14.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after
a major disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry.              He endorses the
recommendation of a Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests,
published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after such a public inquiry
should be limited.


15.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable
and, I think, unnecessary burden on him when the Taylor Report had covered
substantially the same ground. If no inquest had been necessary, the Taylor inquiry,
which all have accepted as an excellent report, would then have remained
unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.


16.        I     therefore    agree   in   principle   with   Lord   Justice   Stuart-Smith’s
recommendations that there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a
judicial inquiry into a major disaster.



f:\oppu\hou\pq\pp0556pd.doc
[17.        This report is substantial and detailed. I appreciate that Honourable Members
will not have had the opportunity to read it fully. With the agreement of my Right
Honourable Friend the Leader of the House, I am able to indicate that the
Government would be willing to make time available for Honourable Members to
debate the report further, if that were the wish of the House.]


18.         When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that
the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the
main material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report.
Much of the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain,
consisting of transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor
Inquiry. I am arranging for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
be placed in the Library of the House.


19.         All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the
families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to
comprehend what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


            " I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
            especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could
            be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had
            to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in
            the light of the evidence which had previously been considered”.


20 .        I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. We must at some point draw a
line under what happened at Hillsborough. However painful that must be for those
who lives have been touched by the disaster, I believe that now is the time to draw
that line.




f:\oppu\hou\pq\pp055 6pd.doc
                                                                            ANNEX C

Schedule           -   Documents and videotapes examined by the Scrutiny


NOTE - This schedule lists the material examined by the scrutiny which is
not referred to in Appendix 1 of the Scrutiny report.        Appendix 1 lists
particular written statements which the scrutiny considered, and people who
sent in written submissions.      These statements and submissions do not
appear in the list below.

With these important exceptions the schedule lists all the documents and
videotapes of any significance which the scrutiny team examined.


Documents

1.        Lord Taylor’s Inquiry - interim and final reports (published by HMSO).

2.        Transcripts and other documentation from Lord Taylor’s Inquiry (Public
           Record Office, 106 volumes).

3.        Transcripts of the initial (so-called ‘mini’) inquests on 95 victims, held at
           Sheffield from 18 April to 4 May 1990 (obtained from the South
          Yorkshire Coroner).

4.        Transcripts of the resumed (or ‘main’) inquest on the 95 victims, held at
           Sheffield Town Hall from 19 November 1990 to 28 March 1991 (80
           days of transcripts, obtained from the South Yorkshire Coroner).

5.        West Midlands Police report to the Director of Public Prosecutions,
          including witness statements (23 volumes, obtained from South
          Yorkshire Police).

6.        Statements by South Yorkshire police officers (obtained from South
          Yorkshire Police).

7.        ‘Body files’ (obtained from South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of
           the Coroner) on, among others

                       James Aspinall
                       Kester Ball
                       Andrew Brookes
                       Paul Carlile
                       Gary Church
                       Tracey Cox
                       Ian Glover


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0562pd.doc
                      Philip Hammond
                      Sarah Hicks
                      Victoria Hicks
                      Gary Jones
                      Richard Jones
                      Nicholas Joynes
                      Michael Kelly
                      John McBrien
                      Keith McGrath
                      Lee Nicol
                      Graham Roberts
                      Steven Robinson
                      Andrew Sefton
                      Adam Spearitt
                      Philip Steele
                      Christopher T raynor
                      Kevin Traynor
                      Kevin Williams

8.        South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 FA
          Cup semi-finals at Hillsborough (obtained from South Yorkshire
          Police).

9.        Legal Opinion by Alun Jones QC for the Hillsborough Family Support
           Group, 13 March 1997, with Annexes A to G (obtained from
           Hillsborough Family Support Group).

10.       Memorial to the Attorney-General on behalf of the families of six of the
          deceased, seeking a fresh inquest, April 1992 (obtained from the
          Attorney-General’s office).

11.       Skeleton argument on behalf of those families to the Divisional Court,
          seeking judicial review of various decisions of the Coroner, 1993
           (obtained from the Family Support Group).

12.       Judgement of the Divisional Court on that application, November 1993
           (obtained from the Attorney General’s office).

13.       Joint Opinion of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birts QC for the
           Director of Public Prosecutions, August 1990 (obtained from the Crown
           Prosecution Service).

14.       Report of a review of the evidence by the Crown Prosecution Service,
           May 1997 (obtained from the Crown Prosecution Service).

15.       Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority in relation to
           complaints against officers of the South Yorkshire Police, 1990
           (obtained from the Police Complaints Authority).


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0562pd.doc
16.         Inquiry and Report by J D Phillips, then Deputy Chief Constable of
            Devon and Cornwall, August 1990 (obtained from the South Yorkshire
            Police).

17.         ‘No Last Rights’ (book) - Phil Scraton, Ann Jemphrey and Sheila
            Coleman, published by Liverpool City Council, 1995.

18.         ‘The Day of the Hillsborough Disaster1 (book) - compiled and edited
            by Rogan Taylor, Andrew Ward and Tim Newburn, published by
            Liverpool University Press, 1995.

19.       ‘Guide to the Safety of sports Grounds’, 1986 edition, HMSO.

20.       Report of the Disasters and Inquests Working Group, Home Office,
          1997.

21.        Report ‘Advice in respect of the Hillsborough Stadium and the disaster
           on 15 April 1989’ prepared for Sheffield Wednesday FC by Sir William
           Halcrow and Partners, August 1990 (obtained from Hammond
           Suddard, Solicitors for the South Yorkshire Police).

 22.        Photographic archive of the disaster held by South Yorkshire Police.


Videotapes

23.       Police tapes TB1, TB2, TB3 and TB4 (originals of TB1 and TB2, copies
          of TB3 and 4 - from South Yorkshire Police).

24.       Police tape VRM2 (copy obtained from South Yorkshire Police).

25.       ‘Compilation tape’ of the disaster, made by West Midlands Police
           (obtained from South Yorkshire Police).

26.       British Broadcasting Corporation tapes of the disaster, MAP 1 to 9
          (copies obtained from the BBC).

27.       Betacam tapes of the disaster owned by Yorkshire Television
          (obtained from YTV).

28.       Coroner’s exhibit C539 (extract from tape TB2, shown to inquest jury
          on the morning of 15 March 1991 (day 71 of the resumed Inquest)
          (obtained from South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of the
          Coroner).

29.       Proceedings at the Inquest on the morning of 15 March 1991 (obtained
          from South Yorkshire Police, acting on behalf of the Coroner).


f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0562pd.doc
30.         Granada Television drama-documentary ‘Hillsborough’,          broadcast
            December 1996.

31.         ‘Kevin’s Mum’, an episode of the ‘Cook Report (Yorkshire Television),
            broadcast June 1994.

32.        ‘Disaster at Hillsborough’ (Yorkshire Television      ‘First   Tuesday’
           documentary), broadcast February 1990.




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0562pd.doc
