WELSH OFFICE                                                                  Y SWYDDFA 0YMREIG
CATHAY5 PARK                                                                       PARC CATHAYS
CARDIFF CF                                                                     CAERDYDD CF1 3HQ
                 13Ha CFACSIMILE TRANSMISSION)
 To be completed by the originator             Please complete In block letters
 Please Insert Name, Room Number, Full Address and Fox Number ( If known )


This Plus                Pages                         Security
                                                       Classification
To;
             Name                                 Address                                Fax Number

                            Q 2 "TD laj                 ^
%                                  GWoQA        (1                      UoN ^Q fO
From:
             Name                                 Address                                     Ext



                                        CPA
                                                                                       Time Required
      Dote                                    Time                                     at Destination*

5 i s =?o                               q - s’ s-                                      A' S.A.p t
COPIES TO:

             Name                                 Address                                Fax Number




                 •




To be completed by the operator
         Date                           Time Despatched                               Signature

C                    D            C                                                                    D
Group 3 Machine (NEFAX 18): GTN 1208-3036        STD 0222-323036

                                                                                              e
         -I. -                    w1ii h* transmitted at the time stated because tranmissjon/receipt
                                                                                Reference.




                            9 tt 9       id a                        gfyy      o| o U m m u>v4' Otd***

                    Y                                   ^                 v»ite                    Jv^Jmk      QrtK


                   oi'   ^ot 4       ^              H** U   i^       0^     J^l* <3 (fcgiw                Vd

                   m     V \| ttt* y \ U i> | o |     4 v j V * W * n t i jpi«sN |. N v t a & t t a t l      ’j |

                   yW j * *     w »K \ Y                          ^ W *u t         to h t \ * i* va^<* V k


                          Artp&ift o| fti V^m S * * V y             -




rrfMMfl Ifl.'T'l
 G585JS58                                           Reference ^JC . V L S l / l o




 1.    Mr D M Timl                             cc: PS/Permanent Secretary
 2.    PS/PUSS                                     Mr J.W Lloyd
 3.    PS/Secretary of State                       Mr R A Wallace
                                                   Mr W M Cooper


 HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER:    POST INQUIRY DEVELOPMENTS

  Introduction

  1.   The purpose of this submission is appraise Ministers of the progress
  on football crowd control and safety in the wake of Lord Justice Taylor's
  Final Report on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. The submission also
  seeks Ministers’views on policy proposals as they apply to Wales.

 Background

  2.   The Football Nfembership Scheme (FMS) has been deferred indefinitely;
  there is no realistic prospect of it being revived in its previously
  proposed form. Because of the close nexus of the safety and crowd
  control recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor with the Home Secretary's
  existing responsibilities for safety at sports grounds and public order,
  DOE have agreed that the implementation of the remaining provisions of
  the Football Spectators Act 1989 (FSA) be transferred to Home Office.
  The Prime Minister has still to form<i#ly agree the transfer.

    3.   The Home Secretary has always exercised primary responsibility for
    the designation of grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act (SSGA)
(tj 75 in consultation with the Department.  Prior to 1988 the Secretary of
    State for Wales exercised an appellate function in respect of sporting
    organisations that felt aggrieved over the terms of the designation. On
    1 January 1988 this appellate function transferred to the Courts however.

 4.    Without the FMS. the raison d'etre of the FSA 89 has changed
 significantly; it is now primarily a vehicle for implementing via the
  Football Licensing Authority (FLA) many of the safety and crowd control
  recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor. Part 2 of the Act also
  rcinforces the existing crowd control powers (such as exclusion orders)
  available to the Home Secretary under the Public Order Act 19&6. Section
  14(7) of the FSA 89 empowers the Home Secretary to designate under the
 •Police Act 196*1 an "enforcing authority" (almost certainly the police) to
  enforce the restriction order provisions of Part 2,

  Forward Action

  5-   Future action falls within the following areas

       a.     the implementation of Part 2 of the FSA 89 which will enable
              restriction orders to be placed on supporters who commit
              offences outside England and Wales. The restriction orders
              will prevent offenders from attending all domestic matches.
              This has particular urgency for England and Scotland whose
              national sides are both competing in the World Cup Finals in
              Italy this summer.




                                        1.
                                                           Reference




             b.   The establishment of the Football Licensing Authority (FLA)
                  created under Section 8 of the FSA, The FLA will be the
                  principal instrument for implementing many of the crowd control
                  and safety recommendations made by Lord Justice Taylor,
                  including the conversion to all-seater stadia. The enabling
                  provisions for the FLA were included in the Act by the Minister
         ‘        of Sport during its parliamentary passage following Taylor's
                  interim report in August.

             c.   Consideration of how practical, or desirable, Lord Justice
                  Taylor’s recommendations on all-seater stadia are in practice.
                  A recommendation that spectators are admitted only to seated
                  accommodation applies to matches played at sports grounds
                  designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act (SSGA) 75•
                  This casts the net wider than grounds of association football
                  clubs; it embraces rugby union (10 in Wales), rugby league and
                  cricket grounds.
                           i
        Designation and Licensing

        6.   The cornerstone for both the implementation of Part 2 of the FSA
        (paragraph 5a above) and ground licensing under paragraph 5b will be the
        designation of certain categories of matches under Section 1(2) of the
        FSA. The following categories of matches are proposed for designation in
        England and Wales

             a.   matches organised by UEFA   (the European Football Association);

             b.   matches between Football League clubs;

             c.   international matches, at   both notional and club level;

        which are played at a sports ground designated by order under
        Section 1(1) of the SSGA 75- As already mentioned supporters subject to
        a restriction order under Part 2 of the FSA will be debarred from
        attending such matches for the duration of the Order. Section 9(1) of
        the FSA creates the offence of admitting spectators to unlicensed
        premises to watch a designated football match. The FLA, in granting a
        licence, can attach such conditions as they feel appropriate,

        7.   If the designation categories proposed above were applied to the
        Football Membership Scheme they would include a wider range of matches
        than recently recommended by the Secretary of State's Working Group on
        designation. The Secretary of State accepted the group’s recommendation
        that designation in Wales for the purposes of the FMS should be limited
        to matches between football league clubs. The FMS is, however, highly
        unlikely to be resurrected and, to demur from the designation structure
        now proposed could be construed as contrary to the spirit of Taylor and
        seriously diluting the effective enforcement of the Restriction Order
        system under Part 2 (which has never had the contentious profile of the
        FMS).

        8.   At Doc 1 is a araft Order which the Home Secretary proposes to make,
        subject to final legal scrutiny, bringing the designations mentioned in
        paragraph 6 into force. Originally, the Secretaries of State for
        Environment and Wales were to make separate designations of match
        categories in respect of England and Wales for the purposes of the FMS.
        As the rules of engagement are now different and designation is so
18-77
        closely allied with existing powers principally exercised by the Home
                                              2.
              G5&5J568




              Secretary Ministers are asked if they are content for the designation
              Order at Doc 1 to be under the Home Secretary's sole signature? If
              Ministers are agreeable the Department, by way of a failsafe, will write
              to the Home Office, making it clear that a common designation for England
              and Wales will need to be rethought should there be any realistic
              prospect of a Football Membership Scheme being revived.

              All-seater Stadia

              9.   Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations on all-seater stadia are of
              less immediate concern. The report recommended that standing should be
              eliminated for all.matches at grounds of first and second division clubs
              in the Football League, the Premier Division of the Scottish Football
              League and at national stadia by August 1994. At all other grounds
              designated under the SSGA 75 standing should be eliminated by
              August 1999- The FLA will have the power to require all-seater
              facilities as a condition of obtaining a licence for a ground. The
              Authority will however, probably be given a measure of discretion on
              timing.

              10.   Any proposal to make rugby and cricket grounds subject to the
              all-seater proposals will undoubtedly meet strong resistance. Home
              Office intend to tread carefully on the issue and will be meeting
              representatives of the English and Welsh Rugby Unions to discuss the
              possibility of both Twickenham and the National Stadium, Cardiff (where
              strong arguments for compliance exist) becoming all-seater by 199^-

              11.   The requirement that national stadia should be all-seater by 1994
              also has direct implications for the Football Association of Wales (FAW).
              The Welsh national side play international matches at all 3 Football
              League club grounds in Wales and it can be strongly argued that Wales has
              3 national stadia. In order to soften the financial implications of the
              Taylor recommendations the FAW will now have to come to a decision on
              whether only one of the league grounds should be adopted as the national
              ground. The Football Association have requested a meeting with the Home
              Secretary to discuss the implications of Lord Justice Taylor's
              recommendations; the Department intend to inform the FAW of this
              proposed meeting so that it can arrange an invitation or, alternatively
              for its representations to be made through the Football Association.

              Conclusion

              12.   Ministers are asked to note the current developments referred to
              above. More specifically:-

                    a.     are they content with the designation structure proposed in
                           paragraph 5. (subject to a reappraisal in the very unlikely
                           event that the FMS will be resurrected)?

                    b.     Are they content for the Home Secretary to be sole signatory of
                           the Football RpfiC't-.Ators (Designation of Football Matches in
                           iingland and Wales) Order 1990 at Doc 1?




                ^   March 1990                                  D A POWELL
                                                                EPLG
Doe \ i - v
                                                     3-
