                                                                          STATION
NAME:           ROGER CHARLES
                BALL

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: □

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260290                                                 RDGER BALL (SIOJED)



           Further to ny previous statement I would make the following specific

        points of criticism.

        The first being a number of points concerning the South Yorkshire

           Police.

           1) Traffic arrangements for supporters arriving from the South and

           this includes a significant number of Liverpool supporters were

           totally inadequate for the volume of vehicles.

           Specifically cars leaving the Ml at Junction 34 were directed

           towards the City Centre, which was already congested.

           2) When we arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.30 pm (1430)

           the situation was already out of control of the Police.    Groups of

           Officers were standing around doing nothing.     There was no filtering

           or queuing system.   Several mounted police near the turnstiles seemed

           to have lost control of their horses with a threat of injury to those

           trying to gain admission.

           3) When we passed through Gate C nobody examined our tickets or gave

           us directions onto the terraces.

           4) Just before I lost consciousness probably around 1503 hours (1503)
BALL                  ROGER CHARLES                                        2


I saw a Police Officer walk slowly along the other side of the fence

in front of roe towards the main stand.    He was completely oblivious to

the groans, screams and cries for help from the crowd.

5) At about 1530 (1530) hours having regained consciousness outside

Gate C I was several times refused entry back into Pen 3 by a cordon

of Police blocking the tunnel entrance.     I was then denied the

opportunity to seek out ny son and if he had still been alive assist

with his resuscitation. I was also anxious about the other two boys

and about the loss of ny spectacles.

6) At about 1730 (1730) hours when I was being treated in the St

Johns Ambulance Room J                 went off to try and find a phone.

He* wandered by mistake into the gymnasium where he saw at least fifty

of the victims. There was obviously no control over access to the

corpses at this time.

7) At about 1845 hours (1845) having returned to the stadium I asked

a Police Officer if there had been any fatalities and he replied,     one

or two."    He would certainly have known that he was lying.   Also at

this time we were advised by a Police Officer to go to Hammerton

Road, but we were told no transport was available and eventually

 hitched a lift there.
 8) Immediately after identifying Kesters body I was taken by a Police

 Officer to a table in the gymnasium and asked to recount the events of

 the day.   This took about ten minutes.    The Police Officer then asked

 roe to go through it again so he could write it down.    As a result of

 this procedure it was at least an hour before I was given an

 opportunity to telephone iry wife with the bad news.

 The officer who took the statement omitted all critical references to

 the Police.   At one point Kesters belongings were brought and I was

 asked to check them and sign a receipt, this was very distressing.
BALL                   ROGER CHARLES                                       3


9) Within the past few weeks the Chief Constable Peter WRIGHT has

stated that there is additional evidence which has not been made

public.

He denies knowing what this evidence is, but has inplied on a

number of occasions that the behaviour of Liverpool Supporters was a

major contributory factor.    His remarks have been widely reported by

the Press in Sheffield where the inquests will be held.    I believe he

has abused his position and prejudiced the outcome of the inquests.

My criticsm of the football association is:

1.     The Association insistence that both semi finals should be played

simultaneously and that neither should be shown live on television

created an extraordinary demand for tickets.

2.     Allocation of the smaller Leppings Lane end to Liverpool

highlighted the demand mentioned in (1) above.     The four of us who

travelled to Sheffield were all season ticket holders at Anfield, but

only two of us automatically qualified for a senu. final ticket.    (The

other two obtained tickets quite legitimately on the morning of the

match).

My criticism of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is:

 1.    The fatal design of the two central pens was obviously crucial

 once through the tunnel, there was no means of escape to the left or

 right while the front gate was totally inadequate.

 2.    There was no indicatation anywhere near the tunnel entrance that

 there were other points of access to the terraces.     Neither did we see

 any stewards directing supporters onto the terraces.

 3.     The tickets advised spectators to take up their positions "15

 minutes before kick off".     Those of us who arrived at the turnstiles

 by 1430 hours (1430) would have expected to be able to comply with the

 request.
    ‘   BALL                   ROGER CHARLES                                     4


        4.    The map on the ticket was inaccurate and dangerously misleading.

        Roger Ball



                                                             ROGER BALL SIQ4ED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

             TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        S BEECHEY D/SUPT




                                I
