From: Peter Edmundson                                        cc M r Boys Smith
      Operational Policing                                      M r Pugh
      Policy Unit                                               M r Granatt
      Room 527, QAG                                             M r W arner
      ® 2 7 3 -2 62 1                                           M r Owen
      4 March, 1998

                                                                            RECEIVED BY
Home Secretary )
               )       Simultaneously
                                                                                 0 4 MAR $ 9 8
M r Howarth    )                                                           HOME SECRETARY
HILLSBOROUGH: MEETING WITH LIVERPOOL MPs

You asked for updated briefing on Hillsborough for the meeting with the Home
Secretary and Liverpool MPs. This is attached together with lines to take on the issues
covered in Paddy Tipping’s note about yesterday’s meeting o f Liverpool MPs.

2.     Only part o f the material considered by the scrutiny has so far been placed in           >
the House o f Commons Library. In particular, we are still in the process o f
photocopying some 1000 statements from South Yorkshire Police officers and do not
expect to have this completed for another week. (We have to provide six copies o f
each document). Since we are dealing with the original documentation, this work has
to be done w ith some care.

3.      The specific points raised in Ms Rushton’s e-mail commissioning this updated
briefing are covered in the attached material. In short, we cannot say yet whether the
DPP will take over any private prosecution. The courses o f action open to the DPP are
included in the briefing.

4.     The briefing covers Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s unfortunate comments about
Liverpool fans and his apology.

5.     We have added to the video evidence section what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
had to say about the CCTV system and M r Houldsworth and have added to the
aftermath o f the disaster and the inquest section the quote from Counsel to the Family
Support Group in their submission to the scrutiny about the impracticality o f
convening new inquests.                                                                   I
6.    We have added a line to take about why the Chief Constable o f South
Yorkshire received an advance copy o f the report.

7.    I also attach the Hansard extract o f the Home Secretary’s announcement.




                          $ Peter Edmundson
f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
New evidence deposited in Liverpool

[It is not clear what is being referred to here.]

LJ Stuart-Smith found no new material evidence in his scrutiny. We are placing in the
House o f Commons Library as much o f the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith
as possible.

M uch o f the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result
o f the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. We are placing in the Library copies o f material
which is not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish. It will
take some time to complete this work.

We are also in discussion with some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


A Commons debate

Will you make time available for a debate?

I understand the strength o f feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate these
issues. I know from an exchange between Ann Taylor (The President o f the Council)
and Vernon Coaker that, although she is sympathetic to the request, it is unlikely that
Government time can be found in the near future.


Changes in inquest procedures

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the
findings o f a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role o f
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report
provided the fullest possible examination o f the causes o f the Hillsborough disaster.


W hat action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners o f the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect o f a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the matter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
The altering of police evidence

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number o f statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome o f the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events o f 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections o f the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority o f cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments o f a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome o f the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


Reform of police disciplinary procedures

Don’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

I can well understand the frustration which is felt when an officer appears, in effect, to
escape disciplinary action by taking medical retirement.As I indicated in m y
statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its
recommendations closely. I will announce m y response shortly.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472. doc
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : INDEX OF BRIEFING

Chronology o f events

GENERAL ISSUES

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

W ill you make time available for a debate?

Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry o f Bloody Sunday
either?

W ere the terms o f reference for the scrutiny adequate?

W hy w asn’t the new evidence persuasive?

W hy were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

W ill the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

W hat form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

D idn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from the
start?

W hy was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

W ill the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further evidence
comes to light?


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

W hat about the video tapes stolen on the day o f the disaster?

W hat about the new evidence about the state o f the police’s CCTV system?


THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

What about the new evidence from Dr W alker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

W hy not order a fresh inquest?


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
IrL*
Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

D idn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the adequacy
o f the emergency care provided to the victims?

W hat does the scrutiny say about criticisms o f the Coroner’s conduct o f the inquests?

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

Inquests and disasters general

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

W hat would have happened i f the recommendations had been in place at the time o f
the Hillsborough disaster?


INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into changing
statements about the disaster?


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered before
being submitted as evidence?


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada drama
“Hillsborough”?


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

W ill the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

W hy haven’t you published appendix 9 o f the scrutiny?

Is the Home Secretary aware o f complaints o f material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
W IDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

D on’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishment?

Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?


BACKGROUND NOTES

The Taylor Inquiry

The 10 'Unresolved’ Questions




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: CHRONOLOGY


15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough resulting in the deaths o f 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Lord Justice Taylor appointed to carry out a public inquiry

24 April 1989: W est M idlands Police Investigation began

I August 1989: Interim Report} Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry
January 1990: Final Report }

April - May 1990: Coroner’s Inquest opens - min-inquests to identify each o f the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 M ay 1990 so as not to risk
prejudicing police inquiries

15 May - 29 June 1989: oral evidence presented to the Taylor Inquiry by 174
witnesses at a public hearing

15 August 1990: PCA confirm that the investigation carried out (under their
supervision) by West Midlands Police is satisfactory. Copy o f report subsequently
passed to DPP

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings

November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence relating
to the incident as a whole was heard - verdict o f “accidental death” reached

II July 1991: PCA directed that charges o f neglect o f duty be preferred against C hief
Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: C hief Supt Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code

13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation o f neglect o f duty could not be heard in the
absence o f the more senior officer

November 1993: Application refused for Judicial Review o f the Coroner’s
proceedings

5 December 1996: Granada Television Drama

17 December 1996: House o f Commons Adjournment Debate - Michael Howard
promised to consider any “new” evidence

30 June 1997: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny o f new evidence announced.


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FOR THE STATEMENT

GENERAL

Was the scrutiny worthwhile?

Yes. It was important that there should be an independent and thorough examination
o f material which the families and others had brought to our attention, so that it could
be determined conclusively whether earlier proceedings should be re-opened.

I hope that everyone, including the families when they have had the chance to read the
report in full, will accept that these matters have been fully investigated and that there
is no further action which it is appropriate to take.


Isn’t the scrutiny report simply a whitewash?

No. LJ Stuart-Smith has carried out a very thorough scrutiny. His comprehensive
report sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his
conclusions, with which I agree.

It is, o f course, open to others to come to different conclusions, if they wish. But there
can be no justification for calling it a whitewash.


W hy was the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire given the report before it was
published?

The C hief Constable is mentioned in the terms o f reference for Lord Justice Stuart-
Sm ith’s scrutiny as the disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore
one o f the parties to whom the report is directed.

It was entirely proper that the Chief Constable should be given the opportunity to
consider the report once it was submitted by LJ Stuart-Smith.


Will you make time available for a debate?

I understand the strength o f feeling that there should be an opportunity to debate these
issues. I know from an exchange between Ann Taylor (The President o f the Council)
and Vernon Coaker that, although she is sympathetic to the request, it is unlikely that
Government time can be found in the near future.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Does this mean we can’t expect anything from the new inquiry of Bloody Sunday
either?

The decision to establish a fresh inquiry into an incident such as Hillsborough or
Bloody Sunday cannot be taken lightly. It is only justified when there are grounds for
believing that the conclusions reached originally may be in doubt.

The Prime M inister made it clear that the weight o f material now available about
Bloody Sunday is such that the events require re-examination.




Were the terms of reference for the scrutiny adequate?

LJ Stuart-Smith’s terms o f reference were very wide. They tasked him with
establishing whether any material evidence was overlooked in the consideration o f the
causes o f the disaster or the consideration o f criminal or other proceedings. He was
also able to recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest.

I am satisfied that he has been able to carry out a thorough scrutiny o f all the evidence
which was submitted by the families and others.




Why wasn’t the new evidence persuasive?

It is inevitable with a disaster o f this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been aired publicly before.

W hat the scrutiny had to consider was, not only whether the evidence put forward was
new, but also whether it was credible and o f such significance that it would justify a
new inquiry, or some other action. This is what LJ Stuart-Smith has now reported on.


W hy were no police officers prosecuted following the disaster?

W est M idlands Police submitted a full report on their investigation o f the
Hillsborough disaster to the DPP. The DPP announced in September 1990 that no-one
would be prosecuted.

The DPP took advice from two experienced Queen’s Counsel [one being the present
Lord Williams] and concluded that there was insufficient evidence to bring charges
against either Ch. Supt. Duckenfield or Supt Murray.

This was a decision for the DPP on the evidence available. LJ Stuart-Smith has found
no grounds to recommend that the DPP reconsiders this decision.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
W ill the DPP take over any private prosecution brought by the families?

That is a matter for the Director and the CPS. It would be inappropriate for me to
speculate.

If pressed

I f there is a private prosecution, the CPS could consider whether to intervene. The
options available to the CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it; or to
take it over and discontinue it.

I f the CPS decided not to intervene, the prosecution would remain with the private
prosecutor. This is, o f course, speculation at this stage.


W hat form did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny take?

Following his appointment on 30 June last year, LJ Stuart-Smith examined the
evidence from the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest as well as other material from police
records.

He visited Hillsborough Stadium and went to Liverpool to meet many o f the families
o f the victims.

He received submissions from Counsel for the Family Support Group and others. He
also had meetings with a number o f other people who contacted him or who he felt
could help him with his scrutiny.

A list o f those whom LJ Stuart-Smith m et or received representations from is set out
in Appendix 1 o f his report.


Didn’t the Judge’s remark about Liverpool fans indicate that he was biased from
the start?

LJ Stuart-Smith said, on the record, that he deeply regretted this remark, which he
made off-the-cuff and without any intention for it to be taken seriously or to offend.


W hy was LJ Stuart-Smith selected?

LJ Stuart-Smith is a senior and respected judge from the Court o f Appeal whose
experience has been invaluable in assessing the evidence presented. He has produced
a very comprehensive and detailed report and I am very grateful to him for looking at
these issues so carefully.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472. doc
Will the Home Secretary look again at the case for a further inquiry if further
evidence comes to light?

It is very difficult to imagine what material new evidence could emerge after the
exhaustive inquiries which have already taken place and the length o f time which has
elapsed.

I cannot rule out the possibility that new evidence will come to light, in which case I
will consider it, but I am strongly o f the view that we have investigated the material
events at Hillsborough as far as it is possible to do so.

LJ Stuart-Smith is clear in his report that there was nothing which he considered
which added anything significant to the evidence already considered by the Taylor
Inquiry and the Inquests.


VIDEO EVIDENCE

Did the Scrutiny find any new videotape evidence?

LJ Stuart-Smith has examined all the available video evidence. He has concluded that
there is no new video evidence or any which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry,
the Coroner or the other authorities investigating the disaster.

He has established that the 'm issing’ footage obtained from Yorkshire Television is
taken from copies o f the police tapes supplied by the force and that the police tapes
were made available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Coroner and to the legal
representatives at the Inquest.

W hat about the video tapes stolen on the day of the disaster?

The theft o f two video tapes, stolen from Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s
Control Room on the day o f the disaster, was investigated by the West M idlands
Police. They are still missing. These were not police tapes but contained pictures
from the club’s CCTV cameras. LJ Stuart-Smith’s view is that the tapes did not
contain any significant material.

What about the new evidence about the state of the police’s CCTV system?

LJ Stuart Smith has considered the evidence o f the technician (Mr Houldsworth)
responsible for the club and police CCTV systems, and that given by the police
officers at the Inquest.

He has concluded that there is no evidence o f the police blaming a faulty camera for
their failure to establish overcrowding.

In his report, LJ Stuart-Smith states 'The only sense in which M r Houldsworth’s
evidence is new and might have an effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
submission 5. [That is to say that M r Houldsworth could see from monitoring the
police cameras that the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx o f extra
spectators through Gate C would create a dangerous situation.] For the reasons I have
given I am unable to accept that his recollection o f events is now accurate. Even if it
was correct, it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply
have been the evidence o f one more person who thought that the central pens were full
at 14.52.’




THE AFTERMATH OF THE DISASTER AND THE INQUEST

W hat about the new evidence from Dr Walker / Ambulanceman Tony Edwards?

Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in Appendix
5). His evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to that
(C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 2 1 ). M r Edwards also gave a statement at the time
(Chapter 3, paragraph 34). His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith add little o f substance to his previous account (C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 4 0 ).
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that M r Edwards’ criticisms o f the ambulance
service are misplaced (C h a p t e r 3 , p a r a g r a p h 100).

W hy not order a fresh inquest?

That is a m atter for the Attorney-General who has the power under S. 13 o f the
Coroners Act 1988 to make, or give authority to an application to the High Court to
hold a fresh inquest and to quash the original verdict. LJ Stuart-Smith found no basis
to impugn the accidental death verdict or for the Attorney-General to exercise his
powers.

Counsel for the Family Support Group stated '... it is accepted, eight years and a h alf
years after the event, that it is impracticable and may be undesirable for fresh inquests
to be convened.’ It was argued, though, that the Courts should be invited to quash the
verdict o f accidental death. LJ Stuart-Smith says that the effect o f quashing the verdict
without substituting any other verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an
open verdict and that is only appropriate where there is insufficient evidence to record
any other suggested conclusion. In practice, he says, there were two alternative
verdicts - unlawful killing or accidental death.

Does an accidental death verdict mean that no one was to blame?

It is not the function o f a coroner’s inquest to determine questions o f blame. An
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blame for it, and the
inquest verdict does not deprive any person o f any civil remedy which otherwise
m ight be available. (As the Taylor report made clear, the main cause o f the disaster
was the failure o f control by the South Yorkshire Police.)




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
Did the scrutiny review the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point?

LJ Stuart-Smith found no reason to criticise the use o f the cut-off point. It was never
suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm or that the
medical evidence was to this effect. (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h 12). The jury heard
evidence about people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or who
regained consciousness after resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and
recovered (C h a p t e r 3 p a r a g r a p h s 58,59 a n d 60). Evidence that some people died
after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome o f the inquest.

As the Judge’s report notes, this issue was thoroughly examined by the Divisional
Court in 1993 when it refused an application to have the Inquest verdicts quashed.

The use o f the cut-off point at the Inquest applied to the consideration o f how the
victims died, not the other questions before the Inquest. The evidence was that all
those who died had suffered their injuries by 3.15pm. There was no other cause o f
death. The use o f the cut-off point in these circumstances was, therefore, considered
reasonable.


Didn’t the Coroner’s 3.15pm cut-off point prevent an investigation into the
adequacy of the emergency care provided to the victims?

The purpose o f an inquest is solely to find out who the deceased was and how, when
and where he or she came to their death. The response o f the emergency services to
the disaster was covered by the Taylor Inquiry and its findings are the set out in that
report. _

The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively. In addition to oral written evidence
from many supporters and police officers, and many written statements, Taylor took
oral evidence from: four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy chief ambulance
officer from South Yorkshire M etropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) who was in
charge at the ground; two other SYMAS officers who were at the ground; two senior
ambulance officers from headquarters control; five fire brigade officers; and five
doctors (C h a p t e r 3, p a r a g r a p h s 79 - 84).

LJ Stuart-Smith has reported that he found no evidence o f lack o f care on the part o f
the emergency or medical services and that a further investigation o f this aspect o f the
disaster would be o f little purpose.


W hat does the scrutiny say about criticisms of the Coroner’s conduct of the
inquests?

LJ Stuart-Smith highlights the exceptionally difficult task which the Coroner, Dr
Stefan Popper, had in conducting the Inquest into this disaster. He did not find any




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
substance to criticisms about the conduct o f the Inquest or to suggestions o f bias on
the part o f the Coroner.




Inquests and disasters

Is the inquest system equipped to deal with deaths arising from disasters?

Where a public inquiry has been established by the Government, there can be an
overlap between the inquest and the inquiry. LJ Stuart-Smith has endorsed the
findings o f a Home Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role o f
the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. I agree that the Taylor Report
provided the fullest possible examination o f the causes o f the Hillsborough disaster.


What action is being taken to implement the Working Party recommendations?

The main change proposed is to relieve coroners o f the need to resume their inquest
after the inquiry has been completed. There is no immediate prospect o f a suitable
legislative opportunity to amend the Coroners Act 1988 but the Government intends
to pursue the m atter when such an opportunity arises.

It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an inquiry if they feel it
appropriate to do so.


What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a certificate from the Lord Chancellor, there would have been no need to
resume the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason for doing so.

The families o f those who died would have been spared some additional distress.




INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES

Did the scrutiny examine allegations that witnesses were pressurised into
changing statements about the disaster?

LJ Stuart-Smith investigated allegations that investigating officers from West
M idlands Police pressurised certain witnesses into changing their evidence. He


f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
interviewed three witnesses, Derek Bruder, Debra Martin (a former special constable)
and Paul Taylor but concluded in each case that there was no improper attempt to
affect their evidence.


SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE STATEMENTS

Is it right that statements given by South Yorkshire Police officers were altered
before being submitted as evidence?

A number o f statements were altered by the officers concerned following advice from
the force solicitors. LJ Stuart-Smith considered this matter in detail after it was
brought to his attention by South Yorkshire Police. He is satisfied that the procedure
was legitimate and that it had no material effect on the outcome o f the Taylor Inquiry,
the Inquest or the conclusions o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions.

If required

Shortly after the tragic events o f 15 April 1989, the police officers present at
Hillsborough were required to record their recollections o f the day. The officers’
statements were subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they
were in a suitable form for submission to the Taylor Inquiry.

LJ Stuart-Smith indicates that in the majority o f cases, no recommendations were
made on the officers’ statements. In some, though, advice was given to remove
comment, hearsay or inappropriate language.

The force’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments o f a
similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

As I have indicated, LJ Stuart-Smith has investigated this matter thoroughly. He does
not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he
believes it would have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made,
because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were
implicit.

The Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted in this way and LJ
Stuart-Smith is satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome o f the Inquiry or
other proceedings.


THE “HILLSBOROUGH” DRAMA & THE TEN UNRESOLVED’
QUESTIONS

Did the scrutiny look at the Ten 'Unresolved’ Questions raised in the Granada
drama “Hillsborough”?




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
LJ Stuart-Smith has addressed each o f the ten questions in appendix 10 o f his report,
either by direct reference to the Taylor report or to the available evidence.

He is satisfied that the answers are quite evident and that they support the main
conclusion o f the Taylor Inquiry about the failure o f police control.


DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL

W ill the Home Secretary publish the evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith?

I made it clear when I announced the scrutiny that I would publish as much o f the
evidence considered by LJ Stuart-Smith as possible.

M uch o f the material which he considered is already in the public domain as a result
o f the Taylor Inquiry and Inquest. I am placing in the Library copies o f material which
is not already publicly available and which it is appropriate to publish.

We are still in discussion w ith some parties who have yet to give their consent to
material which they supplied being placed in the library.


W hy haven’t you published appendix 9 of the scrutiny?

A number o f families raised questions with LJ Stuart-Smith about inconsistent
evidence o f the circumstances in which their relatives died. He addressed these cases
in appendix 9 o f his report and tried, where possible, to resolve the conflicts o f
evidence.

Since these issues were raised by the families on an individual basis, I have decided
that it would be more appropriate to send LJ Stuart-Smith’s conclusions to the
families concerned direct and not include them in the published report. I am sure that
the House will appreciate my reasons for doing so. I f the families wish to make public
the material in appendix 9, that is, o f course, a matter for them.


Is the Home Secretary aware of complaints of material being withheld by South
Yorkshire Police?

LJ Stuart-Smith addressed this complaint as part o f his scrutiny. He invited any o f the
families who felt that material had been withheld from them to contact him so that he
could investigate. Two families did so, but the Judge confirmed in both cases that
nothing o f significance had been omitted by the police.

LJ Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he was given unrestricted access to the records
held by South Yorkshire Police.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
W IDER ISSUES

POLICE DISCIPLINE

D on’t we need new discipline procedures to ensure that police officers don’t
escape punishment?

As I indicated in my statement, there are profound shortcomings in the present police
discipline system.

I welcome the recent report by the Home Affairs Select Committee report on the
police discipline and complaints procedures and I am considering its
recommendations closely. I will announce my response shortly.


Ill-health retirement

Will you prevent officers escaping discipline by taking ill-health retirement?

There is the potential for the disciplinary process to be brought into disrepute by the
inappropriate use o f medical retirement. I am considering the recommendations o f the
Home Affairs Select Committee for tightening the discipline rules and I will respond
shortly.

The existing police pensions regulations provide for retirement to be held over until
discipline proceedings have been concluded, but where there is no prospect o f an
officer recovering his health to face discipline proceedings it is right that he be
allowed to go.


Compensation to police officers

How can you justify the compensation awarded to police officers?

Any individual, whether a police officer or not, has the right to seek legal redress for
any hurt or injury they consider was caused by someone else negligence. That is a
decision for the individuals concerned and the courts.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
BACKGROUND


The Taylor Inquiry

• The terms o f reference for the Inquiry were:

    To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April
    1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at
    sports events.

•   174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the Inquiry.

• 71 hours o f film was provided by the police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
  and the BBC.

    Interim Report

• The interim report, published in August 1989, was concerned with the events at the
  stadium on the day o f the disaster.

• The report addressed all aspects o f the disaster. This included the pre-match
  arrangements, such as access from Leppings Lane into the ground, Sheffield
  W ednesday’s arrangements and the police arrangements and communications. It
  also considered the build-up o f supporters at the turnstiles and the monitoring o f
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster were also examined, including rescue attempts,
  events in the police control room, information given to those in the ground, for
  example tannoy announcements, and the provision and access for the emergency
  services.

• A number o f causes o f the disaster were identified:

    - The failure to cut o ff access to the central pens which were already overfull.
    - There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
    - There was no effective visual monitoring o f crowd density.
    - The protection afforded by the layout o f barriers in the pens was inadequate.
    - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
    - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
    - Sheffield W ednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

• On balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main
  reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control.

• The report was critical o f the actions o f C hief Superintendent Duckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the immediate aftermath o f the disaster.



f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
• In the view o f South Yorkshire Police, all o f the ten “unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada programme were addressed at the time o f the inquiry, with specific
  recommendations being made in respect o f eight o f them.

• In his interim report, Lord Justice Taylor made 43 recommendations which he
  considered to be the minimum required to ensure existing football grounds could
  be safely used in the short term. A large number o f those recommendations were to
  be carried out with immediate effect.

   Final Report

• The final report o f the Taylor inquiry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt from Hillsborough, proposed a range o f
  measures to improve safety at sports grounds.

• The final report contained 76 recommendations, these included the establishment
  o f all seated stadia by the 1999/2000 season, which has been achieved in respect o f
  the top divisions in the country. Another recommendation was the removal o f
  spikes and overhanging or inward-turning sections on the perimeter fences.

• Where terraces remain, the report recommended that the maximum number o f
  spectators to be admitted to each pen should be specified on the ground’s Safety
  Certificate. There was a further recommendation that all Safety Certificates should
  be reviewed.

• The report recommended a written statement o f intent be agreed between the club
  and the police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control,
  w ith particular reference to the filling o f each pen.

• There were a number o f recommendations relating specifically to the role o f the
  police and the responsibilities o f senior officers.

• The co-ordination o f the emergency services and the provision o f first aid, medical
  facilities and ambulances was also addressed in the recommendations o f the final
  report.

• The Football (Offences) Act 1991 created new offences recommended by Lord
  Justice Taylor to regulate behaviour at football matches; throwing any object at or
  towards the pitch or spectator areas; taking part in indecent or racist chanting; and
  going on to the pitch without lawful authority or excuse.




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
The 10 Unresolved Question

The press release accompanying the Granada drama documentary “Hillsborough” last
December identified what it claimed were ten unresolved questions. These were:

1.     Why was Ch. Supt. Duckenfield put in charge o f a major semi-final only 21
days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced in policing matches?

2.     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build
up outside the Leppings Lane end o f the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

3.     Why was the game not delayed, as a number o f police officers thought it
should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the
Liverpool fans safely into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

4.     Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when
eye witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware o f the
problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?

5.       Why w asn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
full, the procedure adopted at the previous year’s Semi-Final?

6.       Why did Ch. Supt. Duckenfield mislead the Secretary o f the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew that he had given the order
for it to be opened?

7.      Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10
foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the
pitch too small to be effective in an emergency.

8.     Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as
to what was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the
ground to help - until 3.30pm?

9.     Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the
pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained medical
help?

10.    Why did only 14 o f those who died go to hospital?




f:\oppu\complnts\brief\mp-0472.doc
10


V ^
