                   CONFIDENTIAL



hs.8.2/hillsb2.peb
From:   A H Turney (2798)
        Fire and Emergency              cc    Miss Nicholson
        Planning Department                   Ms Rex
                                              Mr Yates
        2 August 1989                         Mr Chilcot
                                              Mr Moriarty
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              HMCIC
                                              HMCIFS
                                              Mr Mower
                                              Mr Bolton
                                              Mr Goddard “H <
                                                          n *
                                              Mr Gilbert
                                              Mr Mould
                                              Mr Lidington

Miss Bannister


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
The Home Secretary is to meet Ministerial colleagues later this
afternoon to discuss Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on
Hillsborough.

2.   This note is intended as briefing for that meeting and
offers a draft note to the Prime Minister's office (Annex A)
covering the text of a proposed statement by the Home Secretary
for use on Friday.

Reaction of other Departments to the Report
3.   A meeting of officials was held under my chairmanship this
morning. Subject to one or two points of details, referred to i
paragraph 6 below, there was no adverse reactions to the report.
It seems reasonable, therefore to assume that the Home
Secretary's colleagues will also go along with the
recommendations in the report and the proposed response to
them.
Draft Press Statement

4.   The draft press statement, which has been nrnHnroH -i»->
    “t —   “         nowei , xs at Annex b. The Home Secretary
may wish to discuss this with Ministerial colleagues.
5.   A paragraph has been included on the South Yorkshire Police
l,TZerSt™ d   1* Mr Chilc°t will have discussed this issue with
the Home Secretary and that he may wish to take a different line
In the meantime the paragraph is there largely as a marker
Points on Specific Recommendations in the Report
6.   The following specific points were discussed by officials at
this morning's meeting and may be raised by Ministers.
Recommendation 2b
The proposed 15% reduction in the capacity of terraces is
arbitrary and some clubs may claim that it will have resource
implications by restricting gate money. The restriction is in
fact quite limited and can be regarded as a prudent temporary
measure while the inquiry gives further thought to the methods of
calculating crowd densities in the "Green Guide". Because it
applies to individual pens, it will only affect total ground
capacity when all pens are full, - something which in practice
occurs mainly at major matches towards the end of the season.
Recommendation 7
This recommendation is acceptable in relation to perimeter
fences, but in practice not all gates in radial fences will be
acceptable as emergency exists. This is a matter for local
determination.
Recommendation 8
DoE are worried about the possibility of pitch invasions if
perimeter gates are left open. The report's recommendation is
based on experience at Anfield where there were no gates but only
gaps in perimeter fences. Measures to prevent public disorder
and those to preserve crowd safety are a careful balance. We
must accept that in the light of Hillsborough the emphasis must
be moved back slightly in favour of safety, at least until
satisfactory methods have been developed for confining crowds
safely.
Recommendation 21
This will take time to achieve. DoE have pointed out that few
clubs have CCTV which covers areas outside the ground. However
this is not a recommendation which is expected to be complied
with immediately.
Recommendation 23
DoE point out that tickets for games early in the season will
already have been printed.
Recommendation 25
DoE believe that some clubs have been unnecessarily reluctant to
consult supporters and strongly support this recommendation.
                      CONFIDENTIAL


Recommendation 42
Although at smaller matches, ambulances have sometimes been
provided by voluntary organisations, the Department of Health
support the recommendation that an ambulance authority ambulance
should be provided at all matches with an attendance of 5000 or
more.
Recommendation 43
The Department of Health accept the recommendation in so far as
it relates to the number of ambulances, but it may be ultra
vires for this to be a requirement of a safety certificate.




                            A H TURNEY
                       CONFIDENTIAL



DRAFT MINUTE FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY

Prime Minister



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
I have now discussed the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor
with colleagues most closely involved.


2.   The report has to be presented to Parliament and I propose
that it should be laid at 11.00 am on Friday.    At that time Lord
Justice Taylor proposes to hold a press conference.     The press
will have had embargoed copies at 9.00 am.     My response will be
by way of a statement issued as a Home Office news release
immediately following that press conference.     I will then be
available for interview on request for the broadcasting media.


3.   We agreed at my meeting that I should welcome unreservedly
the broad thrust of the report;     announce that circulars were
being issued by the Home Office and Scottish Office with strong
encouragement for all concerned to get on with implementing
relevant advice;   and indicate that a more considered response,
including possible subordinate legislation, would follow
consultation required by law.     A copy of my proposed statement
(which covers a copy of the circular) is attached.


4.   Criticism is directed at Sheffield City Council for
                         CONFIDENTIAL


shortcomings in their enforcement of the Safety at Sports Grounds
Act 1975.    In the short term this is dealt with by the interim
recommendations.    In the slightly longer term the powers we have
taken in the Football Spectators Bill will permit the licensing
authority to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out these responsibilities (although Taylor specifically
indicates that he will deal in his final report with the need for
some national oversight or inspection of local authority
certification procedures). Some criticism is also directed at
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,, including its technical
adviser, for inadequate arrangements for crowd safety and
control.    In my view these are inextricably linked with the
shortcomings of the licensing authority.


5.   But the most severe criticism is directed at the South
Yorkshire Police;   Taylor concludes that the main reason for the
disaster was failure of police control.    The actions of
individual senior officers, especially Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, are criticised;   reference is made to poor
operational orders, lack of leadership, and evidence of senior
officers given to the Inquiry is described as defensive and
evasive.    It would be for the Chief Constable, and perhaps the
Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police Complaints
Authority, to act on the conduct of individual officers.      [But,
in view of the criticism of the South Yorkshire Police
collectively the position of the Chief Constable requires
                        CONFIDENTIAL



6.   I am sending copies of this minute to colleagues on H
Committee, the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Department
of the Environment, and Sir Robin Butler.
                      CONFIDENTIAL


hs.8.2/hillsb.peb


HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - DRAFT STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY
Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
report the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:

"I am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim
report before the start of the football season.

It is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the causes
of the disaster.

The Government welcomes the broad thrust of the report and
supports the principles of the recommendations. They contain a
number of matters which should be dealt with without delay
pending the longer-term findings of the inquiry which will be
published in the final report.

A Home Office circular1 is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds in the light of the final report of the inquiry.

Most of the problems which contributed to the tragedy at

     1   A copy of this circular is attached
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The tragedy
revealed by the report is that there have been shortcomings in
applying those lessons not only on the part of the police, but of
the club and of the local authority responsible for the safety
certificate.

The report reveals quite clearly that there are major
deficiencies in the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough
ground which should have been recognised and corrected.

The South Yorkshire Police

It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take.

National PoPitile InteOiaence Unit

The setting up/5f[the national/gomputer basedppolice football
intelligenc^syst^m7referred to in paragraph 3-^ M - of the reporty
is already'in hand jmt we shall now try to bring it into
operation sooner thai\had been intended.

Supervision of Safety Certificates

Powers recently 'xJteefCby the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.
The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the past
had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to try
to ensure they are applied in the future."
                         CONFIDENTIAL
                 hs.8.1/hillsb.dm



DRAFT CIRCULAR

1.   The Chief Executive
      County Councils
     Metropolitan District Councils
     London Borough Councils
     Common Council of the City of London
     Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
2.   Chief Officers of Police
3.   Chief Fire Officers
4.   Chief Ambulance Officers




Dear Sir
HO CIRCULAR      /1989
INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
Introduction
The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.

2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

Government response
3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the broad thrust of the
Interim Report and supports the principles of the
recommendations which he believes should be dealt with without
delay pending the longer term findings of the Inquiry which will
be published in its Final Report.
                      CONFIDENTIAL.



Scope of -the recommendations
4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.   The recommendations are in two categories: those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; and those which, although requiring
immediate action are likely to take longer to put into effect.
The Home Secretary nevertheless urges recipients to take urgent
action on both categories so as to put into effect as many of the
recommendations as possible before the start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds
6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations. If there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier test described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
                     CONFIDENTIAL



Football clubs
8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers tinder s. 10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.

Resource implications
9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.

Other
10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).

11.   Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.
                          Yours faithfully




                         A H TURNEY
                         Fire and Emergency Planning Department
