                 CROWD CONTROL A N D SAFETY ON RACECOURSES

(A submission on behalf of the Stewards of the Jockey Club to the
Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster)



LICENSING A N D CONTROL OF RACECOURSES

1.   In accordance with their powers under the Rules of Racing the

     Stewards of the Jockey Club consider applications from all 59

     racecourses for the annual renewal of their Licences to

     conduct race meetings within an already agreed programme of

     fixtures.


2.   Included in the conditions under which that Licence is

     renewed are the following


     (i)    The Managing Executive shall be a member of the

            Racecourse Association,    the parent body for all

            Licenced Racecourses    in England,   Scotland and Wales


     (ii)   The Managing Executive or Board of Directors has

            control of the land,    buildings etc. on which the entire

            racecourse configuration is situated


     (iii) As far as Crowd Control and Emergencies are concerned

            the racecourse shall comply with the relevant Jockey

            Club General Instructions governing this aspect of

            their responsibilities.      Failure to do so can involve

            Managing Executives    in fines of up to £20,000,

            withdrawal of fixtures or withdrawal of the

            racecourse's licence.
FIRE AND SAFETY ARRANGEMENTS

3.   Fire and Safety aspects,    following amendments to the

     respective Acts which came      into force on 1 January 1989

     resulting from the Popplewell Enquiry,      as they effect

     racecourses    in particular,   are the subject of direct

     negotiations between individual Racecourse Executives and

     their Local Authorities.


4.   Should it become apparent that the necessary Local Authority

     permissions    (referred to above) are not forthcoming due to

     shortcomings    in the public enclosures or the working areas of

     the various Officials and supporting services,      the Stewards

     of the Jockey Club are unlikely to sanction the renewal of

     the Licence unless they receive firm guarantees that the

     necessary improvement work will be completed before the date

     of the first fixture in any one year.      Where such

     improvements are considered critical by the Local Authority

     Officers,    requests for financial assistance, where

     appropriate,   are favourably considered by the Horserace

     Betting Levy Board    (HBLB).


5.   In any Racecourse development or rebuilding programme for

     which financial assistance is sought from the HBLB such funds

     will not be made available until the Fire and Safety aspects

     of the Architects plans have been cleared by the Local

     Authority.


CROWD CONTROL A N D BEHAVIOUR

6.   Following the Bradford fire disaster and the subsequent

     Popplewell enquiry, Mr Justice Popplewell himself was able to

     visit a number of racecourses and see at first hand the
pattern of racecourse crowd movement and control.      Early in

1988 certain Home Office representatives,     responsible for

Fire and Safety at sports grounds, also paid visits to

Sandown,   Epsom and Cheltenham where large capacity crowds are

often present.


Racing crowds unlike those wh o attend Football matches are

able to move freely between the viewing,     refreshment,   parade

ring areas and the betting facilities.     At no time are they

confined into specific enclosures in close proximity

with each other,   for the duration of the race day.    At the

more popular and well attended racing fixtures the Racecourse

Managements, working in conjunction with their Local Police

Authority,   actively encourage   intending racegoers to stagger

their arrival and departure times.


During 1988 it became apparent that rowdiness caused by a

minority element of the racegoing public was drink related

and tended to manifest itself during the summer months

particularly during the close season for Football.


The death of a young racegoer following an assault in the

coach park after racing at Newmarket on 6 August last year,

for which his two assailants were subsequently jailed for 5|

and 6 years respectively, prompted the Stewards of the Jockey

Club to ask the Racecourse Association to reconvene

immediately their "Working Party on Crowd Control and

Behaviour"   to establish tighter controls over the entry of

the public to racecourses and their conduct during the time

that they are on racecourse property.
%

                                        - 4 -


    10.      As a direct result of the Racecourse Associations Working

             Party's recommendations the Stewards of the Jockey Club were

             able to agree new Instructions on Crowd Behaviour which

             became effective from 1st January this year.       In the

             preparation of these revised Instructions we were helped

             considerably by the interest shown by Mr John Patten,

             and by his Officials.


    11   .   Both the recommendations and the resultant new Instruction

             8.3 entitled "Control of Crowd Behaviour and Emergencies"

             (copy attached) were commented upon favourably by Assistant

             Chief Commissioner J.D. Phillips    (Greater Manchester),

             Secretary to the Association of Chief Police Officers Sub

             Committee on Violence at Sporting Events.


    12   .   Whilst it is hoped that these new Instructions will

             satisfactorily protect Racecourses and their well      intentioned

             public from the behaviour of an irresponsible minority,        the

             Stewards and the Racecourse Executives are aware that they

             may well have to take more drastic measures should these

             Instructions prove inadequate to guard against any

             "orchestrated" or "spontaneous" trouble.


    13.      Para 2 (iii) of this paper already indicates that the

             Stewards have powers on enquiry to fine and sanction

             Racecourse Managements who fail to comply with Jockey Club

             Instructions.   However when serious incidents occur where

             such Instructions have been satisfactorily implemented, more

             drastic steps must be considered.     This   is particularly

             relevant at race meetings of more than one day's duration

             when trouble manifests itself early    in the meeting and there
      are still subsequent days to complete.       The Stewards would

      consider,    in the light of circumstances surrounding

      any serious    incidents, whether racing could continue

      until the Police and Private Security presence had been r e ­

      appraised and satisfactorily achieved.       Likewise the policy

      of providing alcoholic drinks within the confines of the

      racecourse would have to be reassessed.


EMERGENCY ARRANGEMENTS

14.   Para 18 of the attached Instruction 8.3 requires that

      Managing Executives draw up and rehearse plans for the

      clearance of stands,    other buildings and the course in the

      event of a bomb alert,    explosion,   fire hazard or any other

      emergency.    In the light of the Hillsborough disaster all

      Racecourse Executives have been asked to ensure that these

      emergency plans are reviewed in conjunction with their

      retained Medical Staff and local Hospitals together with

      supporting Ambulance,    Fire and Police Services.


MEDICAL ARRANGEMENTS

15.   Every Racecourse already has, by virtue of their provisions

      for the care of injured riders,    the nucleus of a Medical

      Incident Centre.     Under the Jockey Club's current Medical

      Instruction each Racecourse must provide at least two

      qualified doctors    (one of whom is immediately designated

      as Incident Medical officer by the Senior Police Officer

      present)    together with two Ambulances both fully equipped

      with trained personnel.     Whilst every racecourse has a

      Medical Room for injured riders,       the larger courses have a

      similar additional provision for members of the public.        Both

      of these facilities could become designated areas for the
                                - 6 -



      assessment of injuries in the event of any incident.


16.   Because of the need for the swift evacuation of injured

      riders following racecourse accidents there already is at

      every Racecourse a well tried route for casualty evacuation

      based on the existing relationship with the Local District

      General Hospital who are aware of each race meeting and the

      potential injuries that can occur.




      42 Portman Square
      London
      13 June 1989
                JOCKEY CLUB GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
                --------------------- ~                  No 8.3
                                                   1st Jan 1989

To      Managing Executives
From    Secretary to the Jockey Club

Subject               CONTROL OF CROWD BEHAVIOUR & EMERGENCIES
Reference   Rule 1


Stewards of the Jockey Club

1 To maintain acceptable standards of crowd order, the
Stewards of the Jockey Club require you to implement the
measures set out in this Instruction

Responsibility for Security

2 You are to appoint a senior person, but not the Clerk of
the Course, as Security Officer to directly control all
matters of crowd behaviour throughout your race meetings.  He
is to liaise with the police, security, caterers and other
parties and take decisions as and when necessary.

3 Your Racecourse Manager or the Clerk of the Course must be
directly involved with security arrangements prior to each
day's racing and one of them must arrange and attend planning
meetings with the police and security companies, together
with the nominated Security Officer.

Conditions of Entry

4 Conditions of entry to your racecourse must be prominently
displayed at all entrances and in car and coach parks.  They
are to be in such terms as to enable you to refuse admission
or remove anyone whose behaviour is considered to be unruly
or anti-social.

 Crowd Limits

 5 You must establish an overall crowd limit and a limit for
 each enclosure, together with a control system to prevent
 these limits from being exceeded.  You are to grade your
 fixtures in relation to the potential size and behaviour of
 the crowd based on previous year's attendance figures, and at
 the beginning of each quarter advise Jockey Club Security and
 the Racecourse Association of the anticipated crowd sizes at
 your meetings during that quarter, together with the numbers
 of Police and Security Staff to be employed.




                                                           1 of 4
                                                                        \\
                                                           JCGI 8.3
                                                       1st Jan 1989

Employment of Regular Police

6 Regular Police Officers are to be employed at every
meeting and are to have no duties, such as traffic control,
other than to patrol the racecourse to maintain order from
the time the gates open until one hour after the last race or
until the bars are closed whichever is the later

7 The number of Police Officers employed on any one racing
day is a matter for consultation between you and the local
senior Police Officer.  It is not to be less than two, P ius
an additional officer for every 1000 people where the crowd
is likely to exceed 3000, based on the previous year's
attendance, except with the written permission of the
Stewards of the Jockey Club; this will only be granted on an
application from you supported by a letter signed by a local
Police Officer of the rank of Chief Superintendent or above

8 Detention facilities should be available at high risk
security fixtures.

9 You are recommended to confirm overall policy with your
Chief Constable

    Briefing of Police £ Security Firms

    10 You are to ensure that the senior Police Officer present
    and the senior  representative of any security firm employed
    attend a proper briefing with you and your Security Officer
    which is to include consideration of and instructions on

       a   The identification of likely trouble spots including
           bars, turnstiles, transfer gates, course betting shops
           and the betting rings

       b   The monitoring of entrances where admission of persons
           carrying alcoholic drinks may be refused

       c   The location of the designated "no drinking" areas

       d   The need for' constant patrolling to maintain a high
           security profile

       e   The need for a police or security presence at higher
           risk areas at critical times, e g, in the main betting
           rings immediately after each race

j   Restrictions on the Import of Alcohol ic Dr inks

     11 You are to prohibit the bringing of alcoholic drinks    into
     the enclosures, excepting designated picnic areas, by


                                                               2 of 4
                                                           JCGI 8.3
                                                       1st Jan 1989

refusing admission to those carrying them.        This policy is to
be publicised by

   a       Informing coach parties well in advance when badges are
           sent to the organisers

   b       Large and prominent signs in car and coach parks and at
           entrances to enclosures

   c       Pre-turnstile checks where necessary of hand luggage by
           racecourse or security staff with Police and Jockey
           Club Security support if required

12 Strict security control must be imposed upon all coaches
arriving at your racecourse.  They must be checked on
arrival and an R.C.A. Security Pass completed in respect of
that party.  To avoid delays you are advised to co-ordinate
arrival times with all advance bookings.

13 Ensure that your caterers properly brief their staff on
refusing to sell alcohol to anyone behaving in a drunken or
disorderly manner and on closing their bar in the event of
trouble occurring within the bar.

14 At racecourses where private box holders are allowed to
provide their own drinks, they are to be brought in
discreetly

15 You are to designate clearly defined "no drinking" areas
including parts of the public viewing areas in the stands,
the Parade Ring, unsaddling enclosure and betting rings.   All
these areas are to be clearly signed and the ban on alcohol
in them is to be enforced by racecourse staff supported by
Police and aided where necessary by public announcements.

16 You are not to arrange promotions to encourage attendances
which include the provision of free alcohol in public places.

Reporting of Incidents oE Crowd Disorder

17 Jockey Club Security has established a procedure for the
reporting of incidents of crowd disorder.- When it is
considered necessary, you will be asked for detailed
information including

   a       The time when you were   notified oE the incident

       b   Whether a Police OEEicer dealt with the matter

       c   Any other action taken on the day or subsequently



                                                               3 oE 4
                                                    JCGI 8.3
                                                1st Jan 1989

Emerqencies

18  You are to make suitable plans for the clearance of
stands, other buildings and the course in the event of a bomb
alert, fire hazard etc

19  It is essential that the Stewards of your meetings are
briefed on these plans so that, in an emergency, they may
issue appropriate instructions


4 2 Portman Square                                Circulation
London WlH OEN                           Stewards of Meetings
                                         Clerks of the Course
                                       Racecourse Association




                                                        4 of 4
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH   The Rt Hon Lordjustk* Tayio.
STADIUM DISASTER                            t     . „
                                >*>Queen A n m .- N G .ite
                                Unnjon SWIH 9r.r
                                01-273 2V?‘73«»i'23~3        -




                                O .iic




Mrs Finney, Secretary to the Football Trust
(tel:  01: 388 4504} telephoned in reply to the
letter dated 23 May asking for written
submissions, to say that the Football Trust and
the Football Grounds Improvement Trust had to~h.
given long and detailed statements and have
nothing else to add unless we require it.

The Football Trust gave their statement to
Chief Superintendent Baker on 9 Kay 'S89-  The
Football Grounds Improvement Trust gave their
statement around 10/11 May.
