oHammersmith                                       London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham
                                                   Old Town Hall, Fulham Broadway


SEFulham.                                          London SW6 1ET
                                                   Telephone 01-748 3020 ex. 3900



                                                    W illiam M yers
Environmental Services Department                   Director of Environm ental Services


                                                    W hen telephoning ask for:   Mr. Myers

      The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor              Our ref:       ES/WGM/TB
      c/o Mr. R.M. Whalley                          Your ref:
      Secretary to Hillsborough Inquiry
                                                    Date:       10th October 1989.
      50 Queen Anne's Gate
      London SW1H 9AT



      Dear Sir,

      INTERIM REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

      I refer to our meeting on Saturday, 30th September, at the Stamford
      Bridge Football Grounds as part of your further information gathering
      prior to the production of your Final Report.

      It is appreciated that this particular visit concentrated on the
      activities, role and views of the Police in relation to crowd safety
      and public order.   However, no single public authority can effectively
      deal with a major sporting event without the support of the others. I
      believe the close co-operation of public authorities in this borough is
      a major contribution to safe spectator enjoyment.

      This authority is uniquely placed with regard to public safety
      licensing including the three football grounds at Chelsea, Fulham and
      Queens Park Rangers.      There are in excess of 3.5 million people
      attending entertainments in the borough each year of which nearly one
      million attend the football matches.

      The Safety of Sports Grounds Act takes a considerable amount of time
      with three separate Safety teams operating.     Your interim report has
      perhaps had greater impact here than any other authority.

      I am sure that you noted on your visit that, together with the clubs
      and other public authorities,    we have been responding to your
      recommendations and are therefore able to draw on that experience.
      This Council would be very pleased to make a contribution to your
      inquiry on the basis of our experience and views on future develop­
      ments.

      I would be grateful to hear from you whether you would wish an oral or
      written submission, whether you have any preference for format of the
      latter and the timescales for the response.       Please feel free to
      contact me should you wish to visit any other premises within the
      borough.

      Yours faithfully,


         LO
      William G. Myers
      DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES


Tony Eddison Chief Executive
