                                                                   ID =                                   PACh   v
MAR-G3-B7   17:02 FROM*    B H U C E C A M P B E L L CO




                                                               April 1989.


                                                    Opinion


       Introduction

       1      I am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
              appropriate legal courts to follow in the light of three areas of fresh evidence that
              have come to light recently Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
              Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final of the FA
              cup wits beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
              and later between November 1990 and 28* Match 1991* verdicts of accidental death
              were recorded on the victims.

       2      A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six of the
              bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest. The main
              complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
              presented in the Divisional Court hearinga on their behair, attached ax Annex A. In
              summary form, those main complaints were,

              2.1     The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-oiTpoint in time of 3.15, which had the
                      effect or excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the "Major
                      Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                      emergency services prompdy,

              2.2     The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances of the deaths
                      of the 95; he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                      of the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                      medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to 5 12, and 7)

              2.3     The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                      summing-up on the subjcct, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                      Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The report by Lord
                      Taylor, which was severely critical of the police, had ruled out the
                      consumption of alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

              2.4     The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                      sclcction of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

              2.5     The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                      directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                      ard unlawful killing.




                                                          1
M A R -03-87   17-02 FROM* BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                           ID*                                    PMB   3




          3      The inquest verdicts wore not quashod. The judgment of the Court is at Annex b .
                 The Court was strongly influenced by the fact that the lawyers originally instructed
                 for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner*! decisions (eg page 7), that
                 the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have nude a difference, or had
                 been properly excluded (pages 14- 36); that the directions of the Coroner to the jury
                 wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                 40).

          4      Since 1993, as Tam keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                 Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep wmviction
                 that the legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                 circumstances of death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed 1o me that the
                 disaster would probably rccede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
                 has ntit. In the past six months, there have been tim e developments which, in my
                 professional opinion, provide strong evidence of perjury by individuals police officers
                 at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                 coursc of justice at the inquest. None of the following matters were made known at
                 the inquest.

          5      The evidence of Roflor Houldsworth. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
                  dated 25"' November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                 documents, uiui commenting on evidence given at the inquest / Annex CV Contrary to
                 the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty, the cameras gave clear pictures o f the
                 1 eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                 tapes and Mr Mouldsworth's evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
                 officers committed perjury, This evidence was made known to the world at large in
                 December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
                 disaster. (The cvidencc of tho witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex

          6      The new videotape evidence. Very recently, a member of the Family Support group
                 has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of
                 those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies am enclosed. I am
                 told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
                 South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, bui at a significant time before the
                 inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
                 Group in the presence of Mr UouldswDith, Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
                 Support Group, and Ann Adiingtou of my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
                 that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas of the ground
                 were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
                 Mr Hoaidsworth in his evidence of November 1996. Events in the relevant area may
                 rot, for various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 put but
                 they were clearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

          7      1 have also been shown a copy o f what was, I am toid, presented to the jury. It is a
                 very badly duplicated and blurred picture of Individuals escaping from the stricken
                 pens shortly after 3 pm, in which it Is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The

                                                          2
MAR-B3-B7 17.03 FROM* BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                           ID •                                   FACE   4




              tape has bad interference in the picture. If appears that this tape is a copy at several
              generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
              the videotape of which the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
              events after 3 pm.

        8    The importance of the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
             notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
             page 125, the Coroner directed the jury fAnnex K):

             "The assessment of the terraces” is a “very important factor” and “maybe the single
             most important (actor in the whole inquest'’. "The total sum of ovidence from the
             Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
             that none of them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

        9    None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
             case in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded aa by the Coroner as the critical time, I
             believe Ilwt the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
             the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

        10   l hc evidence of Dr Ed Walker In February 1997 the evidence of Dr Walker came to
             light; see Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
             appears at Annex G . The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
             “sinus rhythm and cardiac output11after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
             Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
             criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
             points out in his letter of Th February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that of Dr
             JSlatcr- Dr Walker was congratulated on 3"* May 1989 by Dr Wardrope, who was
             closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on IS*1June 1989 to
             stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
             at the inquest.

        11   It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker's
              evidence. At page 10 of the Divisional Court's judgment o f November 1993 the
              Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
              tho «vidcncc disclosed the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness feuding to rapid
              death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
              revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter of 3rd May 1989 “Almost
              immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patients
              requiring urgent resuscitation". The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
              structured by the Coroner on an utterly different factual assumption.

        12   t he previous investigation One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
              in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
             exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
             questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
              Midland* Pol ice who assisted the Coroner.

                                                     3
97    17<04 FROM > BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                       ID.                                     PAGE




 12      Conclusion. In my view these new pieces of evidence call for a full police enquiry or
         public inquiry. Exhibits such as the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
         analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate atid compel the
         production of evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
         this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director of
         Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a full copy to the Home Secretary,
         who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

 13      I hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
         two nr three o r the Family Support Group, Aim Adlington and me to expand upon this
         aiivicc.




 3 Raymond Buildings
 Gray's Inn
 London WCl


 3rd March IV97.                                                     Alun Jones QC
                  CROSS BgrBREHCE_Or PAGE HUMBRBfi

COUM8BI,•ft OPINION
                                           PAGE HUMBER IN BUKPT,^

Paragraph
            3!   P « e s ?H       36            P‘, " , 30
                 Pane         9                 ***** 37 “ ^
                 as                             m: %
Paragraph 8!     P*9»    12*                    P.,. 5,8
                    V*jy mbs Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a majcr
                    semi-final cnly 21 days before the sane, When he was relatively
                    inexperienced at policing matches?
                1   Mole 1-2, Duckenfield 3-4, Jackson 5-6                       .
                                                                                 v\
                                                                                      .   . ,,




                    Vfcy were there no barriers or ccrdcns to filter the crowd and prevent a
                    build ip outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans
                2   insist, there were the previous year?
                    Duckenfield 7-H, Jackson 12-13, Marshall 14-15                         ;
                                                                                           _uv




                    Viy was the gane not delayed, as a ranter of police officers thought it
                    ^jould hswe been, «ten it becane obvious that it would not be possible to
                3   get all the Liverpool ffems safely into the ground before the 3 pn kick-
                    Duckenfield 16-31, Murray 32-39, Bichard 40-41      iA/V^^


                    Vfcy didn't police recognise overcrowding cn the Leppings Lane terrace
                    when eye witnesses, including football ccmnentator Jcton Motscn, were
                4




                                                                                                       ■V
                    aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?        f    ia/^.
                    Duckenfield 42-52                 U ( !>                      ^              if



                    Vty wasi't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became

                5   flxLl, the procedure adapted at the previous year's Sani-Final?
                    Duckenfield 53-66, Crawford 67-77, Marshall 78-79       T)yW-v
                                                                            ** f i £
                                                                                      u
                                                                                             ,
                                                                                            'h vt

                    tnfcy did Chief Stperintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA
                    by telling him that ffems bad forced open Gate C, vten the officer knew he

                6   had given the order for it to be opened?
                    Duckenfield 80-92, Murray 93-95, Crawford 96, Bichard 97-101,
                    Jackscn 102-103
                                                                                                        _
                                                                                           C* y J Y ^ v /




                    v*y did it take i an hour after the first crushing began to pull dowi the
                    10 foot spiked fence viiich trapped the ffems, and **y were the gates viiich

                7   led cn to the pitch too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?
                    Duckenfield 104-108, Seaman 109-115, Hopkins 116-118, Eastwood 119-125,
                    Murray 126-129, Taylor 127, Bichard 130/1, Jackscn 132/4, Calvert 135-137


                    Vty was no puhlic address amomcement made - either informing the fans

                8
                    as to rtat was happening, asking for their help or for any medical
                    perscmel at the ground to help - until 3-30 pn?
                    Duckenfield 138-143, Jackson 144-148




                    Vty, Intel 42 anobulances reached the ground, did mere not get cn to the
                    pitch %tere the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained
                9   mprHr-al help?
                    SYMAS 149, Hopkins 150-152, Higgins 153-154, Eason 155-156




                      Vty   did cnly 14 of those %*o died go to hospital?
U niversal
                10
                      Higgins 157-159
OFFJCESUPPUES
UDIV110C
                                                              T.   BICHARD


    Gate A - that is the a l i g nmen t of the camera puts it out
    of view.                                     i



    Which camera was it that was used to go in on Gate A?
    A.  It wou ld be the camera on Lep pings Lane.

    So the same cam er a?  A.   It is the same camera;   it is
    just that its positi on is high up and dir ectly in line
    with the top of the doors and therefore you cannot actually
    see the gate, you see the tcp secti on to it.

    Gate A you can see just inside the gate, can you not?
    A.   You can see into the rear area heading towards the
    rear of the Stand.
         LORD JUSTIC E TAYLOR: This camera is on the south
    corner of the West Stand, is it?
         MR. COLLINS:            I think it is on the model, where the
    Usher is pointing.
         LORD JUSTIC E TAYLOR:  Yes, that is it.                        That is the
    one?   A.   That is correct, sir, yes.

         MR. COLLINS:    There is also a Club camera, is there
    not, which has a view of the Leppi ng s Lane turnstiles?
    A. ’ I do know '.hat there are Club cameras but I have
    not really been invol ve d in that system at all; it is
    purely a Club system.
    The pur po se of the Police syst em is bas ically what?
    What is it there for?     A.   Com ma nd and control initially
    but we are now going into areas of evi dence-gathering ,
    and I wou ld say that the trend is moving into that field.

     Is that what the clo s e - u p is really for?                 A.     T h a t ’s right,
     sir, yes.
     So you can zoom in on an ind ividual if there is a tro u b l e ­
     maker?        A.       That's right.                Peopl e sometimes mis un der stand
     the video syste m that you . are quite capable of identify ing
     somebo dy from a pic tu re just by enlarging it but, in fact,
     if you look at your te l e v i s i o n screen and have more than
     six heads and sho ulder s on it, you willnot be able to
     qet s u f f i c i e n t i d e n t i f i c a t i o n from that, and therefore
     Cou either have to in crease the power of your lense or
     move your cam er a nearer to the people you want to take
     a pic tur e o f .
Q    Apart from the came ra that looks over the tur ns ti les you
     have, I think, a came ra whi ch looks over the West terracin g?
     A.   That is correct, yes.
Q. Whe re is that p o s i t i o n e d ? , A.  It is situa te d just to the
   le f t -han d side of the C o n t r o l Box and near to the s c o r e ­
   board .
Q. Again, rou gh ly where the Usher is poi nting?                       A.     That is
   the position , yes, sir.
                                  43


                                                   T.   BICHARD


Q. We have he ard that on the day in questi on there was som ething
   wrong with that one;           is that cor rect?  A.   For a number
   of weeks we have had d i f f i c u l t y with the camera and they
   have been loo ki ng into hav in g the camera replac ed or
   i m p r o v e m e n t s made. In fact, on the day when I arrived
   at the ground Mr. Roger Halsworth, who is the Technical
   Off ic er for the Club, was in fact working on that camera
   to try and upgr ad e the pic tur e that we were actually
   getting.
Q.       What was the t ro uble?         A.   When the system had been
        swit ched on, after an amo un t of time, the picture would go
        white - you would lose act ually what you could see.           We
        bel ieved ini tiall y it was in relati on to the lighting inside
        the gro und but we seem to think that it may be a problem
        with the e l e c t r i c a l supply to that camera.

Q.       What was the eff ec t of that on the day in rel ation to your
        ability to look pro p e r l y at the terraces, the West terraces?
        A.     On that p a r t i c u l a r day, the picture had been -- the
        qua li ty had been improved.            It was not up to mark but it
        was a lot better than it had been.               We were getting
        pictures, that        is the        best way of describing it.

Q. Could you zoom    in in the no rmal way on to the terraces if
   you wanted' to? A.     The actual control facilities were
   fully available.
Q       What I am getti ng at is this, would it have been possible,
        if you were afraid, for example, that they were becoming
        ove rcr owded , could you take a close- up with that camera?
        A.       You can move ----         A clo se-up is available to move
        into those cen tre two pens.          However, because of its
        p os i t i o n and angle, it does give you a false impression about
        the crowd that         is in there.  It is quite low down and it
        is set at 90 deg re es to the pens rather than looking face
        on.
 Q. So what is the falsity of the imp re ssi on ?          Does it show it
    fuller than it really is or emptier, or what?              A.   It is
    just the illusion.           The pictu re creates a bit of an illusion
    about the cro wd that is in there.             You may be looking at
    som ebod y who is stood in the far corner of Pen 3 and it may
    give you the i m p r e s s i o n   that in fact he is stood in the
    far co rner of Pen 4.            It is because of the angle of the
    camera.
 Q.       I follow   that but we know that those pens did         become o v e r ­
         crowded.      A.   Yes, sir.
 Q.       Is there som ethin g in the p o s i t ion ing of that camera which
         mea ns that it is more d i f f i c u l t to assess that?   A.    The
         phys ical p o s i t i o n it is in is di fficul t to assess that the
         pens would be get tin g ove rc ro wde d.
    Q    Is there any w h e r e else where you think the camera could be
         which wou ld imp ro ve on that?     A.    That is available?
         Really you are looking        at a pos ition directly in front of
         the terraces.
                                  69


                                                  T.   BICHARD


    Q. One point, please, on the two video monitors in the right-
       hand corner of our picture.    Who decides what should be
       re co rded on each of those video tapes?   A.   As with
       actually dea li ng with the monitors, either I see something
       and switch it on to tape or I am ins tructed to tape a
       part i c u l a r incident.

    Q. I think about the time that Gate C was ordered to be opened by
B      Mr. Du ckenfi eld, did he not ask you vtetrer or not the scene
       outside Lep pings Lane ws being re corded?     A.   Certainly
       befor e 3 o'c lo ck I was asked, "Are we taping the scenes
       out there?"
    Q. Can you recall, Mr. Bichard, whether you were taking it
       down on both videos or just on one of them?    A.  I
       cannot rec olle ct whether it was both or one.

    Q. And the tapes from those videos, were they kept by you and
       then han ded over in due co urse to other Officers? A. Yes,
       that is right.
    Q. Did either of them stop in the course of that afternoon?
       A.   Yes, the tapes are 3-hour VHS tapes.    One expired
D      just after 3 o'clock.

    Q. What about the other?     A.     The other tape, somewhere
       bet ween 2.30 and 3, the ac tual function of the tape, the
       mode of operat ion , was alt ere d ina dvertantly.

    Q. By whom?         A.   Again, the ass umpti on is that when the radio
       repa i r - m a n came into the Control Box, Mr. Duckenfield
       actuall y came and stood to my ri ght- ha nd side, behind the
       control s and I would then move into the left-hand corner
       and I have caught the video with my knee - the actual
       ope rat ing buttons.

    Q. With your knee?       A.   Yes, sir.

    Q. One of the button s on the desk there that we see?
       A. No, sir, the two vid eos the mselv es are actually mounted
       to the lef t-han d side of that control pannel at knee height.

    Q. When you were asked by 'Mr. Duc k e n f i e l d whether or not the
       scene out side Leppi ngs Lane was being recorded, did you not
       check the video mon itor to make sure that they were - that
       is the mac hine itself?    A.   Yes, I looked down to the
       machi ne and they were both fun ct io ning right.

    Q. Did you then not notice that one of them was not running?
       A.   It did not stop run ning until after 3 o'clock, sir.

     Q. Did you not notice that one of them was not running?
        A.   They were both running, sir.     We are talking about
        the time aro un d half past two to quarter to three.

H    q   . Ye s . a .  And it fin ished about 6 min utes past 3, I believe*
           one of the tapes.
                                                T.   BICHARD


I thought you told me a mom en t ago that one of them, due
to an i n a d v ert ant mal fu nc tion , I think is how you described
it.   A.        Yes.
Did you not notice when you che cked to see whether or not
the pictu re s that Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d wanted recorded were in
fact being rec orde d?    A.        Yes.
That one of the ma ch ines - had it been switched off, or
what?    A.   No.    What h ap pens was the system was designed
to ope rate on a tim e-lap se mode so that a 3-hour tape would,
in fact, cover 18 hours of pictures.       Basically it is --

     LORD JUSTIC E TAYLOR:         A picture every few minutes,
is that it?         A.   Seconds we are dealing with really, sir,
and I, when I took over the system, altered it so that the
tapes would run at a normal speed so that people could view
them on normal video recorders.           However, that also means
that the tapes have to be change d during the match.           At
this part i c u l a r time   when I che cked them, they were running
in the cor re ct mode,       that is normal speed.
     MR. KALLIP ET IS :  Yes, the time that you are talking about
is whe n'you were asked whethe r the scene outside Leppings
Lane was being record ed ?   A.   That's right, sir.

So you are -aying itis after that that somehow             the switch
is knocked, are you? A.  Yes, that's right.

And which sw itch was kno cke d? A.   There are three buttons
on the front of the video rec orders and one of those which
changes it from normal mode to 18-hour time lapse system.

When you were asked to take over the VHF   link with Force
Con trol can you re member when that was?     A. My con centrati or
was app lied to that just after 3 o'clock, basically when we
rea lise d that things were going wrong.
 Because up to that time your main and primary duty would               be
 with the videos, would it not?   A.   It was, yes.

 You have had a chance to see the transcri pt from Snig Hill,
 I think, Mr. Bichard, have you not?   A.    I have now got
 that with me, yes.
 Can you tell me when, in fact, you took over from looking
 at the t r a n s cri pt?     Do any of the messages ring a bell with
 you7     A.      There were cer ta in messages that were passed
 by me p r i o r to 3 o'clock.       I would say around 5 past, 6
 min ut es past 3 is when I made a conscious decision to pay
 the full a t t e n t i o n to the VHF radio, if you like, when the
 rescue ope ra t i o n had begun.
 Who was ope ra t i n g the VHF radio in contact with Force Control
 before you gave your c o n s ciou s at tentio n to it?       A.   I was
 moni t o r i n g it and ope ra t i n g it on the odd occasion when I
 used i t .
                                                      t

This section deals with two video tapes from the camera overlooking the
terracing of the Leppings Lane end on the day of the disaster.


Schedules of both tapes were prepared for Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry by
West Midlands police officers.


The tapes are identified by the prefixes TB1 and TB2. TB are the initials of
the police officer (Police Constable Trevor Bichard) who was responsible for
operating the CCTV cameras and recording equipment on that day.


TB1 runs from 11.59.51 to 15.04.08 and video TB2 runs from 11.59.52 to
15.34.50.
»




    HILLSBOROUGH         iL INQUIRY




           video   schedule:
*




                                                      Sheet; No . . . .     or


    VIEWED 30. h .8c              HILLSBOROUGH JUDICAL ENQUIRY

                                           VIDEO SCHEDULE


                       Full ienghtbs/
                        Video Ref No    TB1/A/PART 1
                        VHS/Numatic     NUMATIC
                        Duration        From 11.59. 51 to 13.02.08


    Real time          Film begins - throughout duration of film at intervals of
    Data Base          approximately 1 minute camera switches from the following
    11 .59.51          locations with no incidents of any note:-

                       1.   Pitch and Team benches

                       2.   View of Penistone Road North from     Stadium

                       3.   View of Leppings Lane from Stadium

                       4.   View of Leppings Lane turnstiles

                       5.   View of Penistone Road.




    3.02.08            Film Finishes




                       Film viewed by
X




                                           Sheet No           or


                         HILLSBOROUGH JUDICAL ENQUIRY

                                 VIDEO SCHEDULE


             Full lenghths/
              Video Ref No        TB1/A/PART 2
              VHS/Numatic         NUMATIC
              Duration            1 Hour



 Real time
Data Base
1302: 26     Film begins - throughout duration of film atintervals of
             approximately 1 min. camera switches from the following
             locations, with no incidents of any note:-

              1.   Pitch + Team Benches

             2.    View of Penistone Rd, North from Stadium

             3.    View Leppings Lane, from Stadium

             4.    View of Leppings Lane, Turnstiles.

             5.    View Penistone Road




1402:11      Film finishes.
ViEWED 1 .5.89




                                     TB1/A/PART 3
                                     NUMATIC
                                     60 Mins.


 neai ti:

1402.08          Film starts

1406.06          Leppings Lane + Turnstiles A-G Compound, crowds increasing,
                 but flowing freely.

1410:49          Police van with emergency lights displayed driving into area
                 near gate 'C' .




1429:51          Compound at Turnstyles A-G.  Lepping Lane completely compact
                 with crowds.  Area at Gate from Street also compact.  Police
                 Horses visible at that Gateway.




1433:20          Leppings Lane, area heaving with people.




1434:54          „eppings Lane crowd surge backwards from Turnstyle A-G.




1458:55          Views inside Ground & Pens at Lepping Lane, Pen 6 has large spaces
                 available in crowd.




                                                                                      I
                                            iheet Mo ..



                       HILLSBOROUGH JUDICAL ENGUIRY

                               VIDEO SCHEDULE


            Full ienghtns/
             Video Ref No        TB1/A/PART 3
             VHS/Numatic
             Duration            60 Mins.


Real time




1459:19      Fans climbing fence directly behind goals,   Lepping Lane.




 459:25      Pen 1 spaces available in crowd.




1500:00     Gate 1   opened to allow small amount of fans into pen.




1502:35     More fans spilling onto pitch from Pens 3 & 4 directly beftinc
            Goal Post.  Police Officers seen to make area.




!503:15     Fans collapsing onto Pitch.




1504:08     Film finishes.
                    TB 2/A/PART 1
                    NUMATIC
                    FROM 11.59.52 TO 13.00.01




Tape commences and shows views of Leppings Lane, Penistone Road
North, the pitch and the players team benches, Leppings Lane
Turnstiles and the turnstiles in Penistone Road North.  Each vi
is for a matter of seconds only before the recording moves to
another view.
Nothing of any great value is shown on the tape.




Tape finishes

Tape viewed by
1




                                  TB 2/A/PART 2
                                  NUMATIC
                                  60 MINS




Data Base

12.59•35     Film starts.
             For duration of film cameras swap from the following
             locations, at intervals of about 60 seconds, with no
             incidents of any note.




             1.   Leppings Lane from stadium.

             2.   Leppings Lane Turnstiles A - G

             3.   Penistone Road North.

             4.   The pitch and Team Bench.




13.56.27     View of West Stand few fans on terraces there.




14 . 00.40   Tape finishes.




                                                                    -It
!




                  . .er.gr.u::o
                  ’SC ?Gf '<*         TB 2/A PART 3
                  :■/ .\*jn a t ; c   NUMATIC
                                      FROM 13.59.58




    Data Base

    13.59.58    Tape commences with views of Exit V in the Spion Kop and
                continues with views of Leppings Lane Turnstiles, the Wes!
                Stand, Penistone Road North The Spion Kop.




    14.18.39    View of Leppings Lane end terraces, plenty of room in the pen
                in view, insufficient detail to identify which pen.




    14.35.22    View of area directly in front of turnstiles A - G in
                Leppings Lane end showing large number of people packed
                together with mounted Policemen leaning over and talking to
                one of the crowd.




     4.35.24    ’ape finishes.
I




                      -> rN   r. +■ y. <



                                           TB 2/A/PART 4
                  ;/ ,;xa;                 NUMATIC
                  ■> ' 3 r>.
                                           1 HOUR




Date Base

14.35.21        Part 4 Commences.   Leppings Lane Turnstiles A - G .
                Also in time lapse.
                Heavy crowd outside Turnstiles
                Mounted Officers in centre of picture.




14.39.08    j   Shows shot of youths pushing towards Turnstile from left of
            [   shot.  Mounted Sergeant attempting to ease crowd back.




14.39.31        Youth being carried by Officer into ground via Gate 'C'




14.41.36        Distant shot showing crowds outside Turnstiles and in
                Leppings Lane.




14.42.36        Distant shot of youths climbing onto Turnstile block.




14.42.44    I   Close up shot of youths climbing onto Turnstile block,
                above Gate 'B ' .




14.43.15    !   Views over to area of 1 - 16 Turnstiles.




14.43.41        Overall views turnstiles area.         Leppings Lane
                Very crowded.




14.44.12        Views of A - G and all Leppings Lane.




14.44.19        All Leppings Lane Perimeter gates shut.

                                                                              T
                                     TB 2/A/PART    4
                                     NUMATIC
                                     1 HOUR




Data Base

14.44.23        Youths climbing over 1B 1 Gate.




 4 .45.06       General views of A - G, Leppings Lane, Gate C.




14.46.08        10 Youths on roof of A - G Turnstiles.




14.46.17        More youths on roof of A - G Turnstiles block.
                View of gate C and outside Leppings Lane.




14.46.32        Youths start to jump down of roof.




4.47.02         Slight problems at Turnstiles, very slow flow through A
                Perimeter Gates still appear close.




14.47.12        Closer on closed Perimeter gates,




14.47.25    j   Close up closed perimeter gates.




14.47.20        Stream of youths pouring over roof,




14.48.00        Gates open - "Ejection".




14.48.13        Pouring through Gate 'C' into compound.
                                         TB2/A/PART 4
                                         NUMATIC
                                         1 HOUR




Data Base

l 4 . 43.25   j   Policemen trying to stop flow through Gate 'C'.

              i
'4,48.26      i   Police horse into shot.


14 .48.32         Police horse at Gate    'C.



14.48.45          Gates appear closed.      Youths moving away from Gates and
                  Policemen.



14.48.48          Rear view of A - G.    Youths going through hole in wall towards
                  Pens 6 - 7 .



14.48.54          Back on gate + outside area.



14.49.00          Horse outside Gate C controlling crowd.



14.49.48          Perimeter gates closed.



14.49.58          Good view of Leppings Lane, large number of spectators backed
                  up Leppings Lane away from Ground.



14.50.59          Area immediately outside A - G , heavy but not bursting room to
                  the left.  Large number outside perimeter gates, which are
                  still closed.
                  Very slow flow through turnstiles.



14.51 .50         3 Mounted Officers outside Gate C perimeter gates.
                                -J   i   L' „ L




                                           s : he:d :.




             . .e.ngr.trs
             :eo ?ef \'c        TB 2/A/PART              4
             : l/jr.ai:;        NUMATIC
             ’2 : ic n          1 HOUR




Data Base



14.52.00    Close up of Police + crowd close up outside Gate 'C'




14.52.12    Right hand of Perimeter of outer fence area A - G   open,
            fans coming through, area packed.




14.52.20    Gate closed, large numbers climbing the wall.




14.52.24    Gate 'C' open crowd pouring through perimeter gates shut




14.52.40    Fans moving around from front of A - G
            Coming in via Gate 'C'.




i4.52.57    Perimeter fence still secure people climbing over it.
            Entrance to Gate 'C' flow controlled.




14.53.00    Crowd swaying outside perimeter gates.
            Further outside perimeter gates, large number of people,
            mounted coming in left to right breaking crowd.




14.53.20    Fans climbing both perimeter walls + fence.




14.53.40    Second Gate left to right opens and fans enter area in
            front of A - G.




14.53.44    Left hand perimeter gates open.



                                                                        -1
\




                                TB2/A/PART 4
                                NUMATIC
                                1 HOUR




Data Base

’4.54.01    Pens L - R, behind A to G.


14.54.03    Outside Turnstiles 1 - 16, heavy crowd pressure.


14.54.10    Close up back of 1 - 8 Turnstiles + Gate 'A'.



14.54.1?    Outside of 1 - 16, very full of crowd all perimeter gates open.
            Police Inspector on roof of 1 - 16, also PC on roof above Gate '3'



14.54.30    youths on roofs above 1 - 16.    Crowd outside swaying.



14.54.55    Leppings Lane Gate 'A' side.    Mounted Officers.



14.55.17    Overall view of rear of A - G and 1 - 1 6 also up Leppings Lane.
            Ground side of A - G full of people.   Spectators going through
            hole in wall.  Perimeter gates outside A - G open.
            Gate 'C' still open.



14.55.35    large number at rear of gate 'A'.



14.56.29    Crowd at rear of A - G, people still climbing up outside fences.



14.56.32    Area outside A - G and up to perimeter gates clearer;
            Leppings Lane, Police holding back crowd, the far side of
            perimeter fence.
T




                  ~< G> '       TB 2/A/PART 4
                 jr. a:         NUMATIC
                                1 HOUR




Data Base

14.57.31    View of insdie + outside A - G   Turnstiles still flowing
            through gates.




14.57.50    View of Rear of A - G and 1 - 1 6 Turnstiles.
            Rear of A - G full, and congested. Some people going through
            hole in walls.




14.58.09    Fans now coming through Gate 'A' area.




14.58.23    Line's of Police supervising flow of supporters via Gate 'A'




14.58.55    Gate 'C' has been closed.




15.00.18    Overall view of A - G + outside area, Police cordon in situ:
            Not many behind turnstiles.




15.02.1 1   Close up of perimeter gates by wall between A - G   and 1 - 16,




15.02.39    Overall view; rear of turnstiles and Lepping Lane relatively
            clear.




15.02.53    Film swings inside ground.   Terrace West Stand.




15.02,53    Photographers by fence.
Jl   ’   t




                          ■-1     le.n g ht r .s
                          Video B e : ' N'c            TB2/A/PART 4
                           . “!O'! l1-.jn 3. C1C       NUMATIC
                          jurat lor.                   1 HOUR




             Data Base

             15.03.00      Close up on Pens 3 - 4 , Police by fence.
                           Man in Bib (Steward?) on fence.




             15.03.26      Gate '4' open.          Fans climbing over fence and perimeter track.




             15.03.25      Steady flow over fence onto pitch from inside pen.
             until




             15.06.20      Fans on fence starting to pull people out of pen.
                           Cordon of Police along pitch.
             continuous    General scenes of people climbing out of pen, focused mainly
                           on pitch.




             15.09.47      Police at fence.




             Continuous    People climbing out of pen.




             15.16.10      Ambulance arrives.




             15.19.57      Senior Police Officer on fence with Loudhailer.




             15.22.08      Police inside pen entering via open gate.




             15.25.42      Changes to long range view of goal area West Stand, congested
                           with spectators.
J I




                                  TB 2/A/PART 4
                                  NUMATIC
                                  1 HOUR




  DAta Base

  15.27.37    People arriving with hoardings.




  15.27.43    People starting to remove oodies on Hoardings.




  15.31.24    Ambulance leaves front of Stand.




  15.34.50    Film stops.
with is this; you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with; who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.
     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.   My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right ~ bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

     MR. KING:   Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.    All
that was done when one looks at those Inquests was to
identify the time of a first sighting, that is to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.    In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if i can just give one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people who are brought off at 1522 and it is
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
There has been no investigation directed to the global
organisation of what happened immediately after they were
brought off the terraces. Certainly I have been through
 the individual transcripts and there does not seem to be
 any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
 were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
   ' THE CORONER:    Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in raspect of these individuals is not in fact the
pathological cause of death which we have been given but due
to a iiOvus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

     MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and putting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team being brought in, of proper
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being
carried out, that those measures, had they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.    They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me concrete evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.
     Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) been held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dead and there has been no effort
made systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what might have been, and what could
have made a difference.   A very simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a pulse and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never know whether or not that
individual was alive or dead at that stage.   It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces” .  I cannot put it any more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have put it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want to develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues.

     MR. KING:   Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?
     THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of me.   I would
not want to go through all of them but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am prepared to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:   Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which is the submissions to you of      the Jonesfamily,
Richard Jones, I do not knowwhether you have been given one
or two documents.    I have two documents in relation to M r .
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one headed "Dear Mr.
King".
     THE CORONER:     No. 11, did you say?
     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.    I beg your pardon, sir, it is
No. 10.   Sir, if you look --
     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, may I just stop you for one
moment because something has occurred to me, and I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press before we go
further?    The session this morning is being heard without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the Jury is because
we are dealing with legal points.    That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session but you should not actually
report what is being said.    You will no doubt be familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not report what we
are discussing.    If we had wanted the Jury to hear we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hear at this
stage.   You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, of
course, that is a different matter but for the moment please
do not report the content of the legal matters we are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?
     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at any^document
but it is just to help you is one headed to myself,  Dear Mr.
King".
     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel" dated 22nd October.
     MR.   KING:    Sir, this is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:      I have not got it I am afraid.   It is
not in front of me.
     MR. KING:   Iapologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are raised by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they make the basic point that the
report into the death of their loved one, Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must be
entitled to, up to that time the evidence of death is not
clear as having already occurred.

     Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
by Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence given on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a quotation from his evidence which you may
recall:
     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite difficult in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as would have been here.   In fact it can be so
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not."
     Then there is the statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a statement in the large bundle of statements given
to the West Midlands Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the Taylor Inquiry in which he says this:


                                  /"For an e x t r e m e l y long.
      "ro; an ext remel y long time we were without an/ form
      of m e d i c a l equ ipmen t of any des cript ion.    I still
      cannot u n d e r s t a n d wiy the locaL hea lth aut horit y's
      maj or me d i c a l dis a s t e r team were not cal led upon.     I
      u n d ersta nd that all healtin a u t h o rit ies in this
      cou ntry have a major dis a s t e r policy.       It is
      impossib le a c c urate ly to est imate the d i f f e r e n c e this
      would nave made in saving life.             I do, nowever,
      believe that the Liv erpoo l fans should have been
      given tne cnance".
And the que s t i o n raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
sir:   tnere was a maj or incident venicle.          Why -)as it not
called? Lack of equ ipment u n d o u b t e d l y resulted in deaths.

     Sir, I pause tnere. Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were not there and of cou rse they are not experts, but you
will see, sir, from the basis of that evi dence they are
firmly of the belief that one cannot just ignore an
inquiry, an inquest, into that a s p e c t .
      Sir, n um ber 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones comes
from tne statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
from Dr. Gly nn Phillips, p s r t i c u l a r l y w h e r e he says that
after 3.15 p.m. he gave mo u t h to raout r e s u s c i t a t i o n to a
man for 15 minutes, and just as he wa: giving up the heart
sprang to life, and aft er that trie man started bre athing
on his own. We know that this does not prove this man
lived, or if he did ne may have been brain damaged, but
the point we are trying to put across to the cor o n e r is
that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
cer tifie d dea d were n e c e s s a r i l y dead.
       Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jonas direct your att entio n
to the long sta temen t which I am sure you have seen, sir,
of Or. John Asn ton in which tnere is a series of raasoned
c ri tical com m e n t s on the d i s o r g a n i s a t i o n of the medical
and tne rescue attempts, nonest and in good faith tnough
they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.
        Sir, that is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in tnose com ments and
in the short letter, sir, w n i c n you have, whi ch you have
alr e a d y ref erred me to, sir, they emp hasise an issue as to
the failure to implement triage after the dis a s t e r
happened, again, c o n c e n t r a t i n g on what Dr. G um pert has
said as to the fact that without an e l e c t r o - c a r d i o g r a m it
is not pos sible to know wn e t h e r a heart has stoppped.

     Sir, can I move on from Mr. and Mrs. Jones' comments
and just give you one or two more exampies - I app recia te
that in man/ ways it is repetiti ous but it is mak ing the
point - to number 14, sir, whi ch is in the case of Wil liam
Roy Pemberton.
      THE CORONER:        And this one is add re s s e d to you.
     MR. KING:    Sir, it is not often that i n s t r uct ions to
Counsel are giv en in advance to the Tribunal, and I
suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.

     THE CORONER:     You are pro bably right.

     MR. KING:    Sir, it was an effort in tne relatively
short time since we were before you to put before you the
various mat ters which trie families wisned to place before
you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
sir.
      Sir, if I can than turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
see that he makes the following points:         tne report into
the dea th of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
was p r o nounc ed extinct at 16.00 hours hours, and again in
the abs ence of med ical e vi dence to the contrary, the
family can only assume that their loved one was alive
until that hour, and sir, if you then go to par agrap h 3 of
that doc u m e n t you will see tnere is a reference to tne
statement of Mr. Saxton of the St. Jonn's A m b u l a n c e
Service, b ec ause he refers to tne r e s u s cit ation of a young
man at 15.50 hours, i n d icati ng in the h e a rt-fe lt vie w of
Mr. Pemberton, as with all the oth er families, that death
must have occ u r r e d after 3.15 p.m.
         Again ne refers you, sir, in par agrap h 4, to tne
statement of Dr. Byrne wnen he quotes that he was
app roacn ed by a senior Police Off icer and asked to start
ce r t i f y i n g the dead as tnere may be some still alive, and
sir, again, the point has been made that as we only know
for cer tain that dea th was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
con cerns as to the ade quacy of the att entio ns and the
rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investig ate what could
well have been a major reason for why somebody died and
did not survive.
      The final point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
7, is tne que s t i o n he asks: why was it that the very
seriously ill and dving, and those who app e a r e d to be
dead, were not taken to the hos pital in the very first
ava ilabl e ambulance, and ne raises himself the issue as to
why the serious accident response vehicle was not called
out to the stadium, as he u nd ersta nds to be the case.

         Sir, if I can then deal with perhaps one exa mple of
minutiae, of detail, if one turns to the cases of the
Hicks sisters, of Victoria and Sarah Hicks, sir, wnich is
at numbers 7 and 3 in your list, sir, you will not ice the
case of Victoria, tnat on tne face of tne summary wnich
was produced at the Inquest prior to today, there was a
gap in time. There is a gap in time bet w e e n 15.21, which
was the time when Police Con st a b l e M c G uinne ss rescued
Vic toria from a pile of those who u n f o r t u n a t e l y had
fallen, and 15.23 when Mr. Tu r n e r was seen hel ping
Vi c t o r i a out onto the pitch.
     Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
has drawn to the att entio n of this Inquest the evi dence of
a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, whose evi dence is that hs W 3 S
on the very terrace where Vic toria was after she had been
"rescued" by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
minutes he did not, in fact, resuscitate because the poor
man did not know wnat to do, and one can und ersta nd that,
but as Mr. Hicks says, tnose six minutes could have been
vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
received the proper attention.

     Sir, that is just an example of matters which, in Mr.
Hicks's sub missi on to you, through me, ought to be
investigated.

        Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at num ber 8, again
if one looks at the timings we know that at 5-m inute s-
past-3 a Miss McC affer y sees Sarah, who cle arly has
fallen, and we know at 2 1 - m i n u t a s - p a s t - 3 , helps the fallen
Sarah through onto the pitch.                  Again, the time gap there
between o-mi.iutes-past-3 and 2 1 - m i n u t e s - p a s t - 3 . We know
it was not until 20- past-4 that Dr. Bull exa m i n e d Sarah
and c e r t i f i e d ner death, and we know from the summary that
it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
uni d e n t i f i e d me m b e r of the me d i c a l team stated in his view
that Sarah was at that time beyond help.

     All tnose times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
illustra te the need in the s u b missi on of the families for
tne times after 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.

     Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
read tie papers which I u n d e rsta nd and I am sure you have
they express the flavour of all the other sub missi ons
that, in fact, we cannot know that a cut off point at this
stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
premature, sir, so to do, in my sub missi on to you. That
is how I put it.

          THE C0R0NEK:        Thank you vary much indeed, Mr. King.
I think vnat we will now do is to give the rest of you an
op p o r t u n i t y to make points.   I think we ougnt to start
witn Mrs. McBrien.            I think you would p ro bably support
what has been said, but is there anything in add ition to
vhat Mr. King has said that you feel you would like to
tell me. Mrs. Mc3rien can I say if you are more
c o m f o r t a b l e sitting down - indeed, that goes for all of
you - if you are more c o m f o r t a b l e sit ting down, sit down.
I don't mind - it does not make any differen ce.                I know
some of your legal c o l leagu es sit ting around you are used
to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
comfortable.            Mrs. McSrien, is there any t h i n g you want to
aid to what Mr. King nas told me?

     M R S . Mc8RIEN: No, I go along with eve rythi ng that
Mr. King has said, thank you.
That is a matter w h i c h ray learned friend will, I am sure, fully
understand.               I me r e l y mention it now so it is not said that it :
men t i o n e d w ith hin d s i g h t afterwards.               T here may, indeed, be a
great deal of d i f f e r e n c e between the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y or lack of
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y on the part of some of those who died, and
s e p a r a t e r e p r e s e n t a t i o n would in normal c i r c u m s t a n c e s be require
because it may be that one family would m a k e an a l legation
against another.                  Again, I give as an example, and I am not
sa y i n g that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
s o m e o n e who died had come at the ver y last minute wit h a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had mad e his way right down to tf-
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused som e deaths, then
that would be a matter w h e r e he or his rel a t i v e s might well
r e q u i r e to be s e p a r a t e l y r e p r e s e n t e d .

          THE CORONER:            Y e s , Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of r e p r e s e n t a t i o n is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you w ere a p p l y i n g you r mind, and (b) for the legal
r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s who obv i o u s l y have to w eigh whate v e r conflict of
interest there may be between their clients.                       So that is really
not a matter for me, and it is not p r o bably even a matter for
you.        It is a ma t t e r for Mr. Kin g and his i n s t r u c t i n g solicitors
and, of course, p r i m a r i l y for the parties themselves.

      Perhaps I should say one other thing.                    You have men t i o n e d c
couple of v e r dicts and matters like that.                  I am not gett i n g intc
an argument at this s tage as to what v e r d i c t if any the Jury
would bring in, or e v e n what directions, if any, I am g oing to
give them, beca u s e the o b j e c t i v e of this Inquest as far as it ha
one is to hear the e v i d e n c e and to e n a b l e the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.              I have the a d v a n t a g e of having seen
loads of statements.          I do a c k n o w l e d g e that, but e x p e r i e n c e has
taught me in much simp l e r Inquests than this that it is not
in frequent that what you think is going to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the e v i d e n c e when it actually c o m e s ,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is d i f f e r e n t to what I had a n t i c i p a t e d from just
looking at the statement.              So I hav e mad e it as far as I am
able a rule not to p r e d e t e r m i n e the answer but to wait until I
h ave heard the evidence.             I say this not as a c r i t i c i s m of you
but just as a c l a r i f i c a t i o n for everybody.         I do intend to
listen to what is said, w h i c h is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously, I have read state m e n t s and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial t hing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.                 I can't do more than that.              I
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

      MR. PAYNE:          Sir, wit h regard to the .submissions by Mr.
King, the p o s i t i o n of the Chief C o n s t a b l e is that he is neutral.
I have got no s u b m i ssions to m a k e about what Mr. K ing is asking
you to do, but I wis h it to be heard that the position of the
Chief C o n s t a b l e is that he wants to do e v e r y t h i n g he can to
a ssist you in the cond u c t of this Inquest, and c e r t a i n l y does nc
w ish to do a n y t h i n g to put in the w a y of Mr. King any obstructic
into any e n q u i r y that he wants to mak e on behalf of the relative
of th e p e o p l e who died.    Sir, that is the position.
      , As a comm e n t on what Mr. Kin g has said, s t r i c t l y it appears
to us that he is sa y i n g that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus a c t u s . i.e. s o m e t h i n g which
inter v e n e d after the crush i n g and before the deaths, which cause
or c o n t r i b u t e d to the deaths of at least some of the people, anc
the r e s p o n s e of the Chief C o n s t a b l e to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can q u i t e see that is s o m e t h i n g which
pe o p l e w ould wish to see inv e s t i g a t e d on the q u e s t i o n of how it
came about.            I only m ake that comm e n t in an e n d e a v o u r to be
helpful, but the position of the C h i e f C o n s t a b l e is that he has
no submis s i o n s one way or the other.

     May I just say while I am on my feet w i t h regard to what Mr
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Po l i c e have admitted negligence.            It is well k nown and has
been well p u blicised that what has h a p pened is that the Police
have agreed to mak e payments to t hose people who were injured ar
to the depe n d e n t s of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.          Also there has been a civil actic
in respect of appor t i o n m e n t of li a b i l i t y in respect of those
matters.

          THE CORONER:       Thank you very much, indeed.     I accept
en t i r e l y what you say and in a s e n s e I accept what M r . Mann i n g
says as well.           It is not really r e l evant to my proceedings
whether or not n e g l i g e n c e has been admitted or not admitted.         It
is neither h ere nor there.          So I did not comment on it, but      I
a p p r e c i a t e what you have said.

       MR. ISAACS:    I think,       sir,   in fact,     that is Mr.        Hale.   Mr.
Mann i n g sits to my left.                                                                J




     THE CORONER:          I beg your    pardon.      F o r g i v e me,   please,   both
of you.

        MR. ISAACS:             Sir, I have no submissions.   It is e n t irely a
matter for you ha v i n g regard to the breadth or d e p t h which you
c o n sider a p p r o p r i a t e for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have e x a c t l y similar comments                 as far
as my client is concerned.

      M ISS SINCLAIR:          I have no submis s i o n s on this matter,            sir

         MR. CATCHPOLE:           I add to that.  The matter is e n t i r e l y for
you.        You are the best person, ha v i n g read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
you have alre a d y pointed out, sir, a fairly d e t ailed
i n v e s t i g a t i o n into the earlier Inquests.

          MR. CALLAGHAN:           Sir, this is not an a p p l i c a t i o n of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s of the
a p p l i c a t i o n is s ome s u r p r i s e to me. All I think I should, sir,
is this is not the time and place for s ome sort of Public Inquii
into the acti v i t i e s of the A m b u l a n c e S e r v i c e and the Emergency
Services, and it is not a p p r o p r i a t e to bring such a matter into
the arena as a sort of           s i d e wind.   Beyond that,   sir,   it   is
o b v i o u s l y a matter for   you.

     MISS ADDELMANN:    Sir, I have no o b s e r v a t i o n s or submissio
about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

         MR. RUSSELL:         I too endo r s e those remarks.        None of us,
other than my learned friend. Mr. King, has seen the original
s t a t e m e n t s . and so are being invited to comm e n t upon a course ii
the dark because we have not seen the nat u r e of an e x a m p l e of ti
m a t erial he now seeks to rely upon.            I rec o g n i s e it is a matter
for you, and if you d e c i d e I d o n ’t take a stance one way or the
other.

     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point?        Is t h e n
anybody else wants to say a n y t h i n g on this issue? Mr. King?

          MR. KING:         Sir, only to e m p h a s i s e that it is not a side
wind which I am e m b a r k i n g on.       I am s e e k i n g to address causes,
c o n t r i b u t o r y causes to the deaths, and I am c o n c e n t r a t i n g on
that, and it is in that context I hav e invited th e C ourt to looi
beyond 3.15, and c e r t a i n l y we are d e a l i n g wit h it from the poin-
of vie w of p o s s i b i l i t i e s of novus a c t u s . yes, I accept that.

      THE CORONER:          I have listened h o p e f u l l y wit h attention, a:
perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on
I know you have not had the a d v a n t a g e of seeing the letter, but
it is only fair to say Mr. King in his s u m m a r y of the points as
far as I can see s u m m a r i s e d the points w h i c h his clients were
m aking e n t i r e l y fairly.  There is nothing extra in the letter, :
to speak, ex c e p t conne c t i n g words, basically.         That is for your
reassurance, if I can put it like that.

         Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go" on the
15th April, 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
of the u n d e r l y i n g criteria w hich I tried to apply in t h i nking
how to set about d e a l i n g with the Inquests was to as far as
p o s sible treat the Inquests as if they w ere c o mpletely
standard, if I can put it like that - it is a h o r rible word -
but c o m p l e t e l y normal Inquests.   The fact that it was national
news, that it was 9 5 young people, that it created a terrible
amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in som e ways is unique
because of the numbers, but eac h individual d e a t h I dealt with
families are in exac t l y the same situation, and I tried to
think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
oppo s e d to an incident in a football stadium.               I have thought
back on m any occasions to say a road traffic incident where
s o m e b o d y might have s u f fered a serious head injury.            That
person may well have been at the road side for X number of
minutes w hile one was waiting for the a m b u l a n c e services to
attend.         They may then have been taken by an a m bulance to a
hospital.         They may have gon e into the r e s u s c i t a t i o n room.
They may have been worked on by the d o c t o r s . They may have gone
into hospital and they may have then died two, t hree days, may
be longer after the incident.            Or alternatively, you could have
a s i t u a t i o n w here by ch a n c e the road traf f i c incident occurs on
the .road and a d o c t o r happens to be.         He walks up to the
patient, looks and says, "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
that this person is d e a d ” . Or you c ould have a s i t u a t i o n where
the person has this road traffic i n c ident and is taken into
hospital and is c e rtified dea d on arrival.

          In none of t hose instances would I as a matter of routine
call e v i d e n c e of what happened after the incident                    itself wa«
concerned, and indeed, the p a t h o l o g i s t s in the e x a m p l e which i
have used would have g iven as c ause of d e a t h serious head injur'
for instance, or m u l t i p l e injuries with fracture of the skull, c
s o m e t h i n g of that nature.         It seems to me that the fact that the
person may s u r v i v e an injury for a number of minutes or hours 01
even days, is not the q u e s t i o n w h i c h I as C o r o n e r have to
consider.           My task is to e s t a b l i s h who the person was - I am
sorry to repeat this - w here he died, when he died and how he
died.         It is from my u n d e r s t a n d i n g of the path o l o g i c a l evidence
the o v e r w h e l m i n g p a t h ological e v i d e n c e is and was that the peopJ
died as a result of c r u s h i n g or t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.              Different
words w ere used, but the s ense was always the same.                           The
u n d e r l y i n g prob l e m w hich t hese poor men and women w ere subjectec
to was an ina b i l i t y to breathe.

     That does not mea n to say that some of them did not in fact
respire for a period of time or even have a heart beat
thereafter, but the d a m a g e was done, and indeed, both Dr.
Gumpert, Dr. Slater, Prof. Usher, who d e a l t wit h this q u e stion :
an overall point of view, all in fact said, as I u n d e r s t a n d the:
evidence, e x a c t l y the same.

         O n e of the points, Mr. King, which you have mad e is that
because ;a pe r s o n has not been cer t i f i e d dead until a particular
point in time, one must t h e r e f o r e assume that he is alive.                With
the g r e atest respect I d o n ' t accept that as a r e a s o n a b l e -
" r e a s o n a b l e ” is a very unkind word - as a p r o p o s i t i o n w hich I
would take.             Indeed, if you think about it for a moment I am sur
you would a g r e e with me, if a body w e r e to be found in a
mac e r a t e d s tate one would call a d o c t o r who would
cert i f y death, but it would be a little bit illogical to
as s u m e that that part i c u l a r body was a c t u a l l y alive
until that point.

          The issue of d e a t h c e r t i f i c a t i o n and the timing of it is
important, because one wants to h ave if p o s s i b l e certainty.                 Th;
is the first thing.                 Secondly, the c o n v e n t i o n a l way of
e s t a b l i s h i n g a pe r s o n is d e f i n i t e dea d is that a medical man sa?
so, but to d r a w the c o n c l u s i o n that until a medical man has saic
so a person is a live is in my view an impos s i b l e pr o p o s i t i o n to
maintain.




                             /I do u n d e r s t a n d the anxiety.
          I do u n d e r s t a n d the anx iety w h i c h a lot of the families
hav e about this issue, but as I hav e alr e a d y said the
o v e r w h e l m i n g m e d i c a l evidence, the p a t h o l o g i c a l evidence,
and that is the c r u c i a l one I am i n t e r e s t e d in, is the
da m a g e that c a u s e d the d e a t h was don e d ue to the crushing.
          Now I picked the arr ival of the first amb ul a n c e not
b e c a u s e there is a n y t h i n g m a g i c a l abo ut that but bec ause
when we look at the videos we can a ct ually see that and it
is a c o n v e n i e n t marker, that is all.              If the first
a m b u lanc e had arr i v e d at 3.30 I wou ld have pic ked that time.
It is simply int e n d e d as a marker, but, and this is an
imp ortant point, I c o n s i d e r e d the m e d i c a l evidence. The
m e d i c a l e vi dence was that once - I am not q u o t i n g v e r b a t i m -
but the sense of what P r o f e s s o r Usher said, and, indeed, the
o th ers as well, was that once the ch e s t was fixed so that
re s p i r a t i o n cou ld no longer take place, then irr e c o v e r a b l e
bra in d am age w o u l d o c c u r b e t w e e n four and six minutes.
Tha t is the point.
         Now I felt that the e vi dence w h i c h I had hea rd and in
the light of what I had read that the latest time, the
latest, when this per ma n e n t fix ation cou ld have arisen would
h av e bee n a p p r o x i m a t e l y six min utes past, wh i c h is w h e n the
m a t c h stopped.         It alm ost cer ta i n l y was before, but let us
a ss ume six min utes past, add a n o t h e r six min utes to that,
that is twelve min utes past and then as I say I went on to
find a c o n v e n i e n t m a r k e r be y o n d that point in time.       In
other words, what I am trying to say is I did not just pick
the arr i v a l of the first amb ul a n c e ent i r e l y out of the blue,
I d id try and c o n s i d e r in the light of the evi dence w h i c h we
had h e a r d what could have been the latest time when the real
da m a g e was done.
          I have alr eady ind icate d that at the - I will call them
the i nt erim inquests if I may just for the sake of a name
we d id end eavou r to give a great dea l more inf ormat ion or
e v i d e n c e than we w o u l d ever do in a no r m a l inquest and in
that sense I broke my own rule str a i g h t away bec a u s e I said
I w a n t e d to treat this ma t t e r as if it w e r e a c o m p l e t e l y
s ta ndard no r m a l road traffic incident, if you like.                 I
didn't, I gave a great deal of i n f o r m a t i o n for var ious
reasons wh i c h I don 't nee d to go into now.
         As an aside I can assure you that w i t h i n the limits of
our abi lity the sum maries and the e v i d e n c e whi ch was given
was an a c c u r a t e r e f l e c t i o n of what peo ple said and if there
was a gap, for instance, as has bee n sug geste d in some cases
w h i c h is unexplai ned, the reason wasn t b e c a u s e there is
some h i d d e n evi d e n c e wh i c h we have put und er the curtain,
but b e c a u s e we di d n ' t k n o w of it or cou ldn t find it or it
do e s n ' t exist. T he truth of the matter, of course, is that
p e o p l e w e r e n ' t bei ng w a t c h e d i n d i vidu ally c o n t i n u o u s l y by
som ebody else       r e c o r d i n g what was happening.      It is e nt irely
for tuito us as      to w h e t h e r or not there is a w it ness or
wit ne s s e s who   h a p p e n s (a) to hav e bee n w i t h a person, (b)
who rem ember s      who he is and (c) has some idea of the timing.
          Some of you who were there will r e m e m b e r that in some
cases we had a great deal of e v i d e n c e w i t h regard to what
had h a p p e n e d post-cru sh, shall I s a y , and in others we had
next to n o t h i n g b e c a u s e it is very sad p a r t i c u l a r l y for
those families whe re we hav e got so little to share wit h
them, but we are living in the real w o r l d and in some cases
there was o v e r w h e l m i n g - for instance, there were doz ens of
p h o t o g r a p h s as you k n o w - some of the peo ple wer e all over
the n e w spape rs and in others we c o u l d not find any.                    It
can 't be helped, it is just one of those things.
          Bea ring in m i n d that I intend at this stage to d e a l
wit h the q u e s t i o n of how, and I do intend to deal w i t h it
re a s o n a b l y co m p r e h e n s i v e l y , I have to rem e m b e r two things:
that my powers are limited.                         I d o n ' t hav e an ope n e n d e d
a u t h o r i t y to car ry out an inv estigation.                    The Rules and the
Act, indeed, are q u i t e cle ar as to the limits of what the^
cor o n a l inquiry s ho uld be.                   I admit that the wor d h o w is
a little bit fle xible and ass u m i n g we call all those
w i t n esse s on that pr e l i m i n a r y list w h i c h I have c i r c u l a t e d I
hope you will agree that I have been rea sonab ly flexible
w it h that word, but n e v e r t h e l e s s I do hav e to dra w a line.
Indeed, this was don e in o t h e r inquests.                         If you think back
to the Z e e b r u g g e inquest, for instance. T he lea rned Cor oner
there d r e w a line.                 He was j u d icial ly rev iewed on w h e r e he
dre w it and in that p a r t i c u l a r cas e the Div ision al Court or
the Cou rt of Appeal, I can't r em ember now, c le arly said that
a line has to be drawn and in the Z e e b r u g g e cas e they agr eed
it was right.               I am doi ng my best.                I am trying to dra w a
line as well.
      If you think of the oth er major dis as t e r s where
inq uests have alr eady taken place, you will find that lines
were dra wn there as well and I think you will find that the
line w i t h regard to the q u e s t i o n w h i c h we are n ow thi nking
about was very, very m u c h tighter than what we have alr eady
done.
        In an s w e r to your submission, I still c o n s i d e r that as
a g e n e r a l p r o p o s i t i o n we are goi ng to accept - I am g o i n g to
take these inquests and d e a l wit h the que s t i o n of h o w on the
bas is of what h a p p e n e d to about 3.15 o r ^ t h e r e a b o u t s . ^ I
have e x p l a i n e d it to you so I am not goi ng to repeat it and
I base it m ai nly upo n the p a t h o l o g i c a l m e d i c a l evidence.
          Hav ing said that, I think it is p ro bably right to say
b e c a u s e we will be c a l l i n g w i t n esse s it may be that some of
the things w h i c h worry you may be dealt w i t h to a m i n o r
d e g r e e but it is c e r t a i n l y not my int en t i o n to a l l o w us to
stray dow n that path.
          I have also got to say, it is only right, that what I
think you are really i nv iting me to do, Mr. King, is to hold
a further j ud icial inquiry into mat t e r s into which, as I
u n d e r s t a n d it, are out s i d e my a u t h o r i t y and scope. I also
seem to recollect, a l t h o u g h Lord J u s t i c e T a y l o r s Inquiry
isn't - as I have alr e a d y said to you at the b us iness
meeting, I don't really want to spend too m u c h time on it -
but I do recollect that the e m e r g e n c y ser vices were very
well rep r e s e n t e d at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
discussi on, from my reading of the tra nscripts, did deal
wit h the issues of the med i c a l response.
          W h e t h e r or not that '-;?.s satisfactory, w he ther Lord
J u s t i c e Tay lor should have done more, w h e t h e r som ebody else
should look into that whe n we have f in ished that is not hing
to do w i t h me.           However, as far as I am con cerned, my
int en t i o n is to stick w i t h what I gave you as my initial
p r e l i m i n a r y intention.
          I have, of course, alr eady looked through the doc ument s
w hi ch you sent me and i ns ofar as in one or two instances
w i t n e s s e s are men tione d, if I think, and, indeed, I have
thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
the moment, you have got a point.                It would per haps be
a d v a n t a g e o u s to call those persons and we are making
app r o p r i a t e arr angements.     Please don 't think that I have
said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not d e a l i n g w i t h that,
I have already spent quite a bit of time thinking ab o u t it
and I will hop ef u l l y have ano ther look.           If I were - which
is hi g h l y unl ikely - in any p a r t i c u l a r instance to feel we
ought to go a little bit further dow n that line bec ause
there is a spe cific point to be made in any pa r t i c u l a r
instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
However, I think it is unl ikely from wha t I have seen and
what I have read and for the reasons w h i c h I have giv en you.




               MR. KING:       Sir, thank you for that.
    0


%



        ♦                           QUESTION                 EIGHT

            Why was no public address announcement made - either informing
            the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
            medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


            Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
            were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in me pens in
            the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
            they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
            doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
            a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
            difficult situation.

            The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
            was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
            the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
            message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
            the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
            by the fans.



            OBSERVATIONS

            Please see pages 138 - 148, Volume 2



            Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

            Medical

            89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east corner
            and drove to the perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
            nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
            minutes ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
            when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
            situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
            dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
            mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
            but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
            The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

            Fans

            97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
            assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
            address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
            attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
            given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
            close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop.
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught.       A few began to run towards the Kop end.
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.
                                                        P.O.    DUCKENFIELD


Did you feel then that he had the responsibility and not you
to take the lead, as it were, on the pitch, and to sort out
the s i tuation? - A. He was the senior Officer on the pitch.,
sir. and he in my view was taking command of the situation
there, until Mr. Nesbitt arrived.

The sad fact is that he did not achieve ve'ry much, did he, Mr
Duckenfield.    It was not until Superintendent Nesbitt arrived
on the scene that anything was achieved? - A. In fairness to
Mr. Jackson, he came back at one point to see me when I
implemented the major incident plan, and he then returned, bu*
Mr. Nesbitt o b viously was in uniform.

Yes, I see.     Now. what about use of the Tannoy? - a . Use was
made of the Tannoy by P.C. Ryan to ask people to move back, ir
a d d ition to the Officers indicating for people to push back ir
the p e n s .

What m e s s a g e was sent over? - A.   I d o n ’t   know,    sir.

Did you not   give instructions? - A. Sir, in the crisis
situation I   was issuing instructions for all manner of things
to be done,   and that was one instruction which I expected to
be carried out.

Yes. out what was your instruction? - A. My instruction was t<
give Tannoy m e s sages tor people to ease back.

To e ase back where? - A. Towards the tunnel.            I did not say
s p e c i f i c a l l y the tunnel. I said, "tase back".

We have heard some e v i dence that a Tannoy message at some
stage was also given for people to clear off the pitch.      Do
y o u "know anything about that? - A. No. sir.

What about the p o s s i bility of the game going ahead.'' Were you
thinking- in.terras of whether the game should, be postponed
a l togexner .or .whether it might be possible to start, it .again
a f t e r - a period? - A. At that stage, sir................

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Forgive me. at which stage are yo
tellins us?     You say "at that s t a g e ” . Which stage are you
r e f erring to? - A. May I ask for guidance as to what time you
are asking me about?

     - MR. COLLINS:     At what stage was it you were getting or
you instructed Mr. Ryan to broadcast that the fans should go
back in the terraces? - A. I c a n ’t be specific, sir.    About
the time that we have appreciated the people on the pitch, bu
I c a n ’t be specific.   T here were many instructions given verv
quickly.

 You say that you c a n ’t recall now i n s t r u c t i o n s to clear the
 pitch .  C an I ask y o u to look at page 13 of your statement,
 Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ? - A. Yes, sir.

 You have just been deal i n g with your calling for operation
                                                                     69


                                                                                          D.G.   DUCKENFIELD


                                      support.      - A.    Yes.

                                 Q.   For instructions         to implement the major disaster plan.   -   a   .
                                      Yes.

                                 Q.   To warn hospitals, etc, which of course was at a fairly early
                                      stage that you did this.  You reacted quickly, you told us.
                        B             and you sent these messages out.  You say this:

                                             "Whilst all this was taking place I asked Police
                                             C o n s t a b l e Ryan to continue broadcasting for calm among
                                             the supporters and for them to clear the pitch so we
                                             c ould d e t e r m i n e what people were injured and where
                                             b e c a u s e the fans were milling around and obstructing the
                                             view".

                                      - A.   Yes.    sir.

                                 O.   So it appears you did give instructions for a broadcast to
                                      clear the pitch? - A. I misunderstood what you said.         The
                                      sit u a t i o n was one of the difficulties in the situation you
                                      d e s c r i b e is that with so many people coming on the pitch, and
                                      this could link in with the suggestion you have raised that
                         D            people did not know what they were doing, there were fans on
                                      the pitch who were hampering rescue attempts because you just
                                      couldn't see who was injured or who was not injured who might
                                      want attention, because the pitch was filling up. and we
                                      wanted people to move away so we could see who required
                                      attention.

                                 Ci. Where were they supposed to move to? - A. To the sides.

                                 Q.   Which sides and where? - A. Either side,         the North Stand side
                                      and the South Stand side.

                                 G.   There., was a public order problem if they moved to the South
                                      Stand-.side, was not there, because they: would be brought up
                                      against.Nott.ingham Forest fans in that stand?          A'. Sir, in a-
                                      si t u a t i o n such as that I would 'have hoped that a public order
                                      problem may not have developed, although ic is a possibility.
                                      My c o n c e r n . ...

                                 0.   Well, it did develop. - A. Yes.   My concern was for the
                                      injured and for those who required attention, and I could not
                                      and I don't think anybody else could, deal with the injured,
                                      which was of prime importance, until people who could walk
                                      could walk away from the situation.

                                 Q.   It did not occur to you there might be a number in shock?                - A
                                      Very muc h so.

                                 0.    And they    would not be   likely to respond, would they,to
                                      requests to clear the pitch? - A. No, but there were a number
                                      of Police Officers in a state of shock also.
                             H
                                 Q.   I know.       Were you aware of that at the time? - A. No,       I was
                                      not.
                                                                                                           1   j i)
J . L. H a r p h a m L t d
                                70


                                                        P.O.   DUCKENFIELD



Q.    As the s i tuation d e v e l o p e d there was a problem from the
      N o t t i n g h a m Forest end, the Kop, because fans were clearly
      annoyed by what they perceived to be Liverpool fans coming on
      the pitch and effectively, as they thought, doing a Heysel all
      over again? - A.           I d o n ’t know of that, sir.

0.    Did not you hear    it? - A. No, I c a n ’t comment on that. I was
      engrossed in the    events that were taking place, and that was
      at the other end    of the ground.

0.    But you were aware, wer e not you told by anyone, that there
      w er e problems with the N o t t i n g h a m Forest end because they
      believed that the Liverpool fans were disrupting the game? -
      A. I was not told that, sir.

Q. Was not it obvious that might arise? - a . The obvious problems
   before my eyes. sir. was deal i n g with the situation as I saw
   it.

Q.    I am not s u g g e s t i n g this is something you should have
      necess a r i l y done immediately, but did there not ccme a time
      when you should have used the Tannoy to appeal for calm, to
      explain what was happe n i n g ? - A. What would you suggest I
      explain to people?

Q.    Explain that there w ere injuries, people had been hurt, and
      that that was what it was all about, and would people please
      remain calm and en a b l e the injured to be treated anc os
      attended to? — A. I took the view, sir. tnat on tnat occasion
      we said nothing.   We would use the Tannoy to try and clear the
      pitch and we would say nothing to the crowd because it might
      c ause a reaction.

      Saying, nothing did cause a reaction, aia it not.'      It causes
      the Notti n g h a m Forest fans to shout and yell and taunt
      Liverpool?        A. I disagree, sir.   That might have been the
      initial reaction from your perception.        My view is that my
      •decision .to-tell no-one was the .correct decision to ensure
      that the eme r g e n c y services could get in and out, that the
      routes were clear, and that was a correct operational decisior
      on the day.

0. Well, when was it you were first aware you might have some
   deaths on your hands? - A. I think at the time I went to see
   the FA in the board room at Sheffield Wednesday.

0.    When was that? - A.    It is difficult to be accurate,      sir.

 G. At what stage? - A. I would suggest possibly half-past-3,
    shortly after, when all the major incident and operation was
       running.

 0.    Was it at this stage you agreed the game should be postponed?
       - a . Yes, sir.

 0.    I think Mr.   Jackson was with you? - A. Yes.
                                                                    71


                                                                                                   D.G.    DUCKENFTELD



                              G.   But you deci d e d that the announcement should not be made that
                                   there had been postponement, and the reason as I understand i'
                                   was you did not want people leaving until all the ambulances
                                   had been able to ge^ there and get away and ferry the injured
                                   out? - A. There are two aspects to it, sic.       The first one, as
                                   you suggest, was that to announce that to the fans it was
                   B               g oing to be postponed, some of them, even if we requested then
                                   to stay, might leave immediately, and that could cause a
                                   problem.     Furthermore, if the 54,000 fans or thereabouts in
                                   the stadium decided to create a public order situation because
                                   of the p o s t p onement of the game, because of their anger, then
                                   I had not got the resources to deal with it, and I was plsvini
                                   for time.

                              Q.   E v e n t u a l l y we know that Kenny Dalglish made an appeal for
                                   calm, and this was, I think, if I remember rightly, at 3.^5? -
                                   A. I am not sure of the time, sir.           I had returned from tne
                                   board room, and Mr. Clough and Mr. Dalglish came to the Police
                                   control box.           They asked what they could do to assist, anc Mr
                                   Dalglish very kindly offered to pass a message to the
                                   L iverpool fans, a p pealing for assistance and calm, and that
                                   was appreciated.
                    D
                              G.   The effect of your d e c i s i o n - I am not now saying whether it
                                   was right or wrong - the effect of your decision on giving no
                                   information was that for 40 minutes or t h e r e a b o u t s . between
                                   about 5-past-3 and about 3.45. no-one in that stadium, none c:
                                   the fans knew what was happening? - A. Yes. sir.

                              G.   Apart from what they could see happening on the pitch? - A.
                                   Yes. sir.           I correct you.    I have an impression that I asked
                                   for medical attention, and all doctors who were in the stadium
                                   or medical staff to go to the Leppings Lane goal to assist.
                                   Now.. I made a d e c i s i o n not to tell the crowd about the kick-
                              .... off. being postponed, but those who were watching and those whc
                                   were, p e r c e p t i v e must have realised there was a 'difficult
                                   s i t u a t i o n because I had asked for medical staff and doctors

                              G.   But there was still noise and shouting going on. certainly in
                                   the earl i e r stages o: the disaster after the game was stopped
                                   was not there? - A. I don't know, sir.       The reason I say that
                                   is the control box is to some extent sound proof, and the
                                   Notti n g h a m fans are at the furthest end of the ground.

                              G.   A n y w a y , y o u s a y y o u t h i n k the d e c i s i o n no t to te ll was o p .
                                   b a l a n c e a b e t t e r d e c i s i o n t h a n o n e to tell? - A. I d o n ' t
                                   think, sir.           I know.

                              G.   Very well.    In fact, when you did make the announcement in du
                                   course, some time around shortly after 4, the reaction of the
                                   fans was wh o l l y co-operative, was not it? - A. It was
                                   excellent, sir.      They applauded.

                          H   G. Once they were told the full circumstances, not only as you
                                 say did they applaud but they sat quietly or stood quietly fo
                                 about 1 0 minutes before the dispersed in an orderly fashion?
                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                       i -i .1
J. I. H a r o h a m Ltd
                                              72


                                                                        D.G.   DUCKENFIELD


     A            A. I c a n ’t recall e x a c t l y what they did. I was relieved that
                  there had not been an adve r s e reaction, and they then left the
                  ground.

             G.   I am not going to ask you about what went on later in the
                  evening, because that really is not material to this Inquiry.
                  Thank you. Chief Superintendent.  That is all I would ask.
     B                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                Yes.  I think we will break off
                  now, and for a d m i n i s t r a t i v e reasons we will not resume today
                  until iO-past-2.

                                        (Luncheon Adjournment)




     D




         E




         F




         G




                                                                                        A    ..
                                                                                         I A -w'
                                                                                        JL
I1   I
                                124
                                             D.   G. DUCKENFIELD


free ingress and egress of all services.                  A.   Yes, sir.

What i ns truct ions did you give to implement that duty and
responsibility?        A.       I personally did not give any
i n s t ruct ions but I u n d e rsta nd that Force Control set up
m ot orcyc le escorts.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry?    A.  I say I
per sonal ly did not give any instructions but I understand
that Force Ope ratio ns Room set up motorcycle escorts.

     MR. KALLIPETIS:        Were you aware of that at the
time or was that s o m e thin g you learned sub sequently?
A.   I have learned that subsequently.

Did you know at the time that one of the duties of the
Site Com mander was to provide adequate control of all
routes?   A.   Yes, bec ause that was one of the decisions
as to not to tell the crowd, to keep the routes clear.

Very sen sibly keeping the crowd in the ground.           What
other in s t r u c t i o n did you give to make sure the ambulances
could get in and out?            A.   I personally did not but I
was being s u p p o r t e d by the Force Operations Room.

Alt hough you were not aware of that.                A.   No, sir.

You would accept, would you not, Mr. Duckenfield, that
it is e s s e ntia l for any emergency service, especially
the ambulance service, to have as much accurate detail
about the nature of the emergency they are dealing with
as   soon as pos sible ?      A. Yes, sir.

Do you also know that under the Hillsborough Plan that
SYMAS had pro d u c e d that the Chief Ambulance Officer
on site would be s it uated in the gymnasium to co-ordinate
the amb ulanc e duties from there?          A. I was not
s p e c i f i c a l l y aware of that, sir.

Did you know, Mr. Duckenfi eld,            that --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I am sorry, I am not quite
following that.   He is there before any trouble blows
up?
     MR. KALLIPETIS:      No, sir. When the most senior
officer on site is dir ected to go to the gym nasium and
that is his station to co-ordin ate the reception of
casualties, the a s s essme nt --

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:               That is when the trouble has
been announced?

      MR. KALLIPETIS:           Yes, indeed.

D e a l i n g with my L ord's   point    and d e a l i n g with the memo
                                   16

                                                            W. JACKSON


        happened once the incident had blown up.              Have you been able
        to i d e n t i f y any d e f i c iencies as far as you can see it in the
        a r r a n g e m e n t s that were made either by the Police or by anyone
        else for that matter, for coping with the problem when it
        arose? -A. I think one of the big problems is in relation to
        an incident like this is the human element, and certainly the
        p eople that I saw on that day were extremely stressed, were
        e x t r e m e l y concerned.      When I went on to the pitch we talked
        about fans being on the pitch and the possibility of the
        Police taking them off.              That really was not an option,
        because the people I saw there were extremely concerned and
        did not know what they were doing.              So really, the human
        elem e n t is the thing that causes most concerned in a rescue
        attempt like that.

                  In terms of deficiencies I would say in hindsight we
        should look at the improvements you can make such as I have
        suggested, the combined control room, different types of
        fences, perhaps in the control room we could have some sort
        q £ system where you press the button and it goes straight
        t hro u g h to the A m bulance Service, straight through to the
        Fire Brigade.           So those are issues I feel we could
        consider, but in terms of on the day my view is that
        e v e r y b o d y was d oing what they possibly could under
        tremendous stress, under tremendous strain, under a great
        deal of confusion.

Q       Can I ask you this.   It has been suggested that the Tannoy
        o ught to have been used in a mor e positive fashion than it
        was? - A . Y e s .

G        What do you say about that? - A. I listened to Mr. Duckenfielc
         r e garding that, and I do agree with him it is a very, very
         d i f f i c u l t one, because if you start announcing over the Tannoy
         you have injuries or fatalities, etc., then you could very
         liicely c a u s e s problem and people may panic, and there;.o*e.
         it is a case of trying to do it as calmly and as
         p r o f e s s i o n a l l y as possible, and I agree with that
         decision.

0        In fact,      nothing was said, was it, at least nothing to explai
         what was      h a ppening or why it was happening? - A. No.

Q        The result is that certainly the Nottingham Forest fans at tt
         other end, some of them anyway, wer e getting rather impatient
         with the Liverpool fans, because caused its own problems?     -/
         Yes   but I think that probably would be nothing like the
         probl e m s that may have been caused if he did go over the air
         and he did say, ”We have fatalities, injuries", we may have
         caused panic.     So I think that option was probably the most
         pr e f e r a b l e one.

    q    Did you think of it yourself as to whether or not you should
         use the Tannoy more, or was that something that was just lef
         to Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d ? - A. The Tannoy was being used ;asking
         p eople to keep calm.

                                                                             A
                                                                             I -1
                               17


                                                        W. JACKSON


Q. Yes, but that was at a rather later stage, was not it, when
   Mr. D a l g l i s h was asked or did send out a message, and that wa
   about 3.56, I think? - A. I had a feeling the Tannoy was bein
   used at some stage to tell people to keep calm.

Q.        LOR D JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Jackson, I am not doubting
     what you say about that, but I just d o n ’t quite follow why
     there would be panic.     O b viously if you said there was a bomb
     scare or s o mething of that sort I can see that people might
     panic, but to tell the people at the other end of the ground
     or other parts of the ground that there had been some injurie
     at the t e r racing at the west end, some quite serious injuries
     why would that cause people to panic do you think at the othe
     end? - A. I think basically at the time, my Lord, we did what
     we thought was appropriate, and certainly in relation to that
     that was not thought about.

Q. You did just say you thought it might cause people to panic.
   I am w o n d e r i n g whether an announcement to that effect would
   for any reason make people panic? -A. I d o n ’t know.       In
   h i n dsight it may not have done.

q            MR. COLLINS:          Surely it is more likely to cause trouble
     if you say nothing, and as indeed happened let the Nottingham
     Forest fans continue in the belief that the Liverpool fans
     were m i s b e h a v i n g themselves? - A. I think a bit later cn when
     I went dow n to the pitch and spoke to Mr. Nesbit we then
     d e c i d e d to make an announcement, but certainly during the
     res c u e attempt we certainly did not think in doing that, and
     perhaps in hindsight in a wash up situation, it may nave beer-
     a d v i s a b l e to do it.




                                     /Q.   In fact,   when you did make...




                                                                        1
                                                     W.   JACKSON


In fact when you did make the announcement the Nottingham
Forest fans behaved as one would have hoped they would have
behaved initially, namely very well, did they not?
A.   Yes, they did.
Do you think perhaps there may have been an attitude that
football fans will not act reasonably in the decision
that was made?   A.   I think if we look back at the
history of football, you know, there are tremendous problens
with it and sometimes these react on the individual in
terms of what they should and should not say, and ail I can
say is that decisions were made in the best interests of
everybody concerned.
I am sure but do you think there is, perhaps, in the Police
a s ub -cons cious even thought that football fans cannot be
trusted to behave reasonably and therefore one approaches
it on that basis?      A.   Well, I think I make it quite
clear in my standing order that we are talking about s
minority;     we are not talking about the total football
fa n s .
      LORD   JUSTICE     TAYLOR:       But in relation    to that
minority, do you       a c c e p t what counsel says?      A.    Yes.

      MR. COLLINS:     New, we have really brought you up
to about quarter p a s t four.   You were then talking cr
about then talked to the Chief Constable.      A. Y e s r
sir , I d i d .
How much longer     d i d you s t a y at the ground?       A.      Cn^si
Superintendent    M o l e s r r i v e d , I think it would b e r c u nd
about quarter to five time, and I then briefed him, t c 1 c
him to take c o n t r o l c f the ground and to co-ordinate
matters.    I b r i e f e d h :.n as to what had hapened and
told him that I w a s c c i n g to Police Headquarters.

       LORD JUSTICE                  S o you really had taken over
 control then, hao y c ^          I mean, if you were putting Mr.
 Mole in charge, that ^as really acting over and above
 Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d . A. Yes, sir, I would say ostensibly
 I was in control then.
       MR. COLLINS:      A n c you were responsible for the
 arranqem ents about the temporary mortuary in the gymnasium,
 is that right?      A.       Yes.   What I did - I asked the
 Chief Superintendent - Detective Chief Superintendent - to
 contact me and he contacted me about 3.35 p.m. on that day.
 I briefed him and asked him to come to the ground.           I
 saw him there about 4 o'clock.          I told him to take charge
 of the temporary mortuary, to set that up.           I also told
 him to link up with Casualty Bureau and I told him to set
 u d what we call our Home system for major investigations
 so that all the statements could be collated regarding the
  incident because quite clearly there would be need to
  collect the evi d e n c e for the Coroner's Inquiry.
                                     32


                                                               W. JACKSON


    Q.   Now, in fairness I should say this.             Many of my clients
         i n i t i a l l y have put that down to indifference on the part of
         the Police, but it now seems that two causes operated, and I
         put this in the form of a question to you.             Firstly, was ther*
         not some i nactivity by Police Officers due to lack of
         l e a d e r s h i p until Mr. Nesbit came on the scene, and secondly,
         was not some of it due to younger Police Officers freezing*
B        from sh o c k ? - A. All of our Police Officers are trained to act
         either i n d i v i d u a l l y or collectively in terms of saving life.
         In terms of the efforts going round the gates, the gates are
         narrow.           I have said already Police Officers were coming down
         the back in Leppings Lane.             Police Officers were round the
         gate.         There were Police Officers hanging about in the
         background, as it were, who c o u l d n ’t get themselves involved.

    Q.   Do you accept the evide n c e given by a number of pecole that a
         lot of Police Officers suffered from shock? -A. Yes’, I would
         accept that.

    Q.   And froze.    In o ther words, their inactivity was simply due i
         being frozen with shock? - A. I think if I could make a
         broader s t atement in relation to that, I think probably most
         people in the stadium were shocked at some stage.
D
    Q,   The only reason I am putting this to you is that a ]2rca      — — -L ea ~ -

         number of my clients, now that they appreciate rat
         c l e a r l y what did happen, have expressed surprise,             nave
         to say a little anger, that Police Officers were f rczen wnen
         fans were taking initiatives.             In other words, whe n :ans were
         a little more active, and they have asked and I as K a S 8
         result whet h e r Police Officers are given any or i r so ac equate
         t r a i n i n g to enable them to overcome the horrors th at occ ' j r r 0H
         on this o c casion? - A. I think as much training as is
         p r a c t i c a b l e is g iven to Police Officers.

    Q.   I don't think I can take that further.           The other thing
         ob v i o u s l y which I am instructed to ask you, which I do, is wh>
         Police Officers, and I am not now dealing with the situa cion
         that arose after some Liverpool fans very foolishly adva need
         on the N o t t i n g h a m Forest end, when we know a cordon was put
         across the pitch, but why, before that, a cordon of Poll ce was
         drawn up parallel to the terraces instead of those Police
         Officers being utilised in rescue? -A. I think as I have
         alre a d y men t i o n e d to you only a certain number of Police
         Officers could be used in the rescue situation.           You could not
         use all of the Police Officers.

         That is a fair answer.              I have asked you and that is your
         answer.        Coming to the Tannoy, nobody so far as I know has
         sug g e s t e d that the Ta n n o y could have been used or should
         have been used to annou n c e that there had been a disaster,
         but I want to take the questions of Lord Justice Taylor a
         little further.           The Tannoy could have been used not only
         to pacify the N o t t i n g h a m Forest fans by explaining there
         had b een o v e r c r o w d i n g and some injuries, and would they
H        please be patient, but also to give the vital message to
         the L i v erpool fans at the back of pens 3 and 4 to move
                                 33


                                                            W. JACKSON


      back, to go back through the tunnel, because that is what
      a number of Police Officers in the second stage as it were
      of the e m e r g e n c y were attempting to do from the front of
      the p e rimeter fence? - A. Well, certainly Mr. Greenwood
      who was d own there was trying to achieve that at close
      level.

Q.    That is the problem,     because he was doing it from the pitch?
      A. He was.

Q.    And he was trying to get people to push back, but of course
      people at the front were not the people to be talking to
      because they could not push back because of the pressure at
      the back. - The Tannoy could have been used-effectively to. get
      the people at- the back of the pens to move out of the tunnel
      and thus relieve the pressure an those at the front who were
      probably not o nly being crushed but were also probably
      p anicking? - A. I think at that stage there was a lot of
      people on the ground and the pressure certainly in that
      respect had been released.

Q.    I am also asked to mak e some enquiries into the alleged
      confusion, bec ause my clients allege a great deal of
      confusion, in the situation after the bodies had beer, taken t
      the gymnasium, but do I take it you are not really the persor
      to ask about that? - A. No, that would be Detective Chief
      Sup e r i n t e n d e n t Addis.

                      Cross-E x a m i n e d bv MR.   JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Jackson, may I adopt most of the matters put by ray learne
   friend, Mr. H y t n e r , to you about the events of the day.  May
   go back, and I hope not to be personal, to this ridiculous
   sugg e s t i o n that fans should be expected to level themselves
   out.     May I say.that is against the spirit....

           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You are not making a speech,          Mr
      Jackson.  Would you ask questions, please.

q            MR. JACKSON:       Is that   not against the spirit of
      ever y t h i n g you thought when   you planned your operation for t
      day? - A. I said it twofold.          I said, (1) you would expect t
      fans, or hop e f u l l y the fans   would find their own level, and
      secondly, the stewards have         the responsibility in that
      respect.

 Q     May I take the second part first.    May I suggest that rightl
       or wrongly the Police have in this case given the stewards o
       Sheffield W e dnesday the task of planning the packing of the
       ground? - A. I am not quite sure what you mean there.

 Q.    May I sugg e s t it is q uite clear that everyone knew and has
       known for years that it is proper that someone should overse
       the packing and loading of the ground?        May I suggest in thi
       case that rightly or wrongly the Police gave that task to th
       Sheffield Wed n e s d a y stewards? - A. Yes, I would accept that.
'   »
                                    QUESTION                 SIX

        Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid mislead the Secretary of
        the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
        officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


        Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid accepted that he may have said the gate was
        forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
        gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
        communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
        opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
        ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
        he believed correct in a crisis moment.

        Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
        However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
        concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
        disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
        ground.



        OBSERVATIONS

        This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
        gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
        considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

        Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.



        Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

        98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
        the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
        control room for information. Mr Duckenfieid told them he thought there were fatalities
        and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
        there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
        screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
        that's been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
        later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans’
        account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
        their way in.

        99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
        Mr Duckenfieid went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
        three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfieid indicated the match was
        likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
        want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
        emergency operations.
                                                                 36

'           •
                                                                             D.G. DUCKENFIELD

                             A
                                 Q. A n d you are still c o n s i d e r i n g the question of postponement
                                    of kick-off, among other options? - A. It is an option sir,
                                    bu t when he a sked   me to o pen the gate that certainly was
                                    not going through m y mind.

                                 Q. No w when he made that request w h a t was your-immediate
                                    reaction? - A. To be hon e s t I did not wan t to open the gate.
                             6
                                 Q. W h y not? - A. To open a gate        at a football ground it would
                                    have d e f e a t e d the o b jectives of our Operation Order in
                                    that drunken fans m a y get in; people who had got drink;
                                    people who had got m i s siles and people who were without
                                    tickets w o u l d get access.

                             C   Q. W ere you aware by now that there was a problem with a number
                                    of people outside w i t h o u t tickets? - A. I was aware that
                                    d uring the day there had been people without tickets.

                                 Q.   But were you aware that there were a considerable number
                                      of fans at the Leppings Lane entrance who did not have
                                      tickets? - A. I was not aware sir.

                             D   Q.   Because I think a lot cf statements, or a lot of evidence
                                      we have heard and c e r t a i n l y a lot of statements that I have
                                      read, refer to cons i d e r a b l e numbers of people without
                                      tickets and asking for tickets.          Is that something that
                                      had not b e e n drawn to your attention? - A. Hot at that
                                      stage sir.

                                 Q.   Because that was rather an important factor, w a s n ’t it,
                             E        because if there were a lot of people milling around
                                      without     tickets that was something which would have added
                                      to the d i s o r d e r or the problems rather outside? - A. In
                                      w h a t respect?

                                 Q. Well if you have a lot of people milling - a r o u n d in a
                                    small area who are w i t h o u t tickets coupled with people
                                    coming along trying to get into the ground, you add to
                             F      the problems don't you, because you have got more people
                                    there? - A. I w o u l d suggest that there are people there,
                                    there are p r o b a b l y p e o p l e w i t n o u t tickets.

                                 Q.   I see.   - A.   But the crowd difficulties are there whatever.

                                 Q. A n y w a y you were r e luctant to agree to the gate being
                             G      o p e n e d because of the factors you have identified? - A. Yes
                                      sir.

                                 Q. Were you able to make d i r e c t contact w i t h Superintendent
                                    Marshall or not? - A. I r e m ember receiving a radio message
                                    but having recei v e d the radio mess a g e f rom him, or ic
                                    came into the Control Box to ope n the gate, I immediately
                                    looked at the m o n i t o r for the Leppings Lane turnstiles and
                             H      as I did so I w o u l d d e s c r i b e it as the gate burst open.
                                    I have since found looking at the compilation tnat might


J . L. H a r p h a m L t d
                                                                37

                                                                            D.G.   DUCKEMFIELD




                             not be correct, but m y p e r c e p t i o n of the situation when the
                             first requ e s t was made and w h i l s t I was considering it,
                             was that "the gates b u r s t o p e n anyway, why am I being a s k e d ? ”

                             The qate was in fact o p e n e d on that occasion,              as we new know
                             to eject someone? - A. Yes.

                             X can u n derstand how you m a y have made a misuaxe, buu it
                             was not oraen then for m o r e than a iew seconds, .-/as iu?
                             A  No, it"was momentary.           Th e moun t e d Officer came along
                             and* recovered the s i t u a t i o n and the gate was closed once
                             more.

                             So it was clear, indeed it was obvious to you that that was
                             n othing to do w i t h you, you. had made no decision? - A. I
                             had made no decision sir.

                             Tndeec am I richt that no gate w o u l d have been opened unless
                             you mace the d e c i s i o n and instructed? - A. Yes sir.

                             Is that something           that was in the criering   or istr.a*. some­
                             thing w h i c h w o u l d   have been known to all? - A. It would have
                             been known to all           sir.

                             So if but only if you gave the instruction         could a cate ce
                             opened? ~ A. In an e m e r g e n c y situation tnac 1 3 rich^.. Sir.

                             i^-d t V s was of course an emergency situation because as you
                             cui«-e* T-ichtly point cut, one of the problems of opening a
                             cat* '•s vou let in a w h o l e lot of people ur.supervisec? -
                              I.   ?es s i r .
                              But the gate       was opened, as you say zor a rew seconds
                              momentarily,       and then shut again? - A. Yes sir.

                              T’nis    is 2 48 I think on the timing that we have or thereabouts
                              Yo u    then g e t another m e s s a g e from Superintendent Marshall?




                              Aa&in he asks for the cates to be opened, but he                goes coes
                              he r a t h e r furt her on      that occasion? - A. Yes the situation
                              was d i f f e r e n t then sir.      The first message I would describe
                              -'s a ’•eauest.        The se c o n d mess a g e was a rather urgent message
                              and mo-e of "a demand and he asked for the gates to be oper.ee
                              and coup l e d it w i t h the w o r t , similar to the words:        i: vou
                              d o n ' t open these gates somebody is going to be seriously
                               injured or k i l l e d ” .

                               flow you nadj '
                                             ,--1,3 <tnau
                                             nad     -^1 = ^- firsf-mess ace at 2.4/.
                                                              iits.                           You had    seen
                               the gate open and close again? - A. Yes sir.

                               Surelv the ^irst thing you w o u l d do in those c i r c u m s t a n c e s
                               is to try to c o n t a c t S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Marshall and spea* to
                               hin direct if you c ould to ask him wh a t a c t u a l l y was tne
                               s i t u a t i o n ? - A? Sir, if I can set the scene, a very -.ense
                               s i t u a t i o n in a Police Cont r o l Bo:c.         A message came a c r o s s   ^

J . L. H a r p h a m L t d
                                    112
                                                                     D.G.   DUCKENFISLD


                       C r o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR.   DYSON:

Q. Mr. Duckenfieid,     I would like to take you back, please, to
   the control room at about 3.15 or thereabouts.        Do you
   remem b e r that amongst the visitors you received at about that
   t ime there were Mr. G r a h a m Kelly and Mr. Glen Curtain of the
   FA.   Do you remember them coming? - A. I certainly remember
   Mr. Kelly, and if you say there was another gentleman with him
   I will accept that.

Q.   And t o g e t h e r with Mr. Mackrell, the secretary of Sheffield
     W e d n e s d a y Club. Do you remember him coming as well? - A, I
     re m ember Mr. K elly and Mr. Mackrell.

G.   And they were anxious to know what was going on, and in
     p a r t i c u l a r what you were proposing to do about it and whether
     you were p r o p o s i n g to abandon the game.   Do you remember that?
     - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And I think you told them, did not you, it was going to be
   n e c e s s a r y to a b a n d o n the game but you did not want that
   d e c i s i o n to be d i s s e m i n a t e d just yet for the reasons you have
   e x p l a i n e d this m o r ning? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Do you remember also tell i n g those gentlemen that the problem
     had been created by a gate, the gate being forced open by the
     fans? - A. I may have said that, sir, referring to the first
     gate, b e c a u s e I thought t here was a gate that had opened at
     first.

G.   By the first gate,       you mea n gate C? - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you ref e r r i n g to the first time gate C opened?                 - A. Let me
     take you back to the conversation.

G.       LORD JUST I C E TAYLOR:             Where is the conversation?           - A.    In
     the Po l i c e control box.

               MR. DYSON:              In the Police control room, about 3.15. - A.
     Mr. Kelly c ame in, and I was asked what had happened.                   The
     s p e c i f i c c o n v e r s a t i o n I cannot remember, but I may have been
     loath to tell him e x a c t l y what the situation was at that
     point.

Q.        LORD JUST I C E TAYLOR:         What aspect of it?  What had
     happened, or causa t i o n ? - A. What had happened, my Lord.       The
     blunt t ruth that we had been asked to open a gat e and that we
     had opened a gate.       I was not being deceitful.       It was just a
     cas e of at that s i t u a t i o n we were all still in a state of
     shock, one might say.

 Q         MR. DYSON:              So you accept you did not tell him the truth
      at that stage, that the gate had been opened as a result of
      y our i n s t r u c t i o n ? - A. Yes, sir.

 Q    You accept that, and you accept that you may have said that
      the gate had been forced open by the fans? - A. I may have
                                                    113
                                                                               D.G.   DUCKENFIELD


                          re f erred to the first one,    sir,   yes.

                    Q. Whe n you say ’’the first o n e ” , what do you mean? - A. The first
                       gate I b e l ieved at that time had been forced open, gate C.
                       If you look at my sta t e m e n t my interpr e t a t i o n was when the
                       first requ e s t for the gates to be opened I said in my said.
                       "Why do you want the gat e open because it is burst open
               B       already?".

                    Q.    You are r e f erring to the first r e q uest? - A. Yes.

                    0.    But that g ate was shut ver y smartly,        was not it? - A. Yes.
                          sir.

                    Q. And you knew perfectly well that it was not the influx of fans
                       as a result of that o p e n i n g which had caused the problem, did
                       not you? - A. Yes. that was not the major opening.

                    0.    And you knew the real cause of the problem and the casualties
                          was the second opening? - A. yes, sir. that was the
                          possibility.

                    Q.    You see, I put these q u estions to you because Mr. Curtain and
               D          Mr. K elly are quite clear that they were told.          Mr. Curtain is
                          c lear that it was you who said it, and Mr. Kelly is not
                          cert a i n whether it was you or one of your colleagues.        At all
                          events, t hey are both q u i t e certain t h e y were told by the
                          Police in the control room that the casualties had been caused
                          by the sat e being forced open by the fans/ - A. I would go as
                          far as to say that.      I am trying to be helpful in recalling
                          the events at a moment of crisis.

                    Q. Why were you being so coy about telling them what had
                       h a ppened? - A. The reality of the s i t uation is that shortly
                       after the events had o c c u r r e d many people were in a state of
                       shock, and I thought it correct to collect my thoughts and to
                       ass e s s the situation.           I did not exactly information, and- I am
                       not being d i s r e s p e c t f u l to Mr. Kelly or th e other gentleman. I
                       just thought at that stage that I should not communi c a t e - f u l l y
                       the s i t u a t i o n until p o s s i b l y a senior Officer of mine knew the
                       situation.

                    Q     Did you know that s u b s e q u e n t l y and as a result of what you had
                          said to Mr. Kelly that Mr. Kelly when he gave interviews to
                          the media, of which he gav e a number later that day, he told
                          the m edia t here were in fact two theories c irculating as to
                          the cause of the disaster, the fans' theory and the Policy
                          theory, the fans' theory having been that the gate was opened
                          by the Police and the Po l i c e theory, as Mr. Kelly told the
                          media and the world, the Police theory being that the fans had
                          forced the gate open.       Do you know he had said that.-' - A. I
                          had no idea, sir.

                     Q.    Thank you v ery much.




                                                                                                    v3«
w ^ r p h a m Ltd
                                      24

                                                   D. G. DUCKEMFIEr.P




       were easing themselves out satisfactocily between h a l f ­
       pa st-2 and a q u a r t e r - t o - 3 ? - A. Yes sir.

 Q.    You realised of course that the Club's control in the
       bowels of the South Stand did not give them any video
       pictures of that stand, didn't you?  -   a . Yes sir~


 Q.   And so it* you had been concerned, and I acceot that vou
      say you w e r e not, but that if you had been c o n c e r n e d * the
      Club control w o u l d only know of that if you either 'ohoned
      them or radioed them?      -  A. Yes sir.

Q.    Did you know that in     addition to the radio there was a
      direct land -line t e lephone between the Police Control^Bcx
      and the C l u b Box?  -   A. Yes sir.

Q.    And so that any d i f f i c u l t y in getting through on the radio
      could immediately, instantaneously, be solved by picking
      up a tele phone with a di r e c t link?      -  A. Yes sir".

Q.    If anyoody, any of your Officers, was seriously concerned
      to cont act Mr. Locke, or the Police Liaison Officer in the
      Clu b Box at any time, the most obvious thing to do would
      be to pick the 'phone up w o u l d n ' t it? - A. Yes sir.

Q.     And would we be right in supposing that the only        reason
      why aboctiva a t t e m p t s were made to use the Club's radio
      was beca use you simply didn't know w here Mr. Locke was
      stationed on that day?         -  A. I didn't know sir.

Q.    Because if you or S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Murray had known that he
      was where he ought to have been, with respect, in the
      Control Room, you w o u l d have used the teleo’        n one? -  A
      Yes sir.

Q.    Finally., Chief Supe r i n t e n d e n t , may I come to the account
      w hich you gave of this incident after it had occurred,
      because I am c o n c e r n e d with the effect that that has had
      on my clients as         well as others.             It is right to say isn'c
      it that w h e n you d e c i d e d to w i t h h o l d    the information that
      the decision to let people into the grouned had been a
      Police one, you w i t h h e l d that information from e v erybody on
      the afternoon in question.             - a . Yes sir.

Q.    For my p a r t I can ac c e p t that the initial e m b a r r a s s m e n t , if
      you li:<e, to say s o m e t h i n g to Mr. Ke.lly ma y have been done
      on the spur of the moment, you persisted in that deception
      throughout the afternoon.           —  a . Thera was good reason sir
      not to tell the c r o w d what had occurred.

Q.    Was there good reason   not to tell           my clients, the officers
      of the Club?  -    A. I felt so sir           at the time.



                                                                                        u
                                        27

                                                      0.   G. DUCKENFIELD


Q        Well, would you prefer me - and I do not want to be unfair
         and I certainl y do not want you to think that I am being
         unfair, Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t - w o u l d it at l e a s t be right
         to s a y ’that you decided t o withhold information from my
         clients who w e r e re sponsible in that ground in the presence
         of the A s s i s t a n t Chief Constable?            A.   Yes, sir.

Q. Thank you.         I am sure that you appreciate n ow that the
   unfair pub lici ty which was inevitably directed at the Club's
   officers, among others, in fact resulted from the w i t h ­
   holding of that infor mation on that afternoon.         A.   Sir,
   I cannot be specific about the publicity to which you a^s
   referring but any unfairness from that - but I made a
   decision to wi thhold information for what I thought was
   good r e a s o n .
Q             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      I am not quite clear, Mr.
         Duckenfieid.   I think it was put to you by Mr. Dyscn
         yesterday that you had said that the gates had been
         forced open by the fans.      Was that the tenor of what
         you told the Boa rdr oo m as well?   I do not know.
         A.   No, my Lord.
Q. Did you say the gate had been forced open or what?
   ^     My recollec tion , my Lord, is that - and bearing in
   mind yesterday aft ernoo n was the first time that had been
   drawn to my attention, again - I was approached in the
   crisis in the Control Box by many people and I do recall
   Mr. Kelly and Mr. Mackrell with others - Fire Service,
   various inter este d parties - coming in and crowding what
   was already a very crowded box in a very difficult and
   tense time, and I will agree I was probably asked by Mr.
   Kelly what the sit uat io n was and I will be categoric,
   I did not say, "I have given an order for the gates to
   be opened" and I think my learned friend over there
    I can•’t^ remember the wor ds he said but he suggested'
    that-I said that a gate had been ope ned’or a ^at e had burst
    open and' fans had ent er ed and if someone carr refresh me
    of what he said?
    Q. I think it was put that you said that casualties had been
        caused by the gate being forced open by the fans.
        A    I didn't ap pr eciate that, my Lord.   I would have
        said so met hing of the order that fans have entered the
      . ground.
               -MR. COLLINS:  I have, in fact, the transcript
          here of the questions.    (H a n d e d )
    Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you.  It was put at
          first:  "Do you rem em ber telling them that the problem
          had been created by the gate being forced open by the
          fans?" and then at a later stage it was specifically put --
                                 28

                                             D.   G. DUCKENFIEID


             MR. GLASGOW:     Page 113, sir, -letter D to E.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you.   -- that casualties
        had been caused by the gate being forced open by the fans.

             MR. GLASGOW:      In fairness to this witness, sir,
        while you have got the paper in front of you - and we
        have great admir at ion for the way this transcribing
        is being done, let that be said - I think that there
        must be a mistake in the answer there because my
        clear rec olle cti on and my note is that Mr. Duckenfieid
        said he would not go as far as that.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      That's right.

             MR. GLASGOW:   And unhappily it has been transcrioed
        as, "I would" and perhaps we should correct that because
        it is very unfair otherwise.   The correction, with ycur
        leave, sir, at page 113, letter D, that the transcript
        should read, "I would not go as far as that."

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes, thank you.

q   .        MR. GLASGOW:   Perhaps we ought to have that p r o p e r l y
        in evidence.   That is what you said, I think?   A.       Can
        you tell me now what --
Q. Yes, that when you were asked the question that my Lord
   has just put to you:      "At all events, they are both quite
   certain they were told by the Police in the control room
   that the casua lt ies had been caused by the gate being
   forced open by the fans?" your reply, I believe, in fact
   was, "I would not go as far as that."       Do you remember
   that?    A.     Yes, sir.    My opinion is, obviously referring
   to a co nve rsa tion some time ago, I am not -disputing what
   Mr;' Kelly says all I am saying is, my rec ollection is
   I-said, ,lA gate has been opened and fans have entered" or
   words to that effect, but I didn't tell him the whole
   truth about the Police giving the instruction.        I cannot
   be any fairer than that, my Lord.
Q. I must make it plain, Mr. Duckenfieid, I            am not suggesting
   that you went any further than that with            the Directors.
   I am not sugg esting that you told'them a           lie; what I
   am complai nin g about is that you did not          tell them the
   truth.  A. Sir, you are correct.

Q. Thank you, and the answer that you gave to my learned
   friend, Mr. Dyson, yesterday afternoon that you at that
   stage thought that you should not communicate the situation
   until possibly a Senior Officer knew the situation, that -
   with the gr eatest respect - cannot have been a very candid
   reply to Mr. Dyson, bec au se the Assistant Chief Constable
   was present when you said it.     A.   I am sorry, sir,
   can you take me through that again, please, slowly?
                                29

                                            D.   G. DUCKENFIEID


Q. Yes.   You told Mr. Dyson yesterday afternoon when he
   asked you why you were being so coy about telling then
   what had happened, your reply was that you just thought
   at that stage that you should not communicate fully
   the situatio n until possibly a Senior Officer of mine
   knew the situation.    A.   Yes, sir.

Q. What I am concerned about is that that conversation
   to which you a r e referring had taken place after the
   Assistant Chief Constable had come into the Police Bex.
   A.   Y e s , sir .
Q. And you had the opportunity, if necessary, to take him
   on one side and tell him the truth in one sentence.
   A.   Yes, sir, but the situation is that at that stage
   I am not sure that Superintendent Marshall had come in
   from the outside of the ground.

Q. How would that affect the positon?      A.  Because Mr.
   Mar shal l would say in detail, or tell in detail, what
   the sit uat io n had been as he saw it.

Q. But was not the fair thing to Superintendent Marshall
   as well as to all the Club stewards who were going to,
   putting it bluntly, carry the can unless you put the
   picture straight, was it not fair to say at least to the
   Ass ist an t Chief Constable, "You ought to know, sir, that
   I made the decision, right or wrong, and no-one else is
   to blame."           Would that not have been an honourable thing
   to do, as a very Senior Police Officer?           A.   Yes, sir.
   I cannot recall at what stage I told him the full
   c i r c u m st ances .
Q. Let us face it, you must bitterly regret that you practised
   that d e c e p t i o n on anybody, do you not?   .A . -In oae-
   respect *■-sir,., .I rifi-ver agree to deception and-, don '
                                                              ■t .tell
   lies..but i t was my view on this occasion, to save
   a crisis in the disaster, to withhold the information.

Q. Well, let us not talk about lies, Chief- S u p e r i n t e n d e n t .
   I am happy to talk about impressions.      The impression
   that you gave to the world at large from the Assistant
   Chief Co nst able downwards and which you persisted in
   until yes ter da y was that the Club had been responsible
   for the ma nag eme nt of this crowd inside their ground
   and'you knew that to be unfair.     A.   I refer, sir,
   to the Green Guide in terms of the management of crowd
   control and they were my references.

Q. I want a straight answer from you on that point for the
   peace of mind of my clients and the men who have been
   dist ressed by it.     At least you now accept, Chief
   Sup erint ende nt, that the impression which you allowed to
   be created that they were in some way responsible for
   failing to manage thi,s crowd was ^unfair?    Surely you
   can accept that now, can you not?      A.    I can accept
   that n o w , sir.
                                            46
                                                          D. G. DUCK £N:FIELD




             I think you have         :;een some- video        just now of 1988 .          -    *
             Yes sir.

             You were n ' t   at the game        in 1988?       -   A. No sir.

             The staca of the terraces according to your recollection
B            now at the time that gata C was opened the second time,
             how doss that accord with your understanding then of a
             normal stats on the terraces?     A. A crowded situation
             sir, out normal.

        Q.   May I asrc you about this.  Did you ’
                                                 < now that in fact a
             gate wa-i made open and forced open against the .effort- C:
             Police Officers?   -  A. Quite separately c0 gata C sir?

        Q.   Yes.    -    A. No    Sir.


        Q.   Did you know thac one of the peripheral gates, the
             Leooings Lana perimeter gates, was forced open against the
             bolting of it and against the efforts of Officers?  - A.
             No sir.

        Q.   The conv e r s a t i o n that you had in the Control Room with the
             o f ficials that came along to see you, you say you had a
             reason for saying what you did say.          - h „ Yes sic.,

        Q'   what was it?      -  ft. I was. concerned, ebcnrt: tiie crowd
             situation.,. and I.,d i d n ' t want the public. a_ large, via the
             m e d i a oc by casual conversation, to become-aware*.

        n * Awara of what?       -  A. Aware. of,- the^Aoening. of the gates
            by P o l i c e Officers, and the disaster.

             It is u ndersfood from the cross-examilation of you by Mr.
             G l a s g o w that it is not suggested, certainly,.'by the Cluo,
                       vou tol>i atr.y lie, do you follow that-             .? 'In s a y m g wnau
             vou-'did did you achieva anything in your view?                           -        Apart
                                 heetv s a i d t o d a g ^ A i a ^ s i c .    ay. concerns w s r a
                               peotxle c o o i d o w ae' 'iiiSifSvg-. d i s o r d e r i£ they
             uisra a ngry about nty, or         the Police Secvice>, a ctio tis, and
                                           i s near a1 pack,             .sho ^ jn o^ -'cen€ t.3 sftid
             orivat a’'
             to be opened. - I say “es c a p e r o u t e s *, for <i*S|j®*tfces and
             emecjenc#- W r v i c a a , b u t it                                  the
             t r w e s t o r y initially I c o u l d h&sr®: akjp^fcjfb^oubl Ic disorder,
             not so much in the g r o u n d but a r o u n d it.




                                                        /Q.   Was   the:     fear or


    H
                                     49

                                                D.   G. DUCKENFIELD


Q I see, so you have got to add a certain amount of chances
   together before you might achieve something.     A.  Police
   Officers, sir, try theii nardest in the most difficult of
   circumstances.
Q           Of   course, I think one appreciates that.   r certainly
            do   not wish to suggest anything to the contrary but it
            is   a little hard, is it not, to expect them to do anything
            if   they do not know what the problem is.   A.   It would
            be   better if they had had the best information.

Q I shall leave it at that.          The only other thing I think I
   ouqht to just ask you about is this, arising from the
   que st i o n s Mr. Woo dwar d was just putting to you about
   vour reasons for not telling the whole story to the Club
   and indeed to anytine else.         You -added a reason which you
   had not, I think, given earlier which was that you were
   afraid that if you did indicate that the Police had
   ooened the gate and thus effectively caused what had
   happened, y o u were afraid of considerable public disorder.
   A.     Yes, sir.
0           At whose hands?     Who would cause the disorder in your
            mind?    A    The fans wit hin the stadium, and I do not
            wis h to lay blame.    It is just
n           No no    I wanted to see what your thinking was, that is
            all.  Which fans?   A.   None in particular, just ---

    Q     Nott i n g h a m or L i v e r p o o l A. No, no    No suggestion of
        ' that whatsoever.            It was just a general consideration
          that I have a football crowd and there could be difficulties.

    Q        Yes but I am just simply trying to test to.see why you
             thouqht that to tell the truth would have c r e a t e d difficulties
             w i t h the- fans.. ' Y w rnean. they would have been hostile to
             the Podi-ce?       A.   .Yes, they couljU
    n        Well   they were anywsy, were they not, because they knew
             w h a t 'h a d
                         h a p p e n e d - that is the Liverpool fans? I mean,
             one of the patterns that we have had in all statements by
             vhe Polrce- — I expe-ct you know this anyway - is -hostitity
             towards the Police .by a large number of fans afterwards
             becau se of the belief that the Police had caused the trouole.
             A     Can I take you back to the time when I made the
             decision ?
    g        yes.   A.   Bearing in mind I      was not aware of the hostility
             at that time.
        Q     No no.       I follow that but did it not occur to you ---
              You see what you did -      it was not so much ttet you did
              not indicate what had hap pene d - you gave the impression —
              I do not know whether you intended it and I am not
              int erested in that, but the fact is you gave the
              that it was fans who had broken down the gate. Right.
                             50

                                       D.   G. DUCKENFIELD


   A.  Yes, but I did not communicate that to the world at
   large.

Q. But it somehow got to the world at large.   We heard it
   this mor ning and that was what you had — or that was the
   impre ssion you had given, was it not?   A.  I am sorry,
   would y o u   ?
Q. You heard the video this morning, the BBC commentator who
   said he had got the answer or he had got the cause.
   A.   Yes.    Now, can I say that that just nay prove a
   point?    I did not want to disclos* thfr           iSacause
   it may become public knowledge, aspec iallj*              a and
   my i n twttow w ^ iiot
   the lorta^l

   the "information:
   else aftd I didnMT want anybody                     B*dia
   because^ whilst it was not an .imirod^ji ^ rCTPyMteratfcittn,
   if it -got out' via the media, tn»rv rfifffculti escotfld
   occur.




                                      /I follow that
                                                   D.G. DUCKENFIELD



0        I follow that thinking b u t w h a t I am concerned about is
         that you appear to have c o n veyed the impression as part
         of not telling w h a t a c t u a l l y had happened, that it was
         the b r e aking down of a gate by the fans that had actually
         caused the trouble.         T h a t is w h a t the media picked up ana
         that is w h a t the m e d i a b roadcast? - A. When I was m thaw
         Control Room, very difficult,
         you have seen the size of the Control Raoa and from the
         pitch you have seen the difficulties that we were racing.

Q. Chief Superintendent, I don't w a n t to interrupt you but
   that is not an answer to the question? - ^     I know, I am.


         and t-fie                       the closing of that.          .M r
         came in with- B^Maclcrell, another i^i'uriiijtirtf if _,ai»
         i m m e d i a t e a n s ^ - t o a di-ffiwity                           Qi
         other things^-'              tried as best I        to a ^S t    _ ^    >
         own situation -safcidfying my                                      cr®^°
         r
         whatever words
                                     ^orssaBn^SSr!^
                             said it and hopfli*               me
         v e r y quickly so that I could get on with the matter m             nana.

         The only reason I am asking you this is that in the light
    Q.
         c* v o u - answer to Mr. Woodward, I am wondering why you
         thought it w o u l d be less likely to lead to disorder to
         tell the true p o s i t i o n than to imply that it was the ,ault
         of the fans.     Some m i g h t say or might think, .that-that, yfou^c
         be more likely to create disorder? - A., S i r ^ v i t l y hindsight ^
         todav-we can all- look d i f f e r e n t l y at that situation. I acteQ
         as I*believed to be c o r r e c t in a crisis moment.

                 MR.   COLLINS:    Yes,   very well.

                 MR. HYTNER:      May I just correct something Mr. Collins
          has- put beca u s e i t may not be absolutely accurate.

                 The impression I nave from the vast n u m b e r of. state-
              ^  i.hat j have read and from the evidence that nas Jeer,
          a lv^n I s t L t the h o s t i l i t y of the fans after the match
          towards the Police was in large part, certainly m            large
          nart a n d m a y hav e been in sole part, due to their perception
          of what the Poli ce were doing on th* pitch anc on the trac.,.

                    m . COLLINS:      Yes, I am obliged.  I think that may
           well be right and a l t hough I think it was a combination
           of the two and actually those who listened to that viceo
           f i ttle later will hear, I think we all heara on the
           television, fans w i t h tickets complaining tnat the ?° l ice
           h!d o o e n e d the gate and let them in to tne overcrowced
           p e n , so f t h i n k it is fair to say it is a combination o.
           both.




                                                                                      J.i
                                     52
                                                    D.G.   DUCKENFIELD



                            By LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

Mr. Duckenfieid, you w e r e saying there was a risk if you
gave the full truth it m i g h t get out to the media and
cause diso rder? - A. v es.

Tha t p r e vented you from giving the full truth? - A. Yes, m y
Lord.
Th e r e is nothing to stop you telling the Assistant Cnie±.
C o n s table w h a t had happened, was there, when he came into
the Control Room? - A. Ho sir.

Did vcu tell him? - A. Ho, I think he asked me questions sii
and I related to the incident on the pitch; I did Jiot give
him the full picture at that time.

Did you m e n t i o n that the gate had been opened; that fans
had got in through an o pen gate? - A.                        specific,
m y Lord.   I luus-t'hcive m e n t i o n e d c& q u -si»fcu&tion q h the
pitch and b r i e f l y what had occurred*'-I rjp$aa about the first
gate opening, but the full details i n c W ^ th e actions
by S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Harshall and what had fully developed,
I did not give him the full picture.

You did not tell him that you had given authority for the
gate to be opened? - A. No, my Lord.

VTeil whv not?      A o a r t f r o n anything else-.it might have been
h e lpful"to h a v e his advice or discuss w ith him w ha t it was
b e s t to say at -that stage with a view to telling the C lub
and so on? - A. Yes, my Lord, but I didn't.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:               Yes,   thank you.


                   ASST.    CHIEF C O NSTABLE JACKSON Called             -
                    -. . . ' Zxa.T-i n e d by MR.    COLLINS:

 Mr.    Jackson,     you are iJalter Jackson,              I thin*? - A. Yes.

 A n d A s s i s t a n t Chief- Con s t a b l e   (Operations)   for the .South
 Y orkshire Police? - A. I am.

 A n d how    long have you b een in that post? - A. Since tne
 1st May 1985.

 c?n I ask you please a little about your Police history.
 Whe n did you start in the Police Force? - A. I joined tne
 Dni ice Force in O c t o b e r 1961 which was Manchester Cits',
 and progressed through the ranks in the CID to Detective
 Superintendent; then to Deputy on the Division; then ,o
 the Police Staff Coll e g e on the Directing Staff;
 returned to Grea t e r M a n c h e s t e r and headed 'E' Division^
 at Moss Side, w h i c h has Manchester City Football Grouna.
 On the 1st May 1985 transferred as A.C.C. (Operations)
  for South Yorkshire Police.
                                                                91

                                                                              B.D. MURRAY


                           natter, told us that he had sone spare Serials in the gy:.i-
                           nasiun, I d o n ’t know w h e t h e r he said eight or ten, but th e '-
                           wer e ‘D 1 D i v i s i o n Serials.

                     q. These are the ones that have been in the Cit y Centre b r i n g i n g
                        the fans fro m the M i d l a n d Station? — A. Tnese are t:ie ones
                        that b r i n g the fans f rom the M i d l a n d Station. If they arrive
               B        after q u a r t e r - t o - 3 they go and stand by in the gym.               He had
                        e i q h t or ten Serials anc I a sked for five S e r g e a n t a.u-
                        5 0 "men.         T h e s e wer e e i g h t ma n Serials so Inspector Se..'ell ^
                        d e s p a t c h e d six Serials,           .'hich w o u l d be si:: Sergeants ar.c
                              m e n sir.

                     Q. To where?           - A. To the Leppings jane end.

                     0. A c a i n to the inside or the outside of the turnstiles? - A.
                        •~.q jns'.oector Bennett.  rrhat is w here I >»as sendiiig <
                                                                                   — 0 ..1.

                     O. v,'ere these me n d e s p a t c h e d before the instruccicn was giver,
                        to o pen the gate? - A. Eeiore the instruction v/tis given,
                        y e s / b u t I don't icnov; w h e t h e r they were d e spatched be tore
                        or after the first r e q u e s t came.

               D     n         How m a n y requests w e r e there then to open the gate, to your
                               r e c o l l e c t i o n ? - A. I w o u l d think there wer e three or ."ay oe
                               four.

                               All from S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ilarsnall? - a . Two m quic.-; succ=ss_cu.
                               f airlv c u i c k s u c c e s s i o n w i t h a break. ciiortly azter tne
                               s econd r e c u e s t P.C. D i e h a r d who is the V ideo Opera t o r said
                               s o m e t h i n g *to the e f f e c t of -The gate has g o n e 11 or "rae gate
                               has burst" and as I looked up at the video screen I ccuic
                               see that pe o p l e w e r e c o m i n g thro u g h ’C   gate.     Tnen^thc
                               s i t u a t i o n was r e c o v e r e d and the gate was closed.     A rter
                               t hat there w e r e two m o r e requests from I-lr. Marshall.

                      0   .                LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR: Those Offi cers that have b
                               d e s o a t c h e d fro m the gymnasium, how w ould they have g o n e to
                               L e p p i n g s L ane end, from the inside or round the outSj.cc?
                               - a ". Fro m the inside, my Lord.

                      q.       so w h e n t hey got there they w o u l d have remained on t h e               inside
                               of the turnst i l e s ? - A. Yes, they would.

                                                 PHILLIPS:         W o u l d they in fact have been in t n a t
                                area b e t w e e n the fence and the outer wall that leacts to
                                the N o r t h Stand.            The g y m n a s i u m is at the back of t h e >.crtn
                                S^and       isn't it? - A. Tha t is the area they w ould a p p r o a c n .
                                T h e y w o u l d a p p r o a c h a long the n o r t h Stand concourse a n d
                                they w o u l d cone ou t this side.

                         Q. On this side of the fence?                 - A. Yes.

                          q.    some w i t n e s s e s speak of there being a line of Officer s in
                 H              that area on the a p p r o a c h to the North Stanc when Gate
                                was opened.          This w o u l d be some of the m e n who had come
                                f rom the g y m n a s i u m ? - A. It is possible.      I d o n ’t know sir.
                                                                                                                       ,1   -j

L.H a r p h a m Ud
                                                                     B.D. MURRAY



        vn    HYTUER:  T here w ere four requests in all by
 Mr. K a » i * U for the gates to be opened? -A. Yes sir,                                        i
 w o u l d say there were                      four.

 And quite a bit Of                        ti.Tie elap s e d betw e e n        the first and     the
 last? - A. Yes sir.

 T an not sure w h e t h e r we can w o r k it out e:cactly: It was
 w e n Sve r five minutes, w a s n ' t it? - A. No^sir, i woulc
 say   under five minutes, p r o b a b l y abouv. 3, -i.

             , , nr,a n :nr in that                             to 4 minutes.   Was the
 W n a t was h a p p e n i n g in                                      nnrfcpr*ield'? - A. The
 , a t t « discussed ^ e n                            «             H r ^ u c ^ l c .       ^

 theS rates                M a S h a U was told to'stand by p r ^ b l y
 w h l u t h l ’s i t u a t i o n was a s s e s s e d as to w n a t w o u l o be .he
   -ill- n- it and see if it could be recovered.                            A. ^ e




                                                                                      toa~

                                           v-ni-st crate in a m o m e n t . Vje werer. t
. r will           f o n e fJ °       - ^ ^ I ^ ^ l ^ c u i t to g e t the f l a v o u r and
  - b e ^ t m o s p h e r e , *b ut the w o r d s y o u a c t u a l l y spoice * - t e f
          -r>n^-h - e c u e s t :       "Mr. D u c k e n f i e i d ,     ar e y o u g c m c _o
      e ^hpVtes"                   On o n e r e a d i n g of t h e m h a v e a f l a v o u r
  ° P e n th       gc.        •         d t h a t Hr> D u c k e n f i e i d w a s c i t n e r m g ,
  or                            vou o e m g                                   ;;prp ”?t'|sr
  t h a t he h a d n o t m a d e u p h i s min d, o n d y                          ^      ~
          nJ.iv     *.r v inc
  ur g e n - l y .ri-ng to ge^  to  g e t h i m  to   a o   so. ^    is    t ha t  a -
                                                                        DuckenfielQ uas --

   i n c e - p r e    tatio       .        .           n u c k e n ^ i e l d was weighing all the
        £e rat ions and I t u r n e d round to hi, an? said:       -.You
   considerations   an               Qn nov,„ v i r t u aiiy. I usea
   the^words you use but w h a t                               it m e a n t was "Vie have   got to
   m a k e that d e c i s i o n                   now".
          . t       w a n t to pu t v/ords in your m outh        in this way
Q - bu
    k 5 ? 1^ -
        t thau is
               is not
                  not far
                        ra   f rom w h a^t I ^ was putt i n g declslon
                                                        fche  to you, that

   y™  ! e fo„r° ? e q u S s t s for the same thing to happen? - A.
   arte* four r q                 .    d he was not dithering,        he
   I was not c o n c e r n e d    -   de     w h e t h e r we could retrieve
    was          obviously            s t l J-l                          opinion    t h e n t h a t we
    S S          to " o p e n 0 the" g a t e s w i t h the f i n a l r e q u e s t of Mr. M a r s h a l l


Q . At that Particular                                                                  W    *
    adverted to the -®ns                                       | iatel    assume<j that the gate
    gate opened and it                                    ••               words that were given
     ^ r a s ^ h l Y a f e " ^ g i n e - ' o r ^ h e gate has burst-
     a   nt h e y
             d    were given by the Video Operator.
                                                                                115


                                                                                                  B.D.MURRAY



                                0  n-he i m o r e s s i o n b e i n g that they had gone through crowd
                                '* p r e ssure? - A. T h a t is w h a t it conveyed to me, yes.

                                0. An d s i m i l a r l y when you saw for the first time the rans
                                   c l i mbing e ver the gates, the fence, the per i m e ^ e r fence,
                                   it c o n v e y e d to you the impression, did it, that tnere had
                                   b e e n some sort of p itch invasion? - A. Ho, not pitch
                    B              invasion.          W h e n I saw people climbing over the fence, are
                                   we talking o v e r on to the p e rimeter track?

                                0           ve-? - A       T h e y were g e t t i n g on to the pitch.        T hey prcbc^ly
                                            w a n t e d to see, p r o b a b l y wa n t e d a be t t e r view.   There was
                                            s o mething happening, I d on't know w h a t it was.

                                            T t w ? c pr e t t y obvious, wasn't: it, in the wav in         m e n tr.e;
                                O.
                                            w e r e 'c li mb in c over and standing aimlessly around on he
                                            track that they wer e out through pressure, not because
                                            t h e v " w a n t e d to spoil the game or anything of that scrt?
                                                      It was not obvious to me and I never consicerec tne
                                            w a n t e d to spoil the game.       I tnought tney w a n t e d to get
                                            on to the track to get a better view.


                                                                  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b y MR.   JACKSON:

                                    0. M r . M u r r a v , ma y I t ak e u p             the v e r y last m a u l e r . -*• 7 **“
                                            b r i e f i n a y o u g a v e b e f o r e the g a m e was there any p c . r i j . c : : l   in­

                                            a t t e n t i o n p a i d to c r u s h i n g ? - A. Mo sir.

                                    0       A m t richt that in e v e r y case whe n we check the briefings,
                                            we check the notes, we check everything that was saic,
                                            n o t i n g was ever said to any of the Officers on tr.e grouse
                                            about crushing? - A. I cor.'t know sir, out it was nou
                                            m e n t i o n e d in m y brief.

                                    0        Beca u s e at the end of the day there was a great deal o.
                                             distress, was there not, shown by the Ofricers anc anger
                                             by the fans on the pitc h? - A. Yes, there was.

                                    o        A n d if we look at the v i d e o we will see, will we not,, ac
                                             well after 10-past-3, m a n y man y Police Officers standing
                                             a p p a r e n t l y d o i n g nothing? - A. Tha t is w h a t it appears,
                                             yes sir.

                                     0       A n d is that beca u s e no one ever brie f e d                 them as to wnat tney
                                             o u g h t to do if there was a crush at the                     front of a n y one o,
                                             these oens? - A. I think it is p o s s i b l y                  because uhey aid
                                             n o t realise the full e x t e n t of w h a t was               happening.

                                        o     is it c o r r e c t t h a t no o n e w a s e v e r b r i e f e d as to tne m e t n o c
                                              A" e x t r a c t i n g p e o o l e f r o m i n s i d e the se p e n s if t n e r e w a s a
                                              «usS? - A            M o o n e w a s b r i e f e d o n t h a t su bj ec t, no.

                                                       L OR D J U S T I C E TAYLOR:         Is there some specific way of
                            H                 doing it?



J . L. H a r p h a m L td
                                                                              W.C.    CRAv.TQRD



                                              - - r-t-P C b eing opened at about 2.43 when £
         number o?‘“                                       through? - A. That is correct.

                          you P*rty to .the opening of that                                  -        was^ha^one
         of your other                                                              an Officer on my
         Pa W     to           1 l 0 &£                     o oen w h e n I was standing up near
         Serial.        rh      -                           c o u r s e as it o p e n e d m y a u t e n u i c n
B        to T u r n s t i l e A a.nc o                      co         h     r o f f i c e rs froa m y          _
         was drawn to it.  I ran,                                              w hich eventually we cid
         serial to try and close tn                                    ,             because I understand
         d o . The o n l y                                                       th. t o l i c horse cane
          there was a                                              c   and that assisted us quite a
          bit^and                                            close the gate then.
                  . ,n us .,i-h the number of people who caine throuc.i
          Can you ^ l p j3 ;. -               ocasion? - A. I saic
          Gate C whe n it u^s o.xr.ea     D -obably a couole or cays
          i   n   i  in tne rep i
                      t   i   a   l * l   y  5 0 , but having watched
          i f o n W S e £;ideo^heie-was                             nigh on 200        easily.

           -    ’ «-• that G ate C o n e n e d                         again approximately four or
    Q-    '.,e *now tnat                   v
           five minuLes lai_ei.      c
D                                              o c c c s ’on staved o pen for soae time? - A. That
    Q>        isC co?rec?!                        I t a bo u t' f iv e      minutes    later.

                             i-r\ c ptp c w hen it was opened   :he seconc
                                                                >
                                                                —
    q. new close v/ere y c u ^ o ^      position w ould be between
              ti" e ? ._ 1V:                  1-c                 position,      when the gate sudcenly
              Turnstile^                      a-'j ,
              opened.
                                       '     - a Mo        I v/as not in a position
     q   .Did you see     _ « > £ £ • % “ •, to o i d “ tb«t area    and of course
            There was one o_ -./c - .                             V(,,0 oponeci
                                                           aillcer;        a Steward or what,             I have no

                  ic.Ba wnatsoeve- •
                                                           , 3 n iirP serials working in tne area
     Q * i n n e d iatelv&b e h i n d th‘
                                        a t ‘gate apart from your Serial                                               1,7
                  -A.                 I did"not see anyone.
                   • - ..       anv traffic on the radio about the                                             opening
         Q.        Die vOU  -   _ ^ :jone v/hatsoever.
                  of tne gates?    a .

     C. Did you not hear an instruction                                         that the gates should be
              so - * ^o*unc
                        n 0 v»i\ci■—s o s 'fg u *
        coenea?
                     • -,v - an-- warn i n g that the gate woulc be opened
         n
         vj• Dia you save                        of fans? - A. Kone at all.
             and lert open -Oi o.e -n--
                                                             ju   ,•-        coina to be opened, was there
         Q . if you had known                                       ^d Q ^ e b 2 fQ re it was opened? - A.



H
                      w jm 's w s s k                                                 —          is    3 e V 3 r a l    £ a n s   .
                           50



                                                     T.   BICHARD

     - A. I would accept the differences in time, yes.

Q. Well, we have got the timing from the video and obviously
   that is more accurate than your memory. But when that
   »ate opened iust after Mr. Marshall had asked for the
   gates to be opened what did you think had opened it? - A.
   There had been some conversation on the radio regarding
   pushing at the gates and gates bending and buckling and
   when that gate appeared to open- my immediate reaction
   was that the fans had in fact forced open that gate.

Q.   Did you make some comment to that effect?   - A. That is
     right, yes.

Q.   I think you said something like they   have broken down the
     gate? - A. That is the words I would   have used, yes, sir.

Q. Yes. But in fact after about 20 seconds or so it was
   closed again? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. And according to your notes you put it thus, you say
   after 20 seconds gate closed. Appears that it had been
   opened on purpose - sorry - appears that it had been open
   on purpose? - A. Is that on my original statement or the
   notes?
Q. Mo.   I am reading out from the notes. You have got a copy
    In fact you time it at 2.40 which we know to be slightly
    inaccurate.   It is page 6 of my copy of the notes.  I have
    a typed copy.   I do not know.  It may not accord with the
  ' original. ~ A. Yes.

Q. You have got that? - A. I have got that, yes.

Q. As you see, it says after 20 seconds gate closed. Appears
   that it had been open on purpose? - A. Yes.  I was unsure
   about actually who had opened it or why it had been o pened

0. I want to see whether this is hindsight or whether this is
   what you thought at the time. Your immediate reaction was
   to think the gate had been broken down? - A. That is right

Q. That is what you said? - A. Yes.

Q. It was open for a very short time and then closed again?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Did you then appreciate that in fact it had been open_on
   purpose or was this something you were told later on in
   the afternoon? - A. It is quite possible that that is
   something that has come out during the events and me
   actually writing it down.

 Q    I follow   In any event we know that there was again a
      request from Mr. Marshall?"- A. Yes, in relation to
                                     65

                                                 T. BICHARD



                         Cross-Examined by MR. GIBSON-WATT

o       Officer, one point first which you have touched on but I
        want to get it clear. When Gate C first opened, ]ust for
        a few seconds, you instinctively said: "The fans have ^ ^
        broker, down the gate" or words to that effect? - A. I aic,
        yes.
0        That is what you thought.              It then closed and soon arter
         that you were getting very strong requests or commands
         f^ S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Marshall that the gates snould be opened?
         - A. Yes, that is right.
O        So bv the time you were getting these commands througa
         must"" have been obvious to you that the Police hac a. any
         rate r e f i n e d control of Gat e C? - A. I believe that, yes.

n        And indeed that the opening of Gate C originally had bean
         d2l^era?e, not a break in by fans? - A. That may be an _
         assumption in between the incident happening ana me writing
         that down.
o        T\Te 11 what I am suggesting to you is it is an assumption
         between the incident happening when you n r s t blurt out
         you- thoughts instinctively and realising that Superintended ^
         Marshall was still asking for the gates to be opened. A.
         I Ln unclear on what you are actually to g a m , sir.

    o     ret's take it slowly.        If Superintendent Marshal^ is asking
          fo- the qates to be opened, the fans have not oro-<en in
          and not b r o k e n dow n the gate, have they? - A. There  isaore
          than one gate    though,   sir.   It m a y well be he was no.
          that that gate opened.
    o     well you are aware when Superintendent Marshall is giving
          his orders or m a k i n g his requests for the gates to be
          ooened, that fans are no longer coming througn Ga.e C.             You
          can see that? - A. I can see that, yes.

    o     Therefore at the least Gate C is then under Police control
          and no <=ans are coming in? - A. Yes, and I am assuming
          that Gate C is the one that everybody is referring to.
          That is where my attention is arawn.

    n      orpriselv so. So you assume        when Superintendent Marsnall
           Is ma?lig his reauests, that       everybody is concentrating
           on Sati ? and Superintendent       Marshall is asking ror Gate C
           to be opened? - A. Yes, that       is right, sir.

        o MSirS means it must have been opened and closed the ^irst
        q . Whicli neans forced by the fans? - A. It could well have
            time a ^                      been opened or just taken
           o T l o c k   the fans c o u l d w e l l have forced the gate o pen and
           «   U n a g k t o close it again, it does not m ean to say it
           is damaged.

                                                                                    yd
                    N I N E T E E N ™ DAY'S PR OCEEDINGS

                       MONDAY,     12th JUNE, 1989

                           (A FTERN OON SESSION)

          POLICE CON STABL E TREVOR BICHARD, re-called

           C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. GI BSON-WATT   (cont.)

Officer, can you go back to that Photo grap h 48 in the bundle
which you had in front of you.    A.    Yes,   I have that
ph o t o g r a p h now.
We have just got Mr. Kelly to the door of the Police Control
Box, I think.   A.   That's right, sir.

On that photograph       just to the left.          A.       Yess, that's
right.
You are there, Mr. D u c k e n f i e i d is there?            A.   Yes.

 As s istan t Chief Con st a b l e Mr. Jackson is there, I think
 in civi lian clothes.         A.    That's right, yes.

 Did Mr. Kelly ask what had happened?               A.    There was a
 c o n v e r s a t i o n took place bet ween Mr. Du cke nfi eid and Mr.
 Kelly, yes.
  Speak a bit louder, please.                   A.   There was a conversation
. b e t w e e n Mr. D u c k e n f i e i d and Mr. Kelly.
 jn the course of that c o n v e r s a t i o n did Mr. Duck enfi eid tell
 Mr Kelly that a gate had been forced and there had been
 a n 'inrush of Li verpool sup port ers into the ground?
 A.     Yes, that was said.
 And did he, in fact, point to one of the TV monitors in the
 course of that c o n v e r s a t i o n ? Can you remember that.
 A.    He could well nave done, I don't remember it.

  And I think from your answ ers this morning if he did so it
  would ha.vo been a monitor showing the current situation;
  it would not have been a replay of what had happened earlier.
  A.   That's right, it is the scene that would be showing
  at that time.
                  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. KALLIPETI5:

  Mr. Bichard, you have got Pho tograph 48 in front of you
  which shows your position.    A.   That's right, sir.

  Primarily, as you told us, controlling the video
  cam eras th ro ughout the ground. A.  Yes, that is my main
  function.
                                                                    81

                                                                                  T. BICHARD



                       D       You d i d not hear any c o n v e r s a t i o n specifically from Inspector
                               M u r r a y a bout a d i f f i c u l t y m a k i n g contact w i t h the Club   -
                               A. A g a i n I can't, o b v i o u s l y it is a very active time.             I
                               have no r e c o l l e c t i o n of any conversation.

                          m-      Bichard, is that the p o s i t i o n that a number of peopie
                       2- were doinc d i f f e r e n t things and not everybody would have
                          ? n o w n w h a t e v e r y b o d y else was doing? - A. Once we were aware
                B         about the fullness of this incid e n t each individual tooK
                          uoon t h e m s e l v e s their i n dividual tasks, so you w o u l d no. be
                          fully aware of w h a t was h a p p e n i n g elsewhere.

                       0           Mr      Bichard, I am sure we all sympathise w i t h that, but the
                                   c o n v e r s a t i o n that I was p u t t i n g to you as to ™et, - e r you J;ould
                                   he Id was s o m e w h a t earlier.         Mr. M u r r a y thought that he hac
                                   tried to get in touch w i t h the Club before the decision to _
                                   ooe n the gates was made.              A g a i n I can only ask you tnis:       ir
                                   ?n fact there w e r e d i f f i c u l t i e s at that stage, something leu
                                   is say at a b o u t a q u a r t e r - t o - 3 ....       A. A g a i n it is not
                                   in m y recollection.

                       0           A n d the last matter, and forgive me there is only one question
                                   on the q u e s t i o n of the o p e n i n g of the gates.               Can I just
                                          5 ® A 0 c l a r i f y this:        Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d and Mr. Murray have
                 D                 h o - h -old the incuiry that they had e x p ected all the gates to
                                   be ' " o p e n e d ? - A . I w o i l d a c c e p t that if that is w h a t they are
                                   saying.

                           n   'That is w h a t they e x p e c t e d and you have told us tnat your
                           Q ‘ e x p e c t a t i o n w a s diffe r e n t ? - A. T hat is right, G&te C.

                           o       A n d I t hink you have also s aid that the reason for that you
                                   b e l i e v e ? f rom recollection, is that because your camera
                                   h a D o e n e d to be looking at G ate C at that time, you had
                                   a s s u m e d tha t was the gate about w h i c h Superintendent ^ r s n a l l
                                           ^noaVina^ - A      The actual scene is available on that
                                   c a m e r a !   It shows' a c l e a r pict u r e of Gate C. Gate B is out
                                   Of view.          Gate A is o u t of view.

                           Q. A n d that is w h a t you w e r e c o n c e n t r a t i n g on personally? - A.
                                    T h a t is right.

                           n        and vou w e r e unaw a r e of the fac t that Hr. Duckenfield and
                                    Mr. H u r r a y w a n t e d all the gates opened? - A. I am unaware
                                     of that,    yes.

                               n     n- is iust this question in the light of that background,
                                     ,.r lichaJd    After the order to open the gates was given
                                     o n the first occasion, we can see on the video that you
                                     zo o m e d in on G ate C n r s u     of all? - A. Yes.

                                                  „ ar)Kor t-hat? - A.     I d on't actually, because I have
                                     not^had^n opportunity .... I have seen a compilation tape
                                     £ut I have nit seen the tapes I produced.

                               Q. All      I w a n t e d you r hel p w i t h w a s w h e n you did zoom in on Gate C

                                                                                                                       i U 0

l. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                         82
                                                                                         T. BICHARD



                                      y o u said this m o r n i n g that you drew that to"his attention"?
                                      - A. Yes.
                             Q        W h o s e a t t e n t i o n did you d r a w to the fact that Gate C was
                                      b e i n g opened? - A. W h e n I m a d e the comment about it being
                                      fo r c e d open?

                             Q. Yes? - A. It w o u l d be d i r e c t e d at Hr. Duckenfield,                but also
                   B            to e v e r y b o d y w h o was in the Control Box.

                             Q. But are you saying that you have a specific recollection
                                of draw i n g Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d 's a t tention to the gate which you
                                          zooming in on at the time w h e n the i-irst entry was
                                made? - A- W h e n the gate was, as I b e l ieved forced, and I
                                h a v e * s h o u t e d ou t the c o m ments that I have put in my statement
                                a nd it has b e e n d i r e c t e d to Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d who has been
                                s t o o d just in front of me.

                             0. A n d likewise a p p r o x i m a t e l y five minutes later when^ there was
                                c o n v e r s a t i o n s p e c i f i c a l l y about Gate A, and I think v:e can
                                tell you w i t h o u t fear of c o n t r a d i c t i o n that you zoomed in
                                on G ate A as well? - A. Yes, I have got that recollection
                                now of seeing two lines of Po l i c e Officers behind Gate A.

                    D        Q.        An d     zooming    in on them?        - A. A n d moving in on that scene, yes.

                             0        W h e n vou zo o m e d in on Gat e A, those minutes la>.er a^ter
                                       the initial zoom on Gate C, can you recall whether anyth:-:,
                                       was s a ’d at all inside the Control Box a bout w h y Gate A
                                       had not b e e n o p e n e d e a r lier? - A. No, I know why I zoomed
                                        in on Gate A beca u s e of the radio message from Sergeant^
                                        Higgins, that is why I w e n t there, but I have no idea of
                                        any c o n v e r s a t i o n after that.

                                               MR.   GLASGOW:      T h a n k you ver y much.         Thank you sir.


                                                          C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR.   WOODV?ARD:

                                 O.    Mr. Bichard,  m a y I ask yo u a bout the m o nitoring at Snig
                                  *    Hill.   Until the m a j o r incident was declared, was Snig hill
                                       list ening in to the c o m m u n i c a t i o n s that were passing?^
                                       - A. To my knov/ledge they w er e listening to Channel 25,
                                       personal      radio.

                                 0. D u r i n g the time that you w e r e in the Control R o o m up to the
                                    m o m e n t that Gate C was o p e n e d and caused you to shou-w out,
                                    had you b een e x p ecting that gate to open? - A. Certainly
                                       not.

                                 o      W hen you o b s e r v e d v/hat w a s shovm on the television screen,
                                       was it a m a t t e r of surpr i s e to you? - A. Yes.

                                 Q.     Di d you s hout it out?          ~ A. Yes.

                         H       Q.     However, d i d you make any specific                   communication to   Snig Hill


                                                                                                                        1 M
L. H a r p h a m L t d
«



                                                                   W. JACKSON


                 - A  T hat is right, bu t I have a vague recollection that it
                 is sometime during all the melle and I think you will
                 aDDreciate  there was a lot of stress m dealing with the_
                 problem-   I have a feeling that somebody mentioned sometning
                 about storming the gates.

                 It ma y be that we can help you about that.                  We have heard
        Q.
                 some evidence, or rather it has been put, that you were
    B            p r e s e n t w hen Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d spoke to Mr. Kelly ar.c i u u n *
                 a Mr. Kirton from the F.A. and Mr. Mackrell, tne secretary
                 o- the Club.         Do you recall a meeting at which^those «_r.re=
                 were present, together w ith you and Mr. Ducsenfield? - A.
                 Is that the one in the boardroom?

                 well I am not sure w h e t h e r it was in the Boarcroom or
        Q.
                 Control Room.   I think it was in the Control Room? - A. - s ,
                 th°re were a lot of people came to the Control Room uP.a.
                 day and I reme mber Mr. Mackrell being m there, so p r o c e s s
                 Mr. Kelly was in there as well.

           Beca use it has been suggested, and I think Mr. D u c k e n n e l c
        Q- K s actually accep t e d this, that he certainly conveyec .ne
           impression, w h a t e v e r precise words he may have usee,
           fans had br o k e n a gate down and that that naa lec               e ^
    D      trouble"7 - A'. I don't remember v/hat the actual converse.--.*
           was     I ’remember Mr. Mackrell saying something aoout           >vr.az
           was the plan?"      C e r t a i n l y I briefly said we were t.yrn-
           get the people out who had been injured.

                  But you said that you had some vague recollection tnat £•-
            Q- some stage someone said something about     storming c.^e
                  gates"?          : A. Yes,   I do.

                  C o u l d that in fact be the occa sion which has been spoken to
            Q.
                  by Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d ? - A. It could have been.

                  is your recollection that whoe ver said something a b o u t ^ _
            Q. stor ming the gates was someone who was official,    1. ±
                  put it that way? - A. Oh yes, yes.

                  so it was not a sort of mere rumour? - A. No, Mo, I nave
                  r-nt- a feeling it was somebody in the Box tnat said that.
                  ?n f a c t ? thLl< it m a y have been Mr. Duckenfield.


                                  MR.   COLLINS:   I am obliged.

                                  TORD JUST I C E TAYLOR:       But when you said it was only
                       u Alf      a is that you heard what had actually happened, co
                   X    u n d e   r s t a n d that is w h e n you  had called Mr. Marshall*
                   - A. Yes.

             n  v7a<= it- from him that you heard that the gate had been
             Q'              - A. Yes, my Lord, during that period, as every-
                h nd v a o o r e c i a t e s  we were extremely busy and trying to
                lltl             t h t ? t h e areas were sterile, that doctors hac
                S e J n e a H e d and all the necessary things were being done
        H
                                                                                                   l 'j2
                                         46
                                                                          W. JACKSON.




        O.    The time, of course, is approximate, but the point is
              this:  you did not appreciate that there had been a Police
              order to open the gates until you spoke to Mr. Marshall? -
              A.  That is correct.

        Q.    You have also told us that on a previous occasion - a n
              occasion before that - somebody in authority had made a
              reference to storming the gates? - A. Yes, I think that
B             was right.

        Q.    And you b e l i e v e d that that could have been Mr.
              D u c k e n f i e l d ? - A. Yes.

        Q.    And it could have been on the occasion            when Mr. Kelly was
              in the Police control box? - A. Yes.

        0.    Does it follow- from that that, until you. spoke to Hr.
              Marshall at about quarter-past four, you were under the
              imoress ion that fans had somehow forced their way into the
              g r o u n d ? - A. That was my recollection.

        0     Thank you.               There is one other matter.     Do you have a
              r e c o l l e c t i o n , on any occasion before 4 . 1 5 , when you were
              in the Police c o n t r o l box, of some reference being made to
D             the television monitoring screens to illustrate what had
              happened? - A. No, I do not.

         Q.   You do not have any recollection of that at all?                 A. No,
               I do not.

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       What context are you putting
               that?
                    MR. G I B S O N - M A T T : Sir, I am putting it in the
               context of Hr. K e l l y ’s visit.      I deliberately put it in
               general terms because Hr. Jackson had been: a little vague.
               I* was-not put to Mr. Duckenfield, which is why I raise it
               nou  but the recollection of Hr. Kelly and Hr. Kirton was
               that they were r e f erred to a picture on the monitoring
               screen.

                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       Then and there?

                       MS.   GIBSON-WATT--     On the occasion that they were       in
               the Police control       box.

                   . LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          I see.   Thank you.

                     HR  GIBSON-WATT:   It was not thought necessary to
                put it when asking Hr. Duckenfield, but, of course, a good
                deal of evidence has emerged since then.

                         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you.     Yes,   Hr.
                K a l 1 ipetis?


    H
*


    *                             QUESTION                 NINE

        Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
        to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
        need of trained medical help?


        The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
        incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation.

        Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
        been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
        ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
        egress to the playing area.

        Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
        the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
        would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
        area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
        quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
        of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
        the pitch.

        Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken by Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
        and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.

        The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
        area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
        evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
        to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.



        OBSERVATIONS

        Please see pages 149 - 156, Volume 2



        Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

        296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
        response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
        April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
        on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
        arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
        proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
        television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
        equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
        of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
        whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
        The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
        overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate
There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down
The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69

64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
attendance.

65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2.000,
the club should employ a medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with
any medical exigency at the ground.        He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.


   (b) At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000.
the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
those in the police control room.

67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
of 5,000 or more.

68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

 69. A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
 50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
 match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                         3




                                                              • u ak                  v/3 c 2 two ciinouLsncss

a « r R                                          » s r . T                    s >         * « ,

                HR.             KALLIPETIS :                  Mo   sir,    on e was       there.

                loro              JUST I C E TAYLOR:                    And one within a mile.

                mr          . KALLIPETIS:                     And one was on standby.

               Tnc-^T^F TAYLOR:             saw     on the Eilm that tne
      LORO JUS                . i a m b i a n c e corner on first and
St. J o h n ' s A ® oula!J^® J ^       time'before one sees any other
it seems to oe q           ~     d to the SYMAS ambulance that was
                                           thfg^und?               What happened to that, do you
tllT,                   in the early stages?
                    vr   KALLIPETIS:       That stayed in situ    according to
                    SR.                    b a .a £or communication*.  Tne
the                 plan to aot    a,    - Lcs waat     to the Lappings Lane
0   £   f   i   c   e   rtcom thac
                            s         acnoul.            bacausa they soulon't
e n d to f ia d o u t * na<-                                            Th»ra was       the n a cal l tn ro ug n
see Erom w h e r e ^ c n e y -                                     •.               th at thera va? a m a n or
to Headquarter-^ a-                                                 0    ^5    ^3   a l r e a d y a m b u l a n c e s hac.
    i - ^ r i t ^ p p I n g r L n e ^ d ^ n                                     response      to the e a r l i e r

    call                trora the P ol i c e .
                        TORO J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                        Am I understanding             correccl^
    that                the        a   m   b u   Ia n c e ^t h a t w a ^ o n ^ t    the                              •

    aimbulance ,°it wa.                                  a communications ambulance was                      it?

                 war r t d p t I S •It is an operational ambulance       sir
             MR.  KALLI-Erlb.                          first ambulance on
        but as you will                                        Thar,, has got
        sits does not rasa straij                       rstruired.   Thars
        to be an                                       ; iS.’ t h l S ' . U .        which will          O.COW
        are several                              reason* -.ui.
        apparent.
                            TORD JUST I C E TAYLOR:                        I don't want to anticipate.
                            LORU juoi-iv-                                         c<=»on it ac an earLy
        'stlg^on'the'groun'd Eu t I~think you h ^ e                                               explained        it, an
        we w i l l hear                           the evidence later.
                  ,= *arrTP*TIS-           You will hear why it is not_ a gooc
            idea fo r the ^ S u l a i c . s to go right on to the pitcn.

                                LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:                          Very well,      thank you.


                                *ow, Hr. C o l l U . X “^ ^ l ^ t s ' T c o m o U a a o n ' l f " '''6
            lbout w f a n d Y e U                              hours o u t o*E oiany, many hours oe
            vid eo.

                                                                                                                    1 .i
                                                                                                                    J. .1
                                                                                                                          t/
                                                  A.   HOPKINS


serious had h ap pened at the other end of the ground.

A St John's amb ulan ce had gone on to the pitch, had it
n o t ? ‘ A. With hindsight, yes, sir, but I wasn't aware
of that at the time.
You did not see it when you were there?   A.  I know it
was there, looking at the video, but I was not conscious
of the fact that it was there.
When you were outside the gymnasium, did you have any
problems with vehicles?   A.   There was- quite a lot of
vehicles there, sir, yes.
    Did it make any diffe ren ce to the use to which you could put
    your ambulances, because by that time you would have had
    some attend at that end of the ground, would you not?
    A    Yes, we did.   It caused us to reverse in, which is
    negligible, really.
    You also men ti on horses.    A.      There were some horses
    there, yes, sir.
    You see, Inspecto r Hand-Da vie s said that they had gone
    before the f i s t amb ul ance arrived. Is it your recollection
    that they were still there when the ambul ances arrived?
    A.    I know they were there when I arrived, si*..

    You were not in an ambulance, you were in a Range-Rover.
    A. Well, they were there when the ambul ances arrived
    as w e l l , s i r .
    I see.    I think             and Mr. Edwards came in an
    ambulanc e and you wanted to get them on to the pitch;
    that is right, is it not?     A.   Yes, sir.
     And you also got                  lining up ambul an ces outside?
     A.   That is correct, sir.
     Did you send an ambulance on to the pitch driven by
              n   A.    Yes, I did, sir.
     I think that went on to the pitch.      Did you see the St.
     John's ambulance coming off the pitch?      A.   Y®s ’   1 ’
     sir.     We were, in fact, trying to get one on at the top
     of the slope and there was a problem there which, frankly,
     surprise d me beca us e I had not seen it before and there
     w a s a ramp running down the side of the Stand on a large
     block of co ncrete at the bottom of it.
i    T K a f leads to the dis ab led area, the Westfiel d enclosure,
       ^ink      in the North Stand, does it not?          A.   Yes, but
     I had never seen it before, sir, and my ambulance came in
     on a lef t- hand lock arid~CKe moment he hit the concrete
     his body on the other side went over on to the gate-post.
     You could not n e g o t i a t e t h e gate-post unless you came at i t
     straight and we were att empting to push the vehicle o
      the top ga te-post when the St. John's came out, trying to j
                                        92


                                                             A.     HOPKINS


         come off the pitch at the bottom and his bumper was
         fast on the sta nchio n holding the per imet er railing up
         and I recall he had a couple of runs at it and bounced
         off it again and then had a real run at it and came off
         it minus his n u m b e r - p l a t e and I think some damage to
         his bumper.
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Can we see this?

                  MR. KA LLIPETIS:   Sir, if I may, I think these
         ph o t o gra phs are easier to demo ns tr ate what Mr. Hopkins
         is talking about.
               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:          Are these some new ones?

               M R . KAL LIPETIS:   Sir, y e s .   (H a n d e d )

              MR. PHILLIPS:         I have not got them but do they
         help, sir?
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I think they may do, yes, because
         they look at it from the top of the ramp whereas the
         p h o t o gra phs we have got I think look at it from the bottom.

q   _         MR. PHILLIPS:     Yes. Can you just perhaps point to
         the pa rt icular post that you say the ambulance was getting
         caught on?     We can see the ramp there.   A.   It was the
         gate and the post, sir.
Q. On the lef t-han d side of the large phot ogra ph?  A.   Yes.
   We were having to come in and turn sharp left and the moment
   the front wheel hit the concrete nodule, it threw the
   amb ulance across on to the pillar - both am bu lances that
   went on to the pitch - sort of identical damage.

g_              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    The bit of lighter coloured
          con cret e on the right is a rise, is it?   A.   My Lord,
          I think the con cr ete is to accommodate the ramp.

g#             mr   . PHILLIPS:       So it is the thin end of the ramp,
          is it?       A.   I d o n ' t.know what one calls it, b u t --

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    You are talking about coming
          in past where you are standing there.   A*    Yes, sir.

    Q. Turning left.           A.    Turning left in.
    Q. And the rig ht-h and front wheel goes up, does it?
       A. Up on to the concrete, sir, and throws the offside
       on to the gate-post.
    g_         MR. PHILLIPS:     Was that the same gate-post that the
          St. John's ambulanc e got_^tuck on?    A.   Yes, but --
          No, no, he was at the bottom of the ramp trying to come
          off.     There are some angles holding the perimeter fence.
          He had come down and tried to turn right up the ramp and
          got f a s t .                                            1
                                  93

                                                   A.   HOPKINS


     You had not seen that before, you say?        A.    No, I hadn't.

     When had you last been to the ground?    A.    I went to the
     ground the year before merely on a co urtesy visit because
     Off icers were on duty there and I wasn't con scio us of it
     then, and I was quite surprised.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Had anybody actually tried
     dri vin g an ambul an ce in there before, do you know?
     A.    No, sir.     I am sorry, before the ramp, my Lord?

           MR. PHI LLIPS:  Yes, before the ramp was put on.
     Do you know if an amb ula nc e had been sent through on any
     ear lier occ asio n? A. No, I don't, sir.

Q. Well now, these two or three of your ambula nce s went on
   to the pitch, did they not?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. I think you then came into contact with Mr. Hornsby, the
   A ss istan t Chi ef Fire Officer. A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Can you say what time that was?    Paragr ap h 30 of your
   statement, you just sent a couple of ambulances down to the
   pitch.    How long had you been there before you spoke -
   per haps you can remember it that way - how long had you
   been there when you spoke to Mr. Hornsby? . A.       Ithink
   po ssibly around 15.44 I spoke to Hornsby.

Q. By then you still had not spoken to a senior Police
   Office r?    A. Bearing in mind, sir, I hadn't .been back
   to the gym nasiu m and I hadn't seen one in the area where I
   was working.
Q. But you had been in the vicinity of the gymnasium, had
   you not?   A. Yes, sir, I was there all the time.

Q. In the yard, sending ambulances to the pitch and getting
   people sorted out into ambulances?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q. And I think you gave various other instruct ions and the
   major in cident veh icle arrived. That was about 15.45, was
   it?   A.    Yes, sir.
Q. And then you started to use the body-bags which had been
   provid ed with that ambulance, is that right?            A. Yes

 Q. You tell us then that --
 Q           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    I am sorry, did you want to
      say so meth in g? A.  I thought around that time, sir, I
      went into tne gy m nasiu m and met Chief Sup er in tend ent Addis.
                                                  /MR. PHILLIPS:     I am


                                                                         A
                                                                         i
                                                                           55
                                                                                                            P. HIGGINS


                                      .ORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                          Th an k VC'J


                    Q.




                             “       % » r s 8 . ‘s . A
                              (Demonstrating).
            B                          Hr.    KALLIPETIS:                   Do you want to see it,                 sir,   ana m e n
                              it can be han d e d round.

                                       LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                    T hank you very mucn.

                                       Mr. KALLIPETIS:  Can you be getting some airways^cut,
                              Mr-     Higgins?   Do you nave sons axrwavs there?  a. iso,
                              sir.
                              t,    ,   o a ss those to nis Lordship, will you, and tali us
                               “             what t h e y do.   (Witness demon s t r a t i n g to ^ora
                              Tus~i.ee Tavlor).             Forgive mv ignorance, m r . Higgins, bu<-
                              h o w ' d o they coiaoare w i t h the Brooks airway?             A. oasically
                              you achi e v e the'same objective.          You are keep i n g tne tongue
                              dow n and m a i n t a i n i n g a clear airway, si*.

                              And do you have a m i n u t e m a n there as well?                                    A. We have
                              got a n e w pack, sir, w m c n is similar.

                                 Le~ us have a look at that, please.                  A.  That is just a
                         '       rnechanical r e s u s c i t a t o r w h i c n inflates tne lungs an-
                                 empties them.       (Demonstrating) .

                                       LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:    And t h at fits inside tner.?
                                            • _\        a   vpc   that is the m e c n a m c a l p a r w
                                 S ^ u T p l i c e is *in'the J i U o w box.     (Indicating.

                                         LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                    I see.        V ery well,      tnan.< you.

                                        Mr. KALLIPETIS:  Is that portable, Mr. Higgins, in
                         *        fact?'   A. It is carried on all tne emergency amoulances.

                         ,       so you  could take that  on to the pitch,                                        £or example,   on
                         ■'      inis occasion, and use it?     A.  Yes.

                                         Mr.       KALLIPETIS:                  T hank you.

                                                               R e - e x a m i n e d by M r . G O L D S A C K :

                                                   • _  two very brief matters, please.              I shoulc
                         a - W r *a ilait witn one of         t h e m e a r l i e r . On the day, I. think
                                    ” nu too? the v iew t hat it was impractical to t ax. tne
                                    ^ balances o
                                    ambulances  on to the
                                                        ^   pitch?
                                                            ^     ^    m A.
                                                                         e l e eIt fchar
                                                                                     was wag
                                                                                         impractical,
                                                                                             go]_ng on# yes.
                                                                                                         lt

                                    would have b een i m oossible to take people round there,
                                    and it f o r m e d a bott l e n e c k anyhow wit h there bein, oust
                H                   the one access point.

                         Q.         With a     b   e   t   t   e   r   access point        - u W y o ^ h a v e considered

                                    i £ n l    d u a l 3 access p o i n t , it w o u ? d have been p r a c t i c a l ,1 0
J. I. Haroham Ltd
                                                                     56
                                                                                                      P.   HIGGINS


                           bur with just one access point it became impossible.

                           Do you chink it would be advisable if vou were able to ce"
                    Q.     ambulances on to the_pitch? A. In some
                                                              soi  instances, yes,
                           nn<- q iblv   but in             an'*incident       similar to tne one that    ^
                           possio      ,                           j d o n .t think it w oula De practical.
                           SfTould            s t i l l ' h av e
                                                    sufficed to use the g y m n a s i u m ana tne
                           m eth o d s that we use d this time, sxr.

          B                          LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:       T h e only thing is thau all
                                                   ^ar-rvina the injured quite a distance on
                           i m p r o v i s e d bits of b o a r d i n g added greatly to the amount
                           if ohisical effort, I suppose, and also the time taken.
                           n
                           Do    t/on -hink
                                 you     u n i n k it
                                                   it w
                                                      woou
                                                         u l d create^    m ore contusion
                                                                                  ^   ^   ir
                                                                                          ^ wyo
                                                                                              ou   naa an
                                                                                                r ^eQf my
                           amoulance                  i e n t J QOt to t he one focal point very quickly
                               b e c a u s e ” of the i n v o l v e m e n t of the police ana the rans
                               J n d J - h e l v e d the o p e r a t i o n of dealing w i t h_tne p a t i e n t s _
                               to run more s m o o t h l y tnan it w o u l d if we haa haa isolated
                               incidents out on the pitch.

                                      LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:             Yes,    I see.    Thank you.

                                    Mr. GOLDSACK:        The other very brief point is^tnis:
                     Q.        You heard Dr. P u r c e l l ' s e v i d e n c e this morning? a. Yes.
            D
                               Tne amou-bag that he was describing, is that similar to
                     Q.        o S e of the items tnat you nave just snown us? A. -nat
                                is the o n e , sir .

                                That is the same?                   A. Yes.

                                        Mr.     GOLDSACK:           Thank you v ery mucn,          Mr.    Higgin=.

                                          J U S T I C E TAYLOR:
                                        lord                    T hank you.                        I gather that you
                                have problems of your own, Mr. Higgins.                             Thank you very
                                muc h for coming.

                                        Mr. P H I L L I P S :        Mr.   Eason please.

                                          warrTPFTlS:  Sir, if it assists, I can comply witn
                                 your request.  (Document handed to Lord Justice Taylor).

                                        LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:  T h a n k you very much.  It mignt
                                 be helDful for e v e r y b o d y to have copies;      I ao not know.
                                 We c a n get it copied, if you like. Tnank you.

                                                      PAUL ANTHONY JAMES E A S O N, Called
                                                           Examined        by Mr.   P H I LLIPS:

                                  Paul Anth o n y James Eason,                is that rignt?             A. Yes.
                          Q.
                                  YOU   a r e a S t a t i o n Officer a t           Lon,ley Ambulance s t a t i o n
                          Q.      in S h e f f i e l d ?      A.    Yes,._sj.r-

                                   & - -,on n a v e been a liaison officer with Sheffield Wednesday
                                   a?ong          « . Higgins, nave you?   A. That's correct.

                                                                                                                       i
H a r c h a m Ltd
                                                                           64

                                                                                          P.A.J.   EASOH



                                                                   do a n v thing a b o u t h im? - A. When we got
    0. W e r e vou able                                          >-c      _                                         Leal'
                                                                          ' 1                 ind
         b a c k to                                                               s p l i n t e r e d his leg a n d W s e l f
         a   n   d   ^   S   t   a   t   i   o   n       O f f i c e r H igg i n s t r i e d to assess the situation.

                         unn cone to then w h e n you w e n t back the
    Q. W h a t viet. did you cone .o                 ^      ha(J started to

B         f C° " L       ? h e - e w e r e far m o r e people s p i l l i n g on to the
          o t « h • i h « e ‘vas a lot m o r e noise and people w h o were
          i n j S ^ d S e r e starting to c ome on to the pitch.

                                                      and                       wr.o
    Q ' S?,r-‘i d lS t e S d i n g lto the m as quic k l y as they couii? - A.
        , 5 t f \ - 0 0 ene d sir w a s S t a t i o n Offi c e r Higg i n s anc m / s e U
        „iiat n a „ .          n a t t e r and it was deci d e d he w o u l d return
        ? o S thISL i b u l a n c e Uand then s t a r t pre p a r i n g the gynnasiu;-
        a ? e a w h i l e I stayed up the f i e ld in an a s s essment-------
        situation.          Tha t then r e l e a s e d              and
        t o ^ e a l ^ i t h c asualties as they found then

               ^ „ „ ‘H n a into e f f e c t the plan you already had to
     Q * use the g y m n a s i u m as a c l e a r i n g station, a casualty
             s tation? - A. Yes.

     q       A n d to leave it to Mr.                                           Higgins   to deal w i t h Control?      -
             A. T hat is right sir.

     o. H e r e you able «                                             report

                 c a t i o ^ a f t e r that that X h a d w i t h M r. Higgins w a s^by
                                                                                  working
                 SS^ItieSts'Ind                                         I was d o i n g asse s s m e n t and running
                 the information.

                 «             i-hin? vou w o u l d h a v e b e e n a s s i s t e d b y having a
                 Sire?t               w i?S e ach o t h e r in the ground? - A             It is
                 direc                         d i f f i c u l t to say.      You asked e a r n e r
                 p o s s i b l e bU u              . q u i t e possible that ma y have
                 f ° U t o"a S s i s t ^ c e but iq S i “ experience in the past
                 where it has not bea n b e c a u s e of thenoise around.

         o  m o w - think you left Mr. Higg i n s to deal w i t h the situation.
         Q‘ n      i o n come to the v i e w that this was a m a j o r inciaenu
              I ' J Z l stage? - A. A t that time I c o n s i d e r e d we were
            d evel o p i n g a serious incident, not a m a j o r incident.

         q   . W h a t did you propose to do about that?- A.                                               In w h a t way
                     sir?
                                                                 j •j von n r o n o s e to take w h e n you came to that
         Q   '       cone            l   u   s   i   o   n   ?    -     W hat? t h a t w e h a d a serious incident?

                                                 *                      a 1 read_v_ deci d e d that we w e r e building
         °*          upS to"a serious                                  incident.      T h e idea w o u l d be that Higgins


                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                1   )
                                                    65

                                                                P.A.J. EA30K



              . * __h a c i.to the vehicle;               w o u l d radio for assistance
        w o u l a go baCi' he did; w o u l d              then prepare the gymnasium
        whic.i i                    c a s u a l t i e s and injured and people
        h e t ^ n g casualties a n d injured w o u l d be f u nnelled towards
         t h e g y m n a s i u n area, w h i c h is w h a t happened.

                                4-    cface thin!: to yourself:   "Now this is a
Q. D i d you                   at any stage t         ,   sonethl    about thst..?
        ^   “V ^ v    Considered the incident in terns of a major
        ” nriden° as the bodies star t e d coning on to the pitea
        aSd f sa\v n u l u p l e r e s uscitations taking place.

„                 »ort o-' tine w o u l d that be.             C a n you help us? - A.       I
         be l i e v e ' i t w o u l d be s o m e t h i n g round a b o u t quarter-past,
         16-minutes-past-3.
                       j i-                       fhp ■hi’ie w h e n the St. John's Ambula^^-e
Q        T hat w o u l d be                                           think the St. J o h n ’s
         first wen*.                               nitch a little earlier than that sir.
         Ambulance was on                      ~ae pitcn a

         v             -        in’' w e n t to deal w i t h a small boy? - A. My attention
Q. was drawn to the fact that there was a small boy laid on
             the pitch sir,                yes.
                                 t   4-’
                                       nini'o v e r by the player's tunnel, wasn't it?
 Q . This ' ^ s                        1qo£ at the player's tunnel, come inside into
             t h e ' field,          round a bout there,       it w o u l c be round
             that area.
        • r   nn1' frhe-e was a do c t o r w o r k i n g w i t h that boy? A. A
          gentleman* w h o c l a i m e d to be a doctor was resuscitating m m ,
             yes.

    q   . you w ent               to   ^       n j ^ ave db e e n ’dragged by a fan and informed

             tx&SpMrz&rs: sums sra*
              o p i n i o n t h e r e was a chance for the child and could I get
              an ambulance to him straight away.

    o. He kno w that a m b u l a n c e m a n F l a c k arrived o n the pitch at
              about this time? - A. Yes.

                                     in rpsaonse to a request from your or just a
        Q-    fcas '.nau                   P                   fche are_ of ttB rsaip
              ^ w a s ' a w a r e of ciming into contact with Flack.                   I «ouXa
              say t;  :hat was a coincidence sir.

                                , e«nf hin to fetch this little boy, did you? - A.
               r               1 pSinted'out where the child was roughly situatec.
               1                    ■=+■ rrround level you could not see anything,
               bUt                     tv! l i t o u t o l the vehicle we had originally
               u   s   e   d   as a'control vehicle and I ran with Flack to where

                the child was.

                                                                                                 •* t.

                                                                                                 1 ••
                           QUESTION                  TEN


Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the terr.poray mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn’t think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

W hy only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.



OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

 Please see pages 157 - 159, Volume 2



 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

 296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
 response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
 attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
 did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
 He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
 on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
 equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
 of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
 whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
 The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
  overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYM AS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
                                                                         P. HIGGINS


         is c o r r e c t ,   sir.   We tried to m a i n t a i n 10 outs i d e the ground.

         In p r a ctice they reversed in. c o llected their patients and
Q.
         t hen came out forwards? - A. That is correct.

         Did that in pract i c e cause any a p p r e c i a b l e delay? - A. I don't
Q.
         think so.  It went rather s m o o t h l y once the o p eration got
         underway.
         T think the arrangement as per the plan was that initial
Q.
         casualties would be taken to the Northern General? - A. That
         is correct.

Q. With the Hallamshire as the reserve? - A. Yes.
         A S ain       on the d a y did that part of the plan appear to work
Q.
         s m o o t h l y ? - A. As far as I could see it did, yes, sir.

         And also the plan to use the Herries Road bus station as the
Q.
         holding point for ambulances, again many were there within a
         short period? - A. Yes, sir.

          In fact, possi b l y surplus to r e q u i r e m e n t s ? - A. We had too
Q.
          many i n ’the later stages, yes, sir.

       Once Mr Hopkins had taken over from you at the ambulance did
 Q
     ’ vou divert your attention to the gymnasium? - A. It was
       b e t w e e n the g y m n a s i u m area and the a m b u l a n c e loading area. I
       was trying to assess patients, priority to m o v e them, sir.

       t «s it r isht again at the t ime you d e c l a r e d at m ajor incident
 Q
     ' you had visited the g y m n a s i u m at that stage? - A. Yes, sir.

 q     It was the n being used as a d i n i n g room, but you made the
     ’ request that that          be cleared away, and that was done
       imm e d i a t e l y ? - A. That is correct, sir.

 Q          Mr     Higgins, you then spent the rest of                the day taking   a
           leading role in e n s u r i n g that the c a sualties and fatalities
           w e r e then a t t ended to and m o v e d from w here they were to where
           the y had to be taken? - A. Yes, sir.

                               r-poc;c--Examined bv MR. G I B S O N - W A T T :

     n      Mr     HiEHins          w he n you w e r e asking to be able to attend the
            S m i - F i n a l s ' y o u told us that the reason or ex c u s e given to yc
            was that the ticket a l l o c a t i o n was a matter for the Football
            Association and not the club?                  - A. That is correct, sir.

     q      you have confirmed, I think, you did not suggest to the club
            that they should take up the problem with the Football
            A ss o c i a t i o n ? - A. I d i d n ’t press it, sir.

     q       You did not p r e s s ' it. - and-so far as you are a ware no-one in
             S YMAS took up the problem direct with the Football
             A s s o c iation? - A. Not that I am aware, sir.
                                                                                     49


                                                                                                              P.    HIGGINS


n           whan                  in          fact,                   you    did     c o me    back      at a b o ut       quarter        past,     you
“ • found there were some ve hi cles and partic ul ar ly can you
    re member whether there was anyt hing other than a Police
                vehicle                   there?                        A.         I can 't,          sir.

n               V         definitely                                  saw    Police        v e h i c l e s but you c a n n o t r e m e m b e r
Q.              You       definitely                                                             7        .   T fppl th ere was a
                h?e
                  r e d ^ i n i - b u s W s o r t a o yf °thing but                                       l'couldn't              specifically

                say .
                _ .                    •_             fn          reassure            o the rs,       Mr.      Higg in s,         your   understandinc
Q’                h h P l i e f i s t h a t t h e a r r a n g e m e n t t h a t y o u in f a c t s e n s i b l y
                and belief 1                d id nQt l e a d to any 0 f the a m b u l a n c e s
                 a c t u a l l y b e i n g d e l a y e d in c o m i n g in and out of the gr o u n d ?
                           t rinn't th ink it s t o p p e d the m o v e m e n t of p a t i e n t s
                  ' n     sir       x t h i n k it w e n t a s s m o o t h l y u s i n g t h e f i r s t
                 en trance as * i t w o u l d h a v e d o n e u s i n g t h e i n / o u t m e t h o d .

                                                                  Cross-examined                by MR.          WOODWARD:

    n            Mr   Hia ai n s, you had t r o u b l e wit h your radio that day
                 on* a number of occasions, is that correct?             A.   Yes, sir.


    »• “                                                Which
       ?ame and went?    A.    It was      difficult towards the                                  m   o r e

       Le ppings Lane area whe re the crowds were, sir.
                    .                 i                           unu       have      trouble         with      your      communication,               did
    Q       -           ou    u   n   d   e   r   s   t   a   n   d    also that other of your fellow Of ficers did?
                    A.            I understand                               so,      sir,     yes.

                                                              _             aware         in   fact     of there           having        been    any
        Q ‘ Hf a u l t 6 in                           yo ur ra d i o               equipment?                 A.       I am       not,    sir,    no.

        n           Is it c o r r e c t that the p r o b l e m of the radio was not si m p l y
                     u n   w h a t was the p r o b l e m that you e x p e r i e n c e d ?        A.        I
                     Well, w h a t           C o n t r o l and I w a s n ' t r e c e i v i n g m e s s a g e s
                     hack                         As it turned out, most of my me ssages got through to
                     Control                      but I wasn't getting anything back.
                                            unur r a d i o a n d s o f a r a s y o u k n o w , a n d in
                        I ^ e T i g h t of what you have learned since, your mes sages were
                        getting through.         A.       As I understand, sir, yes.
                        n t                                            v n ur    problem        was       not       get t i n g   answers        from
         Q. But,- in fact, yo                                                    P                            was         ttlng them or whe ther
                        i t " w a s n o t b e i n g a b l ^ to h e a r t h e m i n t h e m e l e e d o w n a t
                        L e p p i n g s L an e, I c o u l d n ' t r e a l l y say, sir.
                    r-                     w n ij sav at P a r a g r a p h 41 of your s t a t e m e n t ,
                Q - " S t i l l ^ a v i n g p r o b l e m s c o m m u n i e a t i n g with C o n t r o l b e c a u s e
                    -Still h a v i n           r             ,    „      Do you S ee?        W hen you got
                         no” rep ly^6 what did you dj?                                                Did you repeat your message?
                         A.               I carried                         on   tr y i n g    to call,            sir,    yes.

                o       And I suppose it is' right you tried it in diffe re nt places
                            different positions.
                         a n d                       A.   1 hat is c o r r e c t                                                          .                  ^
                                                         P.   HIGGINS


You w ere in charge, until Mr. Hopkins arrived, of tne
g y m n a s i u m area, d e a l i n g w i t n c a s u a l t i e s . _ May I put to
y o u some c r i t i c i s m s that have been maae Dy aoct o r s ana
the press and ask you to c o m m e n t on them please?                        A. Yes,
sir.
Th e first one is that people were being put into ambulances
in anv order.   What do you say to that?          A. No, that's
not correct, sir.   I was a s s e s s i n g patients as t n e v came
through.   It was rather difficult, as they w ere coming
r a t h e r quickly.

Th e se c o n d s u g g e s t i o n is that it required a do c t o r who was
a soe c t a t o r in tne c r o w d to assume control ana m a * e        sure
tnat those still a live an d most seriously injurea go: o^i
ro nosoital first.                What do you say a b o u t tnat?   A. well,
we h a d ' t r a n s p o r t e d a number of casualties be r o r e tnat
d o c t o r a r r i v e d on the scene, sir, and m a n y m o r e arter.

 T h e r e is also an a l l e g a t i o n t hat at least 30 people would
 H I              alive if t here had been a r apid response witn
 b a s i c m e d i c a l facilities.     W h a t do you say a bout that?
 A       It's d i f f i c u l t to say.    In my e x p e r i e n c e w i t h i n tne
 A m b u l a n c e Service, I don't think we could have saved many
 lives d o w n there, sir.

 W hy'is that, Mr. Higgins?         A.   The people that were
 c o m i n g out of the ground, w h e n the bodies started to
 come out ---

       LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:           You m e a n out from the pens?
 A    Out from the pens, yes, sir.                      They had b e e n there
 for a longer p e r i o d than y o u would n o r m a l l y ex p e c t to oe
 a ble to s u c c e s s f u l l y re s u s c i t a t e anyone.  By the colour
 of them, they were so cyanosed, they were the w o r s t cases
 I've ever seen in m y service, sir.

            Mr. KALLIPETIS:       Lastly, Hr. Higgins, can you nelp
  us w i t h * s o m e of the e q u i p m e n t that has been variously
  d e s c r i b e d here, an d I t h i n k inaccurately d e s c n o e a in
  t e r m s of its function?            C o u l d you just look at ana snow
  his Lordsnio what a Brooks airway Iooks luce, please.
  You cannot tell us wha t a Brooks airway looks like,
  beca u s e we have no t got one I But we have got some rr.outn-
  pieces here, I think.

       * LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:        Perhaps in the course of tne
   day we m i g h t see one.

          i-ir. KALLIPETIS:         We ca n arrange for one to be crought,
   sir.
        LORD JUST I C E TAYLOR:     And perhaps also it would be
   helpful to me, Mr. Kaltirpetis, if on one sheet or paper
   you could put the hie r a r c h y of your orricers.

           Mr.   KALLIPKTIS:        Cer t a i n l y we will do that,        sir.
                                                                                        ’i
♦




                            QUESTION                  SEVEN


    Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
    down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
    the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
    emergency evacuation?


    Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
    Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
    Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
    of the perimeter gates.

    Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
    discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
    gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
    The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
    include the perimeter gates.

    Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
    used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
    area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
    was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
    experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
    could have helped, they would have used it.

    Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
    but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
    - may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
    localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
    perimeter gate when considering escape He agreed that it was within his knowledge
    that the width of the perimeter gates, rightly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
    deliberate decision of the certifying authority and they decided that the gates should
    be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
    decision to leave the gates.

    Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
    first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
    would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
    been at ground very very quickly.

    Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson’s statement "that anyone who had
    considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
    realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
    point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
    lot of persuasion about that".

     W hen Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
     Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
     equipment.
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. W hen used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kit' on SYM AS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NO T a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement'. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104 -1 3 7 , Volume 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits.             They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, w est stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
 If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
 radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
 that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
 minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
 available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

 264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
 standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
 spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
 number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was, that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.



Cutting E quipm ent

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. tO pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without success
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. W hen they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report


G ates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
 leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to do so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
 I would still hope that gates would be left fully open w h erever those in com m and
 feel this can safely be done. However, I recom m end th at w hether they be fully
 open, partially open o r closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
 the pen o r enclosure is occupied.         They should thus be easily available for
 emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.
Cutting Equipm ent

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recom m end that the equipm ent should be m aintained in case of some
unforeseen em ergency.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 17 and 21

17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fencing to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
W hoever is to use it should be trained to do so. W hether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.
                                                              D.G.   DUCI\EI??IZLD



    q   . An c he did take charge,           did he not? - A. Yes,           on the pitch

    Q.       An d he        began tc achieve a semblance of order w i t h a chain
             of Officers gett i n g the bodies out of the pens? - A. But
             there is a series of events before that in that as socr.
             as 1 realised the severity of the situation I ashed for
             a s s i s t a n c e and a fleet of ambulances and implemented the
             M a j o r I n c ident Plan and we have jumped to that particular
B            scenario.

    rs       T am sorry, I thought you had already dealt w i t h that? - A
             T h a t point has not been made clear.

    r,       3ut that of course is to get help from                          outside? - A. Yes,
             b u t as    soon as I r e a lised the severity of the situation,
             which~\;as ver y promptly, and the Superintendents who were
             on the ground there a s s e s s e d it very quickly and they had
             ro c e i a v w h a t s o e v e r c o m m u n i c a t i n g to me wnat m e situation,
             was and wnat action '.ve snould L.a.-.e.

             I follow that, but did it not occur to you that unless
             vou got people o ut of those pens more might be injured?
             - A . Yes.
D
             rf this was crushing, w h i c h is by now wha t you realised,
             the slower the process c-f emptying the pens, the more li:
                is that m e r e " p e o p l e are going to be hurt? - A. Yes.

                     :-grefor>2 it is not enougn., or course             is essential
             anc one :ie thin- vcu c   :c  is   get   the ambulances  in  from outside
             b u t vcu have got to take steps ir.sice? - A. can i ma.es t.'.<
             n0 ,>‘ r, I have to accept the ground as it is and I am no;
             ^ a ’<Vng anv excuses for the Police Officers in the tunnel,
             but we the Police O f f icers anci tne emergency services
                                                                                I*
             *-c '■;ov\’: wit h i n the r rame./or;-". in that grour.c and tne re
              diff icui t i e s .

        O.           LORD JUSTICE. TAYLOR:             Did you send for anything to
              cut the- f r amework av/ay? - A. Yes-' sir, wire c u t t e r s , bolt
              cutters' and also the Fire Service to attend.              /;e had to
              wo^k w i t h i n those d i f f i c u l t areas and Officers were trying
              their'best u n d e r very d i f f i c u l t circumstances to effect a
              rescue.

                         Mil. COLLIMS:        I am not intending or implying the
        0.
              slicrh-test c r i t i c i s m of individual Officers when I tall;
              about "chaotic situation".                    Of course they were doing thei
              best.        U h a t I am s u g g e s t i n g is their best was less than th
              m o s ^ 'effective if they were not under proper command ar.d
              T f ^ t ’-'ey ’./ere no t criven proper directions as to how they
              should do their work.                 Tha t is wha t I am suggesting?
                        Can I make the point, under normal circumstances
              0 -**si c e r‘s w o u l d respond to command and the Superintendents
              -/ho work for me are e x c e l l e n t Officers,           l.'hat you cannot
H             compare is v/hat vou call "normal c i r c u m s t a n c e s ” .
                                                     D.G.   DwCKENFXELD




Well that is v/hat I am asking        you.    -   A. Well    I have
never h eard of that.

Who called the Fire Brigade?                 A. I recall a request
for bole c r o p p e r s or w i r e cu tters and following on from
that I u n d e r s t a n d the Fire Brigade attended, but as to who
made the calls, and from what Control Room, I don't <now.

You di d n ' t yo urself s p e c i f i c a l l y ask for the Fire Brigade?
   A. Mo.      I was in the s i tuation then by implementing a
major incident plan and others in support were ....

So you c a n 1c help us as to the genesis of the belief of a
Police Offi c e r that there had been the breaking down of a
gace by the fans? -      A. No sir.

      y,R. HYTMSR:      Thank you Mr.     Duckenfield.

      LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR:    Mr. Jackson?

                  Cross-examined     by MR.   JACKSON:

S u p e r i n t e n d e n t ma y I m ake very clear that I don't
d i f f e r e n t i a t e between you, your colleagues, your junior
Officers, your C o n s t ables, or the stewards.            Together,
collec t i v e l y , do y o u accept as a body of people who are
responsible for the safety of the people who go to
football match e s ? -              A. Yes sir.

May I take the bull by the horns?   Am I right in saying
that the man in charge thought there was a great deal of
si milarity betwen 24,000 Liverpool supporters anxious to
beat Notts Forest again, and the people queueing for
 'Bambi' at the local Odeon?  -  A. Queues, sir, are queues.

You mean yes there is a similarity?         May I suggest that
you d on't mean that, it has never been the case and it is
c o m p l e t e l y different. - A . Why should a crowd of
football s u pporters wish to behave d ifferently to a crowd
of cinem a - g o e r s ?

Chief S u perintendent, regrettably I can't answer that
question, but I can say they do and everybody knows they
do, and to suggest that you didn'c ....    -  A. I am not
suggesting that sir.

 May I t h erefore move on.       W o u l d you take please two photo-
 graohs and c o m p a r e them.   The first is in composite aloum
 number 1 at MWL10/20A.         It may well be you don't need to
 be referred to the docu ments, but you will accept will you
 not that the duties of the three serials immediately
 outside was to take part in the forming of orderly queues.
                                                     D.   G.   DUCKENFIEID


exit by the tun nel?               A.        No, what I am su gges ting is
this - I am being helpful, I think - that question wants
a d d r e s s i n g to the a u t h o r i t i e s other than myself.

Bec au se it is        quite clear, is it not, even with hindsight,
or maybe only          with hindsight, that the attempts to
rescue peo ple         by means of the perime te r gate were close
to p a t h e t i c ?    A.   There are dif ficul ties as soci at ed with
the per im e t e r     gates becaus e of the width and the fencing.

Chi ef S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , that is a n i c e p o l i t e a n s w e r .
Of course there were di ffic ul ties.                  My word was " p a t h e t i c ” .
A     I wou ld not cho ose that word.                  I would say that the
ground was there as it was with the fence and gates and we
tried to rescu e people as best we could.
Chi ef Sup eri n t e n d e n t , I am not sug gesti ng for the moment
that O ff icers did not do more than anyone could possibly
expect then to do.              What I am suggest ing is the ground
that they had to do it on had a gate which was pa thetic
from a point of view of rescuing, people crushed against
the per im e t e r fence.          A.   The gate was a gate that had
been a c c e p t e d by all the au tho rit ies concerned.

And that ma kes it right?
      LORD JUS TIC E TAYLOR: Well, I do not think it is
 likely to be in the future, so I do not think you need
 to pur su e that.
         MR. JACKSON:         I am obliged to you, sir.

 Perhaps on the very same point, did you ever have any
 pro blems with the p o s i t i o n i n g of the emergency services?
 A.    In what respect, sir?
 Would you turn to Tab 15, a memo on emergency evacuation
 procedure.   A. Y e s , s i r .
 Dated August, 1988.                   Third paragraph:     "A Senior
 A m b u l a n c e O f f i c e r alrea dy attends all home matches at
 the She ffiel d W e d n esda y ground and is allocated compli me nt ar y
 tickets for the South Stand.                    He is in direct radio contact
 with Amb ul a n c e Patrol ," etc.               Last paragraph:     "It
 was co n s i d e r e d that this Amb ul a n c e Officer would be better
 based in the North Stand so he could get to the gy mnasiu m
 without problems.                   However, the Senior Ambulance Officer
 who att en ds is off-du ty and the Sheffield Wednesday
  Football Club only wish to allocate the com plim enta ry
  tickets to the A m b u l a n c e Ser v i c e for use in the South
  Stand so that the Club Physio, Alan Smith, can signal
  straight away to the A m b u l a n c e Uff ic er if an ambulance
  is requir ed for a Wed nesda y player."                 It does seem that
  the p r i o riti es are a little bit askew, are they not, Chief
  Superintendent?                 A.     I have got to confess, sir, it is
  the first time I have seen that report.
                                                    107
                                                                    D.G. DUCKENr'ICLD



           Do v o u think the p o s s i b i l i t y m a y be that w h e n you w ere
  2-       lookina o ver the W e s t terr a c e you we.e no. really J.in. -

            ab° ut          ^ o ^ ^ g ^ g ^ y j _ ° r theU c rowd and d i f f i culties in the
            ^ o w d n a s T r e s u l t of the gates o p e n i n g and fro. where I v/as
            T d i d not a p p r e c i a t e there was a density.

B D<           But w ere you looking s p e c i f i c a l l y to see w h e t h e r or net
                * s      was taking place? - A. If you^ s a y " c r u s u m g
               specifically, no, I was looking ror i n c i c a t . c n s .

               T-' VCU row look e v e r the page in those p hotographs which is
      Q.       I! £ V r u « - e s - o a s t - 3 , that is a tine I think w h e n you „grec
               that vou R e a l i s e d there was serious problems ana iz               ™ _
               longer a p i t c h invasion? - A. Excuse me o --, a r- ^                    ...

               It is ??.2/1 and that is a c t u a l l y at 4 - n i n u t e s - p a s t - 3 .    Get
      o.
                that?      - A. Yes.

                t   think vou will accept, because it has been drawn to
      Q.        a t t e n t i o n a l r e a d y by Mr. Collins, people lying on -he g-o-...
                and so o n and so forth? - A. Yes sir.

D                      h £ ~ time it m u s t have been a p p a r e n t to you that people
      Q.        w e r e trying to get ou t of that pen? - A. Yes sir.

                And they w e r e having d i f f i c u l t y in doing so by getting
      Q.
                through the gate? - A. Yes sir.

           - a-, r n - n e c e s s a r i l y sugge s t i n g this w ould be the solution,
       Q.
         ' but' o n e " o f the p o s s i b i l i t i e s that w o u l d arise w o u l c oe to
           cut some of the fence down? - A. Yes s n .

                              w o u l d be a p r e t t y obvious   thought that w o u l d go througn
       Q-
                    a n y b o d y ' s mind, isn't it? - A.         Yes sir.

                    Di d it go through y our m i n d ? - A. Not M e d i a t e l y        sir.
       Q•
                    DO vou V n o w how long it took b e f o r e anybody asked ror tne
       Q.           - ire ~ricade to cone w i t h their cutting equipment
                    « £ ? p h o t o g r a p h was taken? - A. I d on't sir.

                    Ten minutes.         Does    that strike you as a very long time? -
           O-
                    A. Yes sir.
                    w el l are you saying then even though you knew there was
           Q        c r u s h i n c un a g a i n s t th e front a n d you knew unere w «s
                    5 - f i r v i t ^ i n p^ o o l e g e t t i n g out, it never crossea your
                               -n cet s o m e b o d y to b r i n g some cutters to release tne
                    m^nc -          .         ^    there was a r e q u e s t for cutters very
                    people.              •      ^ n 0 m e n t the call v/as put out for other
                     e a r l y ;? : : e a n d a r e q u e s t was m a d e then for cutters and i
                     believe that b e c a u s e non e were readily available from the
                     P o l i c e S e r v i c e the Fir e B r i g a d e w e r e callec.

  H
                                                                                                      10 I

I*H
                                       108             D .G . DU C K S M F ^ E L D



m h a . iq not the w a y you told us a b o u t it before, nor is it
      t is no-   *     ^  ars in vou r statement.     You seem to oe
    1 v n u r " s a t e m e n t ? n the same b r e a t h talking about the calling
^ ^                   B r I S a d i and als o the requ e s t for cutters.               ;:*en
°-                    -pi fine us t hat you first heard somebody as.ung
        cutters?"- A               I = a n ' t s p e c i f i c a l l y say  W h e n I realised
                   p 'd i s a s t e r s i t u a t i o n I gave instructions as -o
cnere wa»                  ices tQ be   can ed             and i mplemented and I gave
                   instructions.              The c o m m e n t in ay sta t e m e n t is tnae
t r i i i e d ^ o r a s s i s t a n c e generally.                 I gave a lisc       i^'---
 t 1-ons and f w a s aware at that time in that mo m e n t o_ crisis
 that s o m e b o d y w a n t e d some w i r e cutters.

-n-i*- s u p e r i n t e n d e n t Duckenfield, w h a t I am suggesting zc
; ^ ; s        t s o m e b o d y in you r sit u a t i o n rac«a vi zr. ?ec.,le
^    bSir/g able to es c a p e from the front or
   7 ,.      _         t-Sp ^c o     s o u e o o d v w o u l c uiin;. ■ .<ei_ —- *-e
sorae"'cutters", n o t ' g e n e r a l assistance, s p e c i fically cutters?-A.
 And that r e q u e s t was made.

 ... • -     ae v i n c you a b o u t then is this:       at 1 4 -minutes-past.-:.
  somebody a c t u a l l y s u m m o n e d the Fire Brigade? - A. Yes sir.

 As>inc for c u t t i n g equipment.                Can you help us            as to h o ^
           he-'ore         that you r e a l i s e d that tne Police            nac ,o,
 c u t t i r r ' e c u i o n e n t ? - A-         the i nformation I           nave: go - .o
 £ £ “ t this" moment, sir, I c a n n o t give you an                          «nsue..

  can -ou rGmer.be-? - A. Mo sir, I c a n ’t.          There u u s t b e                a
  l e s s U e s o m e w h e r e but I have not got tno -.nroraati^..

  - h e - e did vou e:;pect the Police to be having the cutting
  ‘                    a      I have a r e c o l l e c t i o n that someone as.<ea
  l o r ^ u t t i n g e q u i p m e n t fro m the Po l i c e garage at Claywr.ee Is
   jane.
  —  s a m e s s a g e sent to c l a t h e e Is Lane? -    Yes. ..i am s o n y ,
        .  v!
  Clay.vheels jjo.ne is i-c n e a r b y and it is a Police transpo.r
  garage.
                 -                m i i - r- t.-i hh the facilities w hich can be o^rered
   l ^ t h J ^ i r e ^ r i g a d e on their em e r g e n c y tenders, are you?
   -" a . Yes sir.
   a  ' fv,0 ,. have on those tenders equipment, cola cutting
                 w h i c h can cut thro u g h w i t h o u t causing any ^ire
   o ? in urj to a n y b o d y in terms of d i r o c t i ^ r y , v « y t«i<=*
                              Are you aware or uhciw?           A. Ye>. sir,
   p ieces or met^i.                                            sir
   I k now they have got e q u i p m e n t .o cu- mcua. s_r.

      O - fipv c o u l d have gone through the stanchions witn o u -
      any p r o b l e m if that ias thought appropriate immediately.
      Did you kno w that? - A.               Ho sir.
                                  =inre of w h a t facilities the Fire Brigade
       c o u l d UoffeJ?   -" a     X '-s    not aware that they had got equ i p m e n t
       that could do that sir-                                                                 1 >j $
                                                        A.K. SEAMAI-I



E x h i b i t 4, pag e 27.   On to page 4 of the statement.
Ex h i b i t 5, page 307.      E x h i b i t 6 is not copied.        Can we
just look at it perhaps, E x h i b i t 6 in your bundle refers
to the a b o l i t i o n on r e c o n s t r u c t i o n of Local Government
and the nee d to e s t a b l i s h : a n d m a i n t a i n liaison and so
on.       It is a general note requiring the Fire Service to
have their usual input in a d v i s i n g and liaising with
the relevant Authorities. ~ A. Yes.

E x h i b i t 7 is a l s o n o t c o p i e d a n d is a l e t t e r f r o m the
C i t y of S h e f f i e l d to t h e F i r e S e r v i c e a n t i c i p a t i n g the
t r a n s f e r o f r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s u n d e r the L o c a l ^ G o v e r n m e n t
r e o r g a n i s a t i o n a n d s u g g e s t i n g a m e e t i n g Oj. the 13th Oi
March.          W e h a v e g o t the r e c o r d of t h a t m e e t i n g .

            E x h i b i t 3 is a gain not copied and is a memor a n d u m
from the C o u n t y from the C o u n t y Solicitor of South
Y o r k s h i r e to the Chief Fire O f f i c e r of the 5th   of M a r c h 193
referring to the a r r a n g m e n t s for a meeting and general
d i s c u s s i o n beca u s e of the i m p ending changeover.

            Exhi b i t 9, page 312.  Exhi b i t 10, page 3S1.
Letter'of        the 14th M a y 1987, Exhi b i t 11 is page 399.
E x h i b i t 12, 394.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                  I a m j us t wondering., Mr. C o l l i n s
 I a m n o t ' b e i n g o f f e n s i v e b u t i n s t e a c of p l a y i n g b i n g o if
 w e g o t a l i s t w e c o u l d ....

       MR. C O L L U I S : I can give you a list. I will give
 you a list w h i c h you will have by tomorrow morning.

 Ma y I go to page 10.        Mr. Seaman, you refer at                              the bottom
 of page 10 to a m e e t i n g of the Officer Working                               Party on
 the 12th of F e b r u a r y to discuss Mr. Eastwood's                              report
 and to c o n s i d e r the views w h i c h will be put to                          the Club.

            Nov/ that m e e t i n g or m i n u t e s of that meeting,
 Exhibit       17, a r e r e f e r r e d to at p a g e 57 of o u r b un d l e .

            T h e n over the pag e you say:

             " W i t h r e g a r d to the W e s t T e r r a c e y o u c o n s i d e r
             d u e to the l a c k of d e p t h of the t e r r a c e the o i f e z                   to
             reduce to         7, 200 and so on cill w o u l d be v/ell ....

  No w you s p e c ifi cally refer to "total movement laterally
  throu g h o u t the terrace and the three entrance/exits in
  the terrace being well s i t u a t e d and the Wes t Stand
  pr oviding a m i n i m u m of fire risk.  You go on:

             "The e x i s t i n g gates in the perimeter fence were
             di s c o u n t e d for m eans of escape purposes."
                                            141

                                                          A.K.   SEAMAN


        A. T h a t is c o r r e c t sir,     yes.

O. Was this vou at the time, Mr. Seaman, or someone else
   a c t u a l l y at the meeting.         I t hink it was someone else,
   w a s n ' t it.    You w e r e n 11-. th^re yourself.   But tne three
   e-its that are r e f e r r e d to; those presu m a b l y are the
   three tunnels, two at the ends of the Stands and one in
   the middle.         Is that right? - A. T h a t is rignt sir, yes,
            the three tunnels.

0           A n d those w e r e looked upon, w e r e they, as the natural
            means of escape if there were a fire? - A. Yes.

O           It b e i n g assumed that there was very u n l ikely to be a
            fire in the Stand itself? - A. T h a t is right sir, yes.

0           Of course I suopose it v/as p o s s i b l e that the tunnels
            m i o h t be b l o c k e d off or one or more of tnem m i g n t be
            b l o c k e d off because of fire or p o s s i b l y a oorao scare or
            so m e t h i n g like that? - A. We thou g h t it was very unlikely
            that we w o u l d lose one bu t anyth i n g is possib.e.

o            v es but doing the b e s t you c ould you considered, did
            you! that ha v i n g regard to the lack of any constraints
            on the terraces themselves, all should be well m              i_ne
            sense that it m e t the r e a s o n a b l e requirements? - A. Yes


 0. D i d you kno w of the w i d t h of the p e rimeter gates? - A.
    I c a n ' t say s o e c i f i c a l l y . I am not aware tnat anyboc^
    took p a r t i c u l a r regard of the w i d t h of the cates at tnau
             time.

    0        Was that b e c a u s e it really was not contemplated tnat the
             p e r i m e t e r fence w o u l d form any sort of means o, e g r e s s _
             in case of fire? - A. Yes.               We o n l y saw a minor need ror
             the use of the gates.

    Q.        O n l y a m i n o r need       for the use           of the gates? - A.Yes.

    0        A n d it was on that basis that you wer e prepared                    to approve
             the c a p acity of 7,200? - A. Yes sir.

    n        Can I go on please          to page    14.     You refer there to the
             Safety    C e r t i f i c a t e and then in the nidale you refer in
              1930   to a m e m o r a n d u m from the Council stating:

                      " D e s p i t e th e f a c t t h a t the C e r t i f i c a t e ha d
                      b e e n i s s u e d as r e c e n t as the 21st of D ec e m b e r ,
                      it v/as f e l t t h a t the S h e f f i e l d D i s t r i c t
                      O f f i c e r ...    to r e v i e w the s i t u a t i o n due
                      to the p e n d i n g F.A. C u p s e m i - f i n a l

              No w so these are not in            fact or     this aspect is not covered
              in our bundle?        - A. No.

        q   . I am not sure that it is of vital                  relevance and I can

                                                                                            1 0
                                          53
                                                               A.   K.   SEAMAN


        half way down the radial fence is a dis advantag e?
        A.   I think it w o u l d be better to have it at the rear.

        You have got one at the re£LT. . A.    Again, I think you
        have got to look at the individ ual circumstances .    The
        terrace itsel f was re lativ ely shallow;  it was not
        a deep t e r r a c e .
        May I move on to another mat te r?  In your evidence yesterday
        you spoke of - in answer to Mr. Collins - the terraces
        hav in g access via three tunnels. A.   Yes.

3. That is not right, is it?     A.                   Well, I agreed with Mr.
   Collins' descript ion , in fact.
3 Very well.     The perime te r gates that you were asked about.
  Is this the situation, that the Fire Service did not     regard
  the per imet er gates as having any emergency egress purpose?
  A.    Not other than a loc alise d --
Q       V e r y l o c a l , to l et s o m e o n e out w h o m i g h t be by the gate.
         A.      Well, a fight inthe crowd, for example.

Q       A fight in the crowd?           A.   Well, that would be a crowd
         distur banc e, would it not?        People could be below that
         and in those c i r c u mst ances might need to use the gate to
         evacuate.     The Police could also need to be able to get
         access to get i n .
Q        But was the Fire Service thi nking this, that the perimeter
         gates really should be dis co unt ed as means of emergency
         earess7     A.   We didn't count them as means --     For the
         eva cuati on time which was calculat ed, they were not included.

         You were aware that Dr. Ea stwood attached some importance
         to the per imet er gates as a means of egress, were you not?
         Would you have a look, please, I think it is in your bundle
         at page 54.     Sir, it is in the core bundle at 240.    A
         letter from Dr. Eastw oo d dated 8th Hay, 1985.    You see
         that letter, the last two sentence s?    A.   Yes.

    Q. "It is our view that in the event of emergency spectato rs
       can be ev acuat ed quickly enough by the gates to go on to
       the pitch and by the normal exit gates at the rear."        You
       saw the order in which Mr. Eastwood put those .matters.
       Did the Fire Service ever contradi ct that and say, "No, no,
       it was wrong;     the gates on to the pitch should not be
       taken into account"?      A.   Can I say that what that letter
       was re ferring to was the req ui rem en t for the second gate
       at the bottom of the radial fence.        He was not complaining
       about the one that we wanted at the top of the radial fence.

    Q     Mr. Seaman, please, we may be at cross-purpose s but would
          you j u s t look at the s e n t e ^ e , "It is our view that in the
          event of emergency specta to rs can be evacuated quickly
          enough by the gates on to the pitch and by the normal exit
          gates to the rear." ' He is there giving a reason for not
                                            54

                                                                  A.   K . SEAMAN


                having other radial gates, is he not?        A.    11 can be
                int erpre ted in that way.
        Q       Do you u n d e r s t a n d it to mean anything else? A. I don't
                know why the Police s pe cific ally requested the addition al
                gate.
        Q       It is Mr. E a s t wood 's observation, do you see?     Mr. Ea stwood
B               there seems      to be attaching some sig nifi canc e     and value to th
                eva cuati on of spect ato rs in em ergenc y through       the perimeter
                qates.     A.       I don't think we ever said that       the gate could
                not be used      but for a small lo calise d emergency, not a mass
                evac uation to the pitch.
        Q. But that wou ld be in signif icant in terms of emergency
           evacuati on, would it not?     A.   Yes.

        Q       The Fire Ser vice were asked, I think, to check by the South
                Yorkshir e Count yd Council on the working of the radial
                qates and I think indicated, in --         Sir, I have gone back
                in time to 1981.     It is doc ument 44 in your bundle, if
                that per ha ps helps us.    it follows a letter of 23rd December
                1981 and is dealt w i t h in your statemen t at page 19, and
                this is on the radial fence question.          Had the Fire Service
D               actually che ck ed upon the workin g of the radial fences,
                do you know, in order to a n s w e r that question?    A.   I
                could not be specific.      I think what it probably refers
                to was the reports that they were working well that came
                 from the Police.
            Q    I ap ologis e for coming to that point out of order, but
                 may I go back to the perimeter gates?     A.   Yes.
            Q    As a means of access and egress and for purposes of emergency
                 eqress, the Off icer Working Party did pay regard to those
                 qates, did it not?    A.   They certainly asked for those
                 qates.    When the pens were created there was a requirement
                 for a *gate in a pen that would not otherwise have had one.

            Q    Is it not rather to overstat e the Fire Brigade's case to
                 say that they never regarded the perimeter gates as playing
                 a part in the evacu ati on proce ss? A.   What we have said
                 all along is that they were not counted for the evacuation
                 time.



                                                      /At Tab 62 in your ...




    H
                                                                                    l i I
                                                      55
                                                                     A.K.   SEAMAN



A   Q.    At Tab 62 in you r bundle, page 265 in the core bundle,
          there is a m e e ting of the 29th July 1985 attended by
                                    It talks a bout having pitch p e rimeter fences,
          p i t c h p e r i m e t e r gates for the purpose of both security
          and e m e r g e n c y egress purposes.       That is right, isn't it?
          - A.       Yes,   we    have   always      Said     fo r    localised emergencies.

    Q.    May    I m o v e to o n e o t h e r m a t t e r p l e a s e       a n d I n e e d y o u r help,
B         Mr.    Seaman.

                    In you r bundle, and I n eed to deal wit h it this way
          beca u s e the d o c uments are in a sequence there, in your
          bu n d l e at page 50 there is a letter from Dr. Eastwood,
          d a t e d the 9th April 1935? - A. Yes.

    Q.    He    is    there      preparing      a s ch e m e :
C
                      "We have p r e p a r e d the scheme shown on the
                      a t t a c h e d p rint of our drawing 6705/2."

          I think, Mr. S ea m a n , t h a t the d r a w i n g t h a t t h e n f o l l o w s
          is t h a t w h i c h is in t h e b u n d l e at 50? - A. Yes.


D   Q.    Nov/ t h a t d r a w i n g ha s      got   s o m e w r i t i n g o n it? - A.        Yes.

    Q.    It is not a scale drawing.      It has the various areas of
          the W e s t S tand and terraces labelled A, B, C,D and E and
          there are bits w h i c h have bee n put in in manuscript? - A.
          Yss.

    Q. Do you recognise that w r i t i n g ? - A. Yes.
E
    Q. W h o s eis it?            - A.   I believe         it is D i v i s i o n a l O f f i c e r
          Grimshaw's.

    Q. A n d on that drawing the only measurements that appear to
       be for gates of any d e s c r i p t i o n relate to gates in the
       radial fences?     T h a t is right, isn't it, between C and D
       and D and E? - A. Yes.
F
    Q. The drawing is then considered, if we follow your documen­
       tation through, at the m e e t i n g on the 18th April 1935?
          - A.       Right,      sir.

    Q. A n d the gates that are there referred to are at B.        Do
       you have that?     It was said in opening yesterday that the
       gates that one v/as c o n c e r n e d with .... Do you have the
G      letter of the 2nd M a y 1935 w h i c h is your document number 53.
       It has the p a r agraph E on the second page:

                      " C e r t a i n g a t e s to h a v e the m i n i m u m w i d t h s    an d
                      m e t r e s i n d i c a t e d on th e a t t a c h e d p la n . "

           A. Yes.                                ___

     Q.    Now       that   is   the p l a n   that, y o u h a v e ju st l o o k e d at,           i s n ' t it?


                                                                                                          1 J. -J
                                            58

                                                                     SEAMAN


Q.        But did       it have the e f f e c t that we can see - is that
          ricrnt?        A. Y e s , sir.

Q.        In fact, as far as                 is concerned, he, as you
          said, did not Droduce ansL.Minutes_ as                        had
          do ne - is th at' the posi€ron?     A.  Trie M i n u t e s D e d u c e d
          bv |              v;ere alwa ys very, verv prompt.         Sometimes
          there we re no Minutes at all wh e n                     took
          meetings.

0.        If we       look pl e a s e at 78, w o u l d you just have a look at
          that?         L o o k ” at 78.   That is a report made by, I think,
                                to Mr. Mackrell relating to an annual
          i n s p e c t i o n w h i c h had taken place on the 6th August?
          A.     Yes,      sir.

                     is a c t u a l l y ma k i n g the report to the Club
          on the 4th December,        1987?       A. Yes.

Q.         Man y mo n t h s       later?   A.    .Yes.

Q.        Well    into the next season?                  A.   Yes.

q         Can I ask you no w p l e a s e to go to page 11 in your
          statement?"           I just wan t to ask you a little bit more
          about the p e r i m e t e r gates.     You have ir.ade the poin>_
          auite c l e a r l v there that the existing gates were
          d i s c o u n t e d as a means of escape.   You have made that
          point ver y clearlv.          They were intended, as far as you
          wer e concerned, to deal w i t h a localised difficulty.
          Can you iust please look at the ol d green guide, if I
          can d e s c r i b e it in that way, and ask you to look at
          7.9?          A. Yes, sir.

 0.        The p o s i t i o n is there that there is a specific r e q u i r e ­
           ment, is t here not, to have such gates?         A. Yes, sir.

 0         This is 7.9, "Pitch per i m e t e r fence/wall:      This fence
           should be d e s i g n e d to k e e p spectators off the pitch
           but gates or other access points should be            provided
           for use in an emergency... ? A. Yes.

    0      Was that the eme r g e n c y to w h i c h you regarded those gates
           as b e i n g dir e c t e d ? A. Yes.

    Q      That k i n d of emergency that m i g h t arise in the v i c i n i t y
           or round a b o u t the gate?  A. Yes.

     0     And I t h i n k the p o s ition has already been made clear
           that at that time there was no specific r equirement as
            to how w ide those gates should be?        A. No, sir, uhere
            w a s n 1t .

            As far as the absence of exit signs at the perimeter
     Q'
            q ate is concerned, d i d ’Tou t h i n k it would be desirable
            to have an exit sign above the perimeter gate?         A. No,
            not at a l 1.                                                            1 i
                                              60
                                                          A.   K. SEAMAN


          So i f 1 , 2, 3, 4 and 5 an d so on were all evacuacea,
Q.
          w h i c h w a v w o u l d vou e x p e c t the people in 1 and 2 to
          m o v e ' w h e n they w e r e told to eva c u a t e ? A. To the corner
          exits of the terrace.

              W ould that then create s'^yacuum or an area at the racial
Q.
              gate?    A. Yes, it woulS.

              And    it is into that radial        gate that the people would         then
Q.
              go?     A.    Yes.

Q.        F rom pen        3?    A.    Yes.

O         Can I as k vou then a bout another matter               p l ease,^if vou
           will cro to paae 17?           Par a g r a p h 2.10.   This refers .o
           the p r o blems that there h a d been at the           Wolves -v-
           T o t t e n h a m Hotspur game in the summer of        1981?    A. Yes.

              You,    I think, have looked through all your         files   in
Q.
              your    possession?   A. Yes.

              Have you been able to find any letter or d o c ument which
 Q.
              cjives d e t a i l s a b o u t what a c t u a l l y happened on that
              oc c a s i o n ? A. No, sir, none whatsoever.

 Q.           In D a r t i c u l a r , I think, in the general bundle at page 144,
              1 4 6 * and 147, you have now seen those letters?         A. Yes,
              I have seen them.

 0            For example, the letter writ t e n by        Sheffield Wednesday,
               but n o n e ’of those letters have you      been able to find m
               a n v of your files?     A.  No, sir.

 q            qj-   any report bv the police or anything o; tha^.            .<ind?
               A.    No.

     0        An d    such e n quiries as you have been able to make with
               the v a r i o u s officers, can you help us as to wha t detail
               they a c t u a l l y had about wha t the problem was in 1981?
               A.     I d o n ' t "think they ever had any information other
               than that there had been some sort of crushing incident.
               T h e y n ever k n e w the ex t e n t of the actual incident.

     0          In that connection, can you h elp us about this from the
               e n q u i r i e s that you have made:  Was there at that time,
               or at any time, any complaint about the size of >_he
               p er i m e t e r gate?    A. No, sir, none at   all.

     0          Or anv p r o b l e m that a n y b o d y had felt had arisen in
               e v a c u a t i n g people, b e a r i n g in mind the size of the
                gate?       A.   No.

     O        As    far as you are aware, has there at any time been
                anv aeneral complaint by the Police or by anybody that
                there was diffi c u l t y in_£ontrolling the number of people
                going into the pens?        A.  No, sir.

         Q.     Or into the terrace' as a whole?           A. No.
                              89

                                                    A.HOPKINS


           I       g o t inf ormat ion a little later about casualties
     at Le pp ings Lane end and decea se d at Leppings Lane end
     of the ground.
3. What was your means of c o m m u nic ation at the ground itself
   with other Off ice rs ? A.       Verbal.

3. Speaking to them dir ect ly ?       A.    Yes.
Q. Could you not use any other form of radio or anything like
   that?      A.   You could use radios on tal k- th roug h but, I
   m e a n i t is not an ideal situation.   I think when you take
   charge of an incident, we were virtually operating in a
   given area - an agreed area - so commu nic ation did not
   become a problem.
Q. So now I think you went back to the gy mnasium end and you
   spoke to Control and asked for the major accident vehicle.
   A.   Yes, I did.
     You very kindly suppl ie d this morni ng a list of the equipment
     which is c a r r i e d -- an inventor y of equipment carried by
     this vehicle.         I do not want to go into it all but I do
     notice one of the things that it carries are bolt-crops
     and saws.      A.      That is correct.
     Is this in fact confi ne d to the major accident vehicle or
     do other ambulan ces carry them?              A.   No, not at all.
     Eme rge ncy vehicles have what we call a break ing -i n kit which
     includes small b o l t - c r o p p e r s and saws and rope and gloves.

Q.   Do ordinaryambulanc es have these?       A.    What do you mean
     by ordina ry amb ul anc es ?
Q. An ambula nce from the County Ambulance Service, does it
   have __          a.    An em ergenc y County ambulance carries a
   b r e a k ing -in kit.
Q. So the amb ulanc e that Mr. Higgins had brought to the ground,
   would that have this b re aking -in kit?  A.   It would have
   had a kit, yes, sir.
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   I do not know - you have seen
      the fencing, have you, at the Leppings Lane end?
      A.   Yes, my Lord.   Yes.
      I do not know what your bol t-cr oppe rs and saws were able to
      deal with.      Would they have been able to deal with that?
      Cut the w i r e o r -- ?  A.   I think the big ones may have
      done.   lhe ones that were carried on the ambulance would
      probably have had problems.      The major incident - the large
      gauge - one would pr obably have cut it but ---

      Can I get it clear?   The- ambulance which was standing by
      at the ground which Mr. Higgins had had seme equipment of
      this kind but are you saying that would not have worked on
      this wiring, or what?    ' A. I think the equipment carried |
                                      90

                                                     A.   HOPOKINS


            on an eme rge ncy ambulance, my Lord, is equipm ent for
            aai ninq access to pro perties rather than breaking down
            sec urity fences, and that is bas ical ly what it is on
            the amb ulan ce for, for gaining access to property, really,
            when som eo ne has col lapse d inside.
n       It comes to this - it might have worked but it was not
         des igned for that, does it?   A.   My impression would be
         I would be do ubtful on whether it would have, in fact,
         fulfilled that role.
        —       |vjR PHI LLIPS:  Perhaps we can get round that, sir,
            if I ask for a set of these bolt-c ro ps to be provided
            and we can have them looked at to see whether they would.

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Yes.
n               MR. PHILLIPS:     You then ask for the major accident
            vehicle*to be bro ught to the ground.   A.   To be despatched,
            yes, sir.
n 8y the time you got back to the Penistone Road end you
   clearl y had the idea that this was a very serious matter.
   A   There was no doubt in ray mind it was a serious matter,
   sir
    n        And vou did then eve ry thi ng you could to get everybody
             there that you w a n t e d . You saw, I think, some St. John s
             people, did you at the gymnasi um?      A.    I saw a group of
             S t . John's Cadets, sir.     My initial reaction was to
             uti lise them but they were quite dis tr ess ed children, really,
             and not in a posit io n to be utilised on what I wanted doing.

    Q. Now, you went into the gymnasium, I think.               A.   Yes, sir,

    Q        Did you see anybody in charge there from the Police?
             W h e n you first went in?    I am looking at Paragraph 22 of
             your statement.      A.    I didn't see anybody at that time,
             sir
    Q. You de scribe the sit ua ti on as chaos.           A.   That's right,
       sir.
    n        Did vou try to do anything to bring order to the chaos?
             A         Not really, sir.        The main concern I had was getting
             res ources to the ground to remove what I had seen on the
             nitch              At the time I came off the pitch I was conscious
             of two things - (1) that at that moment in time I hadn't
             i-hp resources to remove the casualties from the pitch,
             and I was c o n s c i o u s of the fact that the people on the
             Pe nist on e Road end of the ground seemed to have a total
              u n a w a r e n e s s of what was going on at the other end of the
                  ound and there was still quite a lot of clapping and
              c hantin g'as I came off.            My immediate reaction was to
              g e t a n amb ulance on to the pitch.          That was the forefront
              o f m v m i n d , mainly, yes, to deal with casualties but so the ,
              rest of the people — to bring home to them that something i
                                               99

                                                                          A.    HOPKINS


Q.          M a y I ask you just about the problems of access tnat you
             have mentioned.    I think you said that ambul an ce s were in
             fact able to get in and out?        A.  We were air  to reverse
             two or three a mb ul an ce s in at any one time.

Q.          You were?      A. There were a number of vehicles in the yard
            w h i c h were Police vehicles, but one u nd er st oo d why tnev
            were there.

Q.          Are you saying, in fact, that their presen ce was an
             in c o n v eni en ce but it did not really prevent you getting
            on wi t h the job?         A. No, it didn't.

q   . And if you had wa n te d them to be removed, you wo uld have
       ta ke n some steps?    A. Well, we did ev entually gee then
      moved, sir.

Q.          A n d tney w e r e m ov ed    as you requested?               A. Yes, sir.

Q.          The horses    that you have spoken about were no problem                        for
             you, were they?     A.     I a c xn ow led gea their presence.                 They
             d id not give me a p r o b l e m as such.

Q.          I imagine you are talking about horses with men upon then,
             are you?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q.          Ana if you  wan te d a horse moved, it would                       have   been a simple
             job to get it done?     A. Yes, sir.

Q.          An d a l th o ug h you have ment io ne d horses, you are not
             s ug ge sti ng that the vehicles there or the horses were
             really an imp ed i me nt to getting your job done?       A. They
             di d n ' t stop us do in g the job, sir.

Q.           Th an k you.         Is it   right that you          did not in fact     have any
             co n v e r s a t io n with   any of the m en         on the horses? A. I have
             a r e c o l le c t io n --- I don't think            I did, no.   One spoke to
             m e as I got to the ground, but I                    didn't have any
             co n ve rsa ti ons wi t h them regarding             the incident.

Q.          M ay I ask you about one further matter.        Bolt croppers or
             eq ui pme nt on the ambulances have been referred to.      I think
             three of your ambul an ce s actually went out on to the pitch?
             A.    Th ere w e r e three ultimately, yes, sir.

Q.          What eq ui pme nt is it that you have in mind on the ambulance                            -

                   Mr. K A L L I P E T I S :        Sir,   if it helps,   I am having them
             broug ht here.

                    LORD J Ua TIC E TAYLOR:                Thank you.

    q   .         Mr. WOODWARD:            Are you aware of any of the equipment
             having be en used?            _A*_No, I'm not aware of it, sir.

    Q.      It v/ould follow, w ou ld it, that your experienced a m b u la nc e­
             men, if they thought they had got any tackle on board that
             could have helped, wo ul d have soon had it out?   A. I think^
             thev w ou ld have used it, sir, yes.                                                     •
                                                         57
                                                                               VI. EASTWOOD



                        i.                      c-7. " c o mp re he nsi ve system of signposti
         Can I go on >-o       •       . ' s i v e system, indeed there v/as
         There was not a c o _ ^ t!         Lepoin gs Lane end of signposting
         ha rdl y any s ^ stel^ a ^ h^    d         was that ever an ything tna.
         y o u t c o n s i d e r ed °t o be y o u r foncern,                         - X. «o.

                                                  It m a y be arguable that is not structural.
                          MR.   COiiLIHS :
                           ».   O.ASGOW:       .Hit* t h y r e a t e s t of
B
         a °s]iSnpos? i f a               s t ructural part becaus e if it isn t we a.e
          playi ng games,
                           MR. COLLINS:           No, I think probably not,
                                                             j       ,                  this is a point effectively
    0.
                                                                                                    O U 5 h t to hav# been
             1.1 metres,             they wer e n o J                    - A. Yes.

             A d e a r breach o£ the Safety O j r t l f i c t . requirement.                                              That
             m a y have been a causative one too.

                            iron     titsTICp ^AYLOR:                     Sorry, Mr. Collins,                  I keep fta.<ing
             you this-               i r f l oS coming back to gates any more.
D                           {115.-C0Li.IHS:-      - s o >■       X    d o n ' t . t h i n k . X   w a s ^ i a i . ^ - , , ,   ,,     ,   ...



                    LORO JUSTICE TAYLOR:  X ^ S L ^ e t ^ r ^Police                                                                          -
        Q.' this:    y o u were                         ^ ^ ^
              desire not to 1® “J:  y± d of situation and the neec uc let

                                     “» “»               -                     A - Ye=-
                 The re nay be v j ri^ % ^ s g e i Se\ 1/r w i l / ' p e r h a p s hear about,
        Q.       France and g o o d n e s s kno s e.Lse ^       ^ ^       Qf difficulty      _
                 b u t in or din ar y ter . <-                ^ m         garage ga^es, o
                 is there in aoing uh          ° n ® “ w a n t to get something big out
                 having a large ga          •  mi<adlc of it when you want to ge.
                  and a s mal l one      ^            a very good point sir.
                  one person in? -

             •    ^       rS ? i eS u t ^ ; t 52 a r S e ^ ; r S o m e
                  Jn= b?g and one small.
                                      vbc                                one thing I should have come bcC.'.
          Q.      to on               “ L y o u put yoi remember your special bolt on,

                          A. Yes.
                             - reins to go into the details of that. - A. v-OuU
                      t am not going ^
             Q'           -      - 1,- p V t o mv i j o r u f
                      X come buck

                                lord JUSTICE                                   -fr' ^ *oi don'Vmlnd, i H o
             Q
                      ^     a    f    «   "   -     s                t U       the'gates, could I pass t h „

    H                 to ray Lora?

                                                                                                                                   l i i i
                                      59

                                                             M.   EASTWOOD


     Now    that would be the normal way out, and it gets you out
     well inside the 8 minutes which is required in emergency.      My
     thoughts when we were putting the gates at the top, the 2
     units and so on, were rather like this.      Suppose there was
     some emergency that shut that tunnel.     Obviously there could
     not be a fire in that particular tunnel but say somebody put a
     bomb there, you have now got to get people out in 8 minutes.
     If vou look at the 2 units to the top left, 2 units to the
     t o D right through these gates, that is 4, and if you count the
     eates on to the pitch, which are very adequate for 1 unit, you
     have 6 units of exit from that area.     My belief was that even
      if somebody blocked the tunnel there were 6 units of exit,
     which at 360 per minute, 60 per unit width, would take
      something like 6 minutes to completely empty those two pens.
      This appeared to me to be very reasonable secondary emergency
      exit     I had no idea it could possibly happen that gates could
      be open that gates would not be open, and that there would be
      people trapped there for a long time as there were.    I
      believed I had a very reasonable secondary escape system in
      Diace even though only two were on to the pitch.     With the
      other two you could completely replace the tunnel and get
      everybody a w a y .

o     I am not sure that can be right, with respect to you, because
      the one thing we have made absolutely clear throughout all
      t h i s i s that the exist gates or .the gates o n to-the.pitch'were
    " not treated' and were never treated as emergency evacua-tion       -
      gates for the purpose of determining capacity?

              LORD JUSTICE JAYLOR:   Speed of evacuation. - A. A gate
Q.
         is a gate   The gate has a quick release device.  It has got
         somebody outside.  It could therefore in my thinking become an
         exit gate.
              MR. COLLINS:    If it was to be an exit gate then even
         under the 1976 Guide it must be 1.1 m at least, if it is going
         to be used as an exit gate.   That is paragraph 15.5.3.
         This is looking at it, if you like, legalistic is the wrong
         word   but the common sense view is that there is a gate with c
         -uick release device, a Policeman standing beside it, and it
         people want to get out they can get out of that gate.

         But all I am suggesting is that this is a ex post facto
    Q,
         - j u s t i f i c a t i o n for something which was not actually part of the
         thinking at the time? - A. That is completely incorrect.                At
         the time when these radial barriers were put in I had ^ e a t
         cause for concern to think what the effect would be, and I die
         think about it.

          P a r t i c u l a r l y when in pen 3 you were concerned that it w o u l d
    Q.
          have been p e r f e c t l y all right for there to be no exit gates
          through the p e r i m e t e r fence? - A. We s t i l l had 5 units of exi
          just like the t un n el .

               MR COLLINS:        Sir, I have very little more.  Do you wan
          me to finish it?      I have got about two or three minutes, I
          hope.
                                              71

                                                                W. E A S T W O O D


    q   . So whatever they did with it, they certainly knew what your
          opinion was?   A.  Yes.

    0           And as far as you were concerned, it was important, as i.ar
                as practicably possible, to adhere to those figures? A.:Yes.

    0           I just want to ask you now please one or two things about
                the perimeter gates. As far as the perimeter gates are
                concerned, they were never intended, were they, to be
B               anvthing other than a means of escape if there was some
                localised problem which would require people to come out
                a* the front?   A. That was their prime purpose. Obviously
                we must have in mind that in emergency they could be used,
                but that was their prime purpose, I agree.

     0          Obviously if there is an emergency somebody might open the
                gates.  A. But the prime purpose.

     n          For the purpose of any calculation that was done, those
                gates did not feature in terms of determining the capacity?
                A.     No.
        n       You have mentioned the width of various gates that you have
                had to deal with elsewhere. Am I right in saying that you
                m e n t i o n e d one which is 1.7 metres and that was at Bramall
D                Lane?          A. That is -so.          J                     i :■■»...
    i o That is for a gate on a wooden stand, is it not?           A. Not
         on a-voocterr strand.— rt'-s a-•‘terrace v ery Hke-trhi^'TJTTer -and —            J
         the stand behind .has a lot of timber in one half of it.

        0 So that is obviously a consideration which certainly does
           not a p d y here? A. Everything is analogous except at
           Bramall Lane there is a lot of timber in the stand.

         0. And, of course, there being a lot of timber, you have to
             have a auicker rate of escape?  A.  Yes.

         Q. And hence you have to have either more gates or wider gates?
            A.  That is so.

            n    As far as the others at Bramall Lane are concerned, where
                 I think you said it was 1.2 metres, I am not sure that the
                 situation has yet been resolved, has it?    Is there a safety
                 certificate as far as Bramall Lane is concerned yet.    A.
                 believe there i s n ’t, but I don't know. I mean I have
                 discovered since this incident that Bramall Lane didn't
                  have one e i t h e r .

                  But an I not r i g h t in saying that Sheffield United Football
            Q.    Club - perhaos you as well - are urging for those gates,
                  which are 1.2 metres, to be used as part of the normal
                  route of escape?      Isn't that right?   A. You say 'are
                     urging" now?
            0        Yes, the discussion is still going on.   In other words, the
    H                position is not analogous to this at all In the case of
                     Bramall Lane where you are talking about 1.2 metres, th_ ^
                               72

                                                   W. E A S T W O O D


idea is that those ga,;es a r e ^ a s ^ a . t ^ f ^ h e ^ e c o ^ n i s e a ,

Going right back ten'years or so, this was part o£ a
recognised picture.

But that is a totally different situation from the one
here?     A. Yes.
                        i                        at 7 9 2 which deals with
Can I ask you       °         7 9 2 :   "Access points should be
f      led  -       a n d  the word used is "controlled" as opposed
controlle   ^        ^           immediate access to the pitch or
to manne                     fae ensured in the event of an emergency
■ N o ^ m thIrvital* thing about any perimeter gate is that that
 should happen?           A.    Yes.




                                         /Q. And that there should be           .




                                                                            1.
                                                     73
                                                             w.     EASTVJOOP



                           should be extreme vigilance and speec in
j' ^     r   ~    q    a t«s ^ the necessity arises? - A. Yes.
   o pe ni ng '-•-*= 'j0-1-'-3 --
n       ^nc i - i s e s s e n t i a l that everybody involved in operating
        the s y s t e m s h o u l d be fully aware o r that? - A. *es.

n       r-n I ask vou please in the core bundle to have_a loo/.
             ?in       it is" a letter dated the 3th or iMay. i raise
        - M c ' w i f n you because it does rather appear that you
        a^e -a'ing a slichtly different view as to tne runction
        o f the perimeter gate in that letter, because what you
        sav in the penultimate sentence on tnau page:

                       "? 1 5            our view that in tne event of an
                       eme r g e n c y spectators can be evacuated
                       ruicv lr‘ enouch by the gates on to cne piuch
                       and by'the normal exit gates at the rear."

                is certainly an unhappy way of phrasing it, isn't it?
            i
            *i *
                   vac
                   —   w
                        a rather daft letter in a sense.
                           w   f    Vi



                   it really rather sounds there as though you are
O.
         nutting urime emphasis on the gates on to the pitc/- u.*c
         S^en going on to a secondary basis dealing witn .he
               cates at the rear. The position being tnat realI,
         vou "don It ‘take -the cates on the- pitch into-. account..
         ' -    rg> ii. — ^et right? - A. I have. no. re.oo"t.lsci.ion o.~
               tHis is about whatever.            I can't imagine which
                * i-        :--is -ni’n u t s . I -wouls need tnsr'le-t-cer df.d-
         gai.es l- i*     -          —
         the drawing.       = -
               LORD JUSTIC2 TAYLOR:  We looked at this this
         morning and at the letter to which this was a reply.

                    r^T'T'^/'PSS: On sorry, we are back to Snerfielc^
         lIeclnesday.~iL'thought we were still at Sheffield Uni tec.
          1 'Ct'Ii'i' «            ' *   ■**                  _ _   .
          I am sorry,                    I a.u with the wrong Clufi.

                          . I'ULLER:       The po sition is simply this, isa'c
    Q     i-      t h a t ’in co ns idering escape you really should net
          b e ' t a ^ n c -into account the perimeter gate at all, s.iOUxc
               o             l did.       You see I explained this morni ng witn
                    f:»a-.’irr t’--at m v own calculations ror the s e c o n d e d
          i-^ns o f M escape* this was me satisfying myself.             I did
          >ake account of the fact that the gates were whe^.e
               j          ^ -ninutes 29 seconds or whatever it was -mac
           vou worked*out, when I added in that third gate cecame
           y° a ’-e/e- i- is! 5* minutes, so I had been taxing into
           a c c o u n t ' the fact that with m y quick opening device m
                 i-ion       v;hich it v/as going to oe «.ns <*ay, ^           ^
           in'*-act $’-vcrc.l months away, we could be sure t..ar i-
           i S u t d £ e ’ p o s s i b l e to open the gates.
                                                                   ‘7. £ASTr
                                                                           .;'COJ



            •oil of course that reduces it.  The acre gates you
            in the more it is going to reduce it? - A. Yes.

            r',,a. ,         T am s u c c e s t i n g to you, Dr. ^ a s t w o c d ,           :naJ
0   .
            e v e n without including those gates, the racia                                  gates as
             - s e c o n d a r y m e a n s of e s c a p e , w n i c n o_ c o u r s e is a
            u n i i ^ e i v e v e n t u a l i t v , are p e r f e c t l y a d e q u a t e b e a r i n g m
            m i n d ' the k i n d of S t a n d y o u h a v e got? - A. it is a ^
             g o o d S t a n d f r o m t n a t p o i n t o^ view.

    ^       r -.. r *-sen t u r n to a n o t h e r n a t t e r . In 1931 unere -t.o
            -n i n c < 7 e n t of which you have sone knowledge at a -up
            S ? n a l b e t w e e n Wolves and Tottenham :iotspur anc -he
                                    fSis        i s n ’t it, that although tnat inci.s„.
            S - ^ c c c u - r e d / ' t l ' i r e was no suggestion or complaint at
            that t i ^ by anyone ab ou t the w id th or the gate? - *. ao
            -_r           T know there was no suggestion.
                                                                                                            i +■
                                     at that time fron what you icnew, you >-:e_e.*
    «•                                perhaps we ought to to-a wider gates t,an
             w e - have alread y got"?             - A. Ho.

    Q . ca n I then go to a n ot he r natter

             S ! 4 c ? e !ie plan of hav in g separate turnstiles for a l =h
             part" cf      the    terrace?       - A.     fes.

        o. MOW that was something which^was . p ri va t e as it were
              bec./een y o u a n d       the Club.           «.

        o     rt v/as n o t " s o ra e thing that v/as made^ known to the Local
              Authority? - A. I did not make u /.nown.

              ■■Tall it certa inl y does not appear in any of the correspondence
        n
              ’
              ■x i t t-h--- ti^'-in 1981 v/hen you are empnasising cr.a-
              o"' c o u - s e ^ r o f is important and people were appreciating
               •-h-- control was important, there was no sugges-— cn
               "h.ro ° h a t vou are av/are of, that people were P.avir.c^ _
               d iff icu lty in co nt ro lli ng people in numbers goinc i ^ - c ^ n .
               of*those pens? - A. The pens hac not appeared a-, ^ e ^_.,e
               of the Spurs,           incident.

               n u t r h e v s u b s e q u e n t l y a p p e a r e d in 1931 a n d w h e n they w e r e
                  i-- in in 1 9 3 1 v o u w e r e n o t s a y i n g to a n y b o d y o n _i.e _
               p u ". in                 n o - as far as y o u w e r e a w a r e was a n y o o c y
               -.lorang ?a-                          par ty:        "Look, w e h a v e g o t prcole.ns
                •
                S7?thn? o ^ r o l l i n g ‘people getting into these pens"? - A. ,!o,
                - •        n o t s a v ^ n c that.    Y o u w i l l k n o w t h a t t n ere was
                "         “ n n 4 n c e as to ho-./ w e l l the pens w e r e v o t i n g ar.c
                             the C h i e * C o ns ta ble w e n t to look a n d tnere are
                 T e r e n c e s in the f o r k i n g P a r t y Liinutes t n a t t aey
                 to'be w o r k i n g w e l l u p to to the m o a e n r a n d so on.

                          • .r          had been concern on your part or on -.ie
              ' S r t So? t h e l l u b oron the part of the Police about control!*
                                             37


                                                                                   W. EASTWOOD


        n o t i t compl ie d w i t h the t e c h n i c a l i t i e s o f the Greer1, code?
        - A. Yes.
0       May I ®ive you one example? I take i t ve ry s h o r t l y .                             It
        was w i t h i n your knowledge t ha t the wi dth o f the perimeter
        „ates         r i g h t l y or wr o n g l y , had been a c o n s c i o u s and
        d e l i b e r a t e d e c i s i o n o f the c e r t i f y i n g a u t h o r i t y ? - A. Yes.

Q. Had been discussed a t some l e n g t h and the two opposing
        v i ew s c o ns i d e r e d ? ~ A. Yes.
Q       And t hey had d e c i d e d i n t h e i r wisdom t hat the g a t e s should
        he l e s s than the recommended gui de? - A. Yes.

0       They hav i ng e x p r e s s e d t h e i r s a t i s f a c t i o n w i t h that p o s i t i o n ,
        d i d you b e l i e v e t ha t the e f f e c t o f the c e r t i f i c a t e was to
        o v e r r i d e t h a t s a t i s f a c t i o n and to impose an a b s o l u t e l e g a l
        o b l i g a t i o n on you and your c l i e n t s ? - A. I b e l i e v e d that
        the e f f e c t o f a c e r t i f i c a t e was to r a t i f y the d e c i s i o n to
        l e a v e the g a t e s .
Q       And l o o k i n g a t paragraph 15 and the f u l l c o n t e x t and the
        words t h a t were o m i t t e d the l a s t l i n e w i th the words and
        i n a l l c a s e s to the s a t i s f a c t i o n of the Council did you
        b e l i e v e t h a t i f you had a d e c i s i o n , fo r example, on the
        wi dt h of the g a t e which was to the s a t i s f a c t i o n of the
        Counc i l t h a t you c oul d l a w f u l l y a c t on t hat s a t i s f a c t i o n ?
        - A. I d i d .
                  MR. GLASGOW:   Excuse me one second.                         Thank you
          v ery   much, Dr. Eastwood.
                             Cross-examined          by MR. WOODWARD:

    0Dr       Eastwood, you     h e l d a c o n t i n u i n g r e t a i n e r from the c l u b ,
          d i d you not? - A. No, s i r .      I was r e t a i n e d from t i n e to time
          throughout t h i s p e r i o d .
    Q     I s e e . ~ A. I t would be wrong to say I had a c o nt i nu i n g
          retainer.
    0     But t he r e was no o t he r c o n s u l t i n g e n g i n e er a c t i n g on b e hal f
          o f the c lu b throughout t h i s p e r i o d , was t h e r e , i n r e l a t i o n
          to t h e s e m a t t er s about which you have spoken? - A. No, no.

    0      And the appointment or your part begi ns by documentation
           by document page 7 i n the bu nd l e , 1 s t December, 1978,
           c omm i s s i o n e d to a c t on our b e h a l f m our d e a l i n g s with
           the c l u b , and t hat i s i ndeed what you did? - A. Can I
           i u s t come back, p l e a s e , to your previous ques t i on? There
           was a not her e n g i ne e r employed on some works m the club
           duri ng my p e r i o d or o f f i c e .
     Q. Any of the works to which we have been g i v i n g our a t t e n t i o n
        here? ” A. No, no.


                                                                                                        1.^
                                                                          1 0 1



                                                                                                    B.    D.   MURRAY


                                    D i d you s t a y d o w n on the t r a c k or did you go b a c k to the
                                    Control Room?               A.      A f t e r the game had b e e n s t o p p e d,
                                    I i m m e d i a t e l y w e n t d o w n to the C o n t r o l R o o m and then
                                    r e t u r n e d to the p i t c h a n d r e q u e s t e d Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .
                                    W h e n I was l e a v i n g the C o n t r o l R o o m I can r e m e m b e r
                                    P.C. B i c h a r d a s k i n g for an a m b u l a n c e or a c o u p l e of
                                    a m b u l a n c e s to be on s t a n d - b y .     W h e n I got d o w n on to
                    B               the pitch, I c o u l d see the p e o p l e d i s t r e s s e d a g a i n s t
                                    the fence w h o w e r e o b v i o u s l y i n j u r e d , and t h e r e were
                                    o b v i o u s l y m a n y of them, and an a m b u l a n c e ---             Excuse
                                    me.

                              Q.    You    realised,        I think      ---

                                         LORD J U S T I C E T A Y L O R :            Just    a se cond,        he   wanted     to
                                    complete something.

                                             THE W I T N E S S :   One        ambulance        or   two    ambulances        were
                                    not    g o i n g to be e n o u g h .

                                            MR.    PHILLIPS:            So    what     did   you    do    abo u t   that?

                                              LORD JUST I CE TAYLOR:                  O f f i c e r , w o u l d you like a
                      D       Q.
                                    short break?                A.       No, t h a n k you, my Lord. I d i d n ' t
                                    h a v e a ra d i o .        My r a d i o was on the desk.                    I w a n t e d some
                                    ambulances.                I w e n t a n d I a p p r o a c h e d a S e r g e a n t and I
                                    t o o k his r a d i o o f f him.              I c a l l e d the C o n t r o l R o o m and
                                    I was ack no wl ed ged .                I a s k e d for a fleet of a m b u l a n c e s .
                                    I c o u l d see at the b a c k of the L e p p i n g s Lane S t a n d that
                                    p e o p l e w e r e just s t a n d i n g there, l o o k i n g out on to the
                                    f i e l d as t h o u g h n o t h i n g was h a p p e n i n g .             I h ad r e a l i s e d
                                    that p e o p l e w e r e j a m m e d a g a i n s t the fence, that O f f i c e r s
                                    w e r e h a v i n g g r e a t d i f f i c u l t y in g e t t i n g t h e m out of the
                                    g a t e s and t h a t the o n l y r e l i e f w o u l d be if p e o p l e wou l d
                                    m o v e back.              Ia s k e d for ta n n o y m e s s a g e s to be p a s s e d to
                                     tell p e o p l e to m o v e b a c k and I t h i n k I a s k e d for some
                                     c u t t i n g e q u i p m e n t for the fences.                  If I d i d n ' t ask for
                                     it t h e n s o m e b o d y who w as i m m e d i a t e l y in my v i c i n i t y
                                     did, but I s e e m to t h i n k it was me.

                               Q.            MR. P H I L L I P S :     Were       those ta n n o y m e s s a g e s p l a y e d ?
                                     Did    you h e a r any?           A.         I c a n n o t say I h e a r d any.

                               Q.    D i d you m a k e any f u r t h e r r e q u e s t for t a n n o y m e s s a g e s ?
                                     A.        Yes, I did.           As I s t o od I n o t i c e d that the p e o p l e
                                     w e r e sti l l s t a n d i n g th e r e , there was still no m o v e m e n t
                                     and I a s k e d for f u r t h e r m e s s a g e s to be p a ssed, keep
                                     p a s s i n g m e s s a g e s to t e l l p e o p l e to move back, and w h i l e
                                     I s t o o d t h e r e and w a t c h e d I could see no m o v e m e n t at
                                     all at the b a c k of those pens.

                               Q.     In r e s p o n s e to y o u r l a t e r re q u e s t were any tan n o y
                                      m e s s a g e s p l a y e d to y o u r r e c o l l e c t i o n ? A.       I ca n't
                                      recall m e s sa ge s being played.                     I c a n't r e ca l l that I
                         H|           c o u l d h ea r t h e m but I d o n ' t know w h e t h e r I w o u l d hear
                                      t h e m on the f i e l d of p l a y anyway.


J . L. H a r p h a m L t d
                                        116

                                                      B.D.   MURRAY


               M R . JACKSON:       M y Lord, it wou ld have^been, or will
    be m y s u b m i s s i o n that any on e who had consid ere d uhe
    p o s s i b i l i t y o f crus h i ng at the Leppings Lane end would have
    in s t an tl y re ali se d that the gate at the front         was patriotically
    inadequate.

          L ORD J US T I C E TAYLOR: I follow that point.    As I think
    I have said e ar l i e r in this Inquiry, I d o n ’t think I am
    going to require a lot of p er su as io n about tnat.

              MR.        JACKSOII:   I am ’obliged,     m y Lord.

              MR. W O O D W A R D : Sir, I do apo logise for interrupting,
    but if the O f f i c e r is be in g asked that men       cn tne rielc.
    shou ld have done s o m e t h i n g and it      is being put t:ie- t.^r.ct
    c o u ld have be e n done, sir in fairness to the Ozficer par-.aps
    >ir.‘J a c k s o n v/culd put wh a t it is pr ecisely suggested t.'.cse
    Off i c e r s sho uld do.       He has not answered u P.s l pOiHu.

           LORD J U S TI CE TAYLOR: I was raising that point ar.c
     then   rather think Mr. J a ck so n shifted his ground on to
     saying that the gate was inadequate.

           MR. JACK SOLI: My Lord, may I make it ve r y clear.
     Mv point* is e x a ct l y the op posite of that wh ic h app-rer.-ly
     i"have g ive n the impression.

                LORD J U S TI CE TAYLOR:      Oh by all means         let's see w h a t
     it i s .
             -iR. JACKSO:!: The Officers were distressed; they v/ere
                    a p p a r e n t l y d oi ng nothing; there was nothing they
     s t a n d i n g ’

     could do in the circumstances, but the picture tnat v/ou.c
     be p r e s e n t e d to the fans w o u l d be a large number c: C.ricers
     doing no t h i n g at a time of emergency.              That would be v.v.y
     the Of f i c e r w o u l d receive ana his colleagues w ou ld rece_ve
     abuse from fans th in ki ng they we r e doing nothing.

            LORD JU S T I C E TAYLOR: Again I am not wanting to s t o p
      you but I think that is pretty clear, isn't it?

            MR. JACKSON:         T h a t is wh a t I thought.            That iswny
      I am rather s u r p r i s e d at the intervention.

                LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR: W i t h Mr. Wo od wa rd I thought
      vou were s u g g e s t i n g there was some special technique ^o^
      g e tt in g peo pl e out of a tennis court gate n            tney all cot
      cr u s h e d inside, but you are not saying that.

                  MR. JACKSON:        I am obliged.

0   . Hr. Murray, m a y I take just one aspect o f fthe evidence that
      you have given and e x t e n d it a little.

             We have heard th ro u g h o u t the Police evidence that
       this v/as u n p r e c e d e n t e d the crush at the Leppings Lane


                                                                                          1,
                                             119

                                                                     B.   D.   MURRAY




0           What I am su gg e s t i n g to you is that those gates should
            have been mann ed in order to encou rag e people to do
            pr ec is el y that? - A. Well, I cannot see, if you are going
            to lock the gate back, there does not seem to be any point
            in m an nin g   it,   sir.

o           Pr e c is el y the reason I am putti ng it to you. In order
            that the Of fi c e r s who are there will keep the ganguays
            clear to make sure that people do not pack up right to the
            back, but go through into the next pen?

                    LORD J U S T I C E TAYLOR: Hr. Muller, do you mind my
            as ki n g hou this matter is related to the Fire Service?

                     MR      MULLER:    It relates to the situation that the
            Fire Servi ce was c o n c e r n e d with matters of egress from the
            uen and           of course, they were responsible, with others on
            the W o r k i n g Of ficers Committee, for allowing that position
            to arise which did arise, namely that there was the gate
            at the back and it was part, as the Fire Service
            u n d e r s t o o d it and said to the Working Party, that it was
            to be a cond it io n of those gates being there, and only
            those gates being there, that would be under the manning
             of the Police:

    o       Can I now ask you about another matter.             Can you help me,
            -lease     an I right in u n d e r st an di ng that it would be no
            later than about seven minutes past three when you were on
            the pitch itself or the perimeter of the pitch and then
            re al is ed that people were being crushed up against the
            pe rimeter fence? - A. Seven or eight minutes past three,
             yes.

    Q.       And at that time you say, "I think           I asked for cutting
             e q u i p m e n t "? — A. Yes, sir.

    0        Am I right in u n d e r s t a n d i n g that, although you do not
             s p e c i f i c a l l y remember it, you would not at all be
             <5U T D r i s e d if, in those circumstances, you would be asking
             ur ge nt ly for just such e qu ip me nt ? - A. I think I did.     If
             I d i d n o t , - someone else very close to me did.

        o     But was it s o m e t h i n g   that struck you as being obvious that
              was r e q u i r e d at that    time? - A. To get t h e fences down.

        0     And can you help us at all, from an ything you may have
              d i s c o v e r e d since or otherwise, if that happened about
              seven minutes past three, how it came about that it was
              n o t until 1 4 minutes past three - some seven minutes later
              - that so me bo dy was asking the Fire Brigade to provide
              c u tt in g e q u i p m e n t ? - A. Well, my enquiries revealed, sir,
              ♦     + the first request was made to our M a y w h e e l s Lane
              Depot and an Accident Unit was directed, but I think that
               would have been t r a v e l l i n g fro* some distance.    Presumably




                                                                                        i   0
                                                                 1 2 0


                                                                                                  B. D.    HURRAY



                               at C l a yu he e ls   Lane there          was no cutti ng equipment
                               available.

                               Was it within your knowledge, as a Superint en de nt uf
                         Q.
                               Police, that the Fire Brigade had all manner of cutting
                               eq uipment which could, if required, have cut aown that
                               fence very quickly, without c a us in g direct injury from the
              B                cutti ng to people in the pen? - A     I would certainly hope
                               so , sir.

                         Q.    But did the Police have similar cutting eq uipment? - A.
                               It is to my kn owledge that we do have power tools in
                               Accident Units and, if there had been an Accident Unit on
                               stand by at Cl ay w h e e l s Lane, as there could well have been,
                               he could have been there very, very quickly indeed.

                         Q.    It depended, therefore, on there being such a unit
                               av ailable at the time? - A. It did, indeed, sir, yes.

                                                 C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by HR.   HAXWELLs

                         q          HR. HAXWELL:       Hr. Hurray, your understanding uas
               D               that it was the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of the Police and the Club,
                               by its stewards, to monitor the fans that went into pens 3
                               and 4? - A. I think it is a general responsibility, sir.

                         Q.     And that was done for the purposes of seeing whether there
                                was overcrowding, not by co un tin g heads, but by a visual
                                check? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q.    And that would be ge nerally true in the event of any kind
                                of p r o b l e m a ri si ng on the terraces, that you would carry
                                out that visual check? - A. Yes, sir.

                          Q.    Having in mind they are fighting or drinking or any sort
                                of d is or de rl y be hav io ur? - A. If there is something urong,
                                I would expect a Police Officer to bring it to our
                                attention or a steward to bring it to a Police O f f i c e r ’s
                                attention.

                          Q. Thank you.  Now, in the context of your understanding, I
                             want to draw your attention to this, that it was evidently
                             part of the st anding instructions that there was to be
                             a pre-match br ief ing of stewards? - A. Yes, sir.

                             Q. Hr. Du ck e n f i e l d thought that you might be able to assist
                                the Inquiry about that.          Was there on this occasion a
                                pre-match br ief in g of stewards? - A. The Inspector in
                                 c h a r g e of the fou.r s t a n d s b r i e f e d the SiSWd.rd3 w o r k i n g in
                                 those par ti cu la r areas.

                             Q. So my enquiries should be put better to an Inspector
                                rather than to your sel f? - A. Well, the Inspector of the
                                stand that you are interested in, yes, sir.
                     H


J. I. H arpham lid
                                                          T. BICHARD

Did you know why you were c a l l i n g the F i r e Brigade?
What I am g e t t i n g a t i s di d you know what you wanted
from the F i r e Br i ga de?       A.      I was payi ng a t t e n t i o n to
what S e r g ea n t Goddard was doi ng i n r e l a t i o n to the
Brymac and o b t a i n i n g the c u t t e r s , and when the r e a l i s a t i o n
was t h a t he was n o t s u c c e s s f u l i n g e t t i n g t h o s e from
Cl aywh ee l s Lane, I o f f e r e d t o c o n t a c t the F i r e S e r v i c e s .

But the F i r e Br ig ad e would want to know what t hey were
d e a l i n g w i t h , would t he y not?       I t was n o t a f i r e , for
e xampl e, and t he y would -----            A. C e r t a i n l y I can remember
p a s s i n g ’ a mes sage t h a t we r e q u i r e d the F i r e S e r v i c e
and f or the F i r e S e r v i c e to b r i n g c u t t i n g equipment.

      Mr. COLLINS: I t h i n k t h a t i s a l l I need ask you,
thank you, Mr. B i ch a rd .

                   C r o ss - e xa m i ne d by Mr. HYTNER:

Mr B i c h a r d , I want t o i n v e s t i g a t e , i f I may, j u s t what
your d u t i e s we re .       You c l e a r l y were an e x p e r t in
i n v e s t i g a t i n g the m o n i t o r s and the cameras?       A. I t hi nk
' e x p e r t ' mi ght be an e x a g g e r a t i o n ; experienced.

E x p er i e ne d .    Were y o u r d u t i e s s i mpl y to o p e r a t e your
mac h i ne ry, your t e c h n o l o g y , under s u p e r v i s i o n and
d i r e c t i o n ’ or d i d you have d u t i e s which d e r i v e d from
your own i n i t i a t i v e ?        A. The s u p e r v i s i o n o f the mo ni to r s
and the o p e r a t i o n o f them i s my i n i t i a t i v e .          I f I coul d
perhaps e x p l a i n :        i f I s e e an i n c i d e n t or n o t i c e something
on the m o n i t o r s , I w i l l b r i n g i t to the a t t e n t i o n o f
t he Cont rol Room s t a f f .            O b v i o us l y i f t hey se e something
i n p a r t i c u l a r , t he y w i l l ment i on i t to me.

 So t h i s may be two ways.         Somebody may say to you, "Zoom
 i n on the c e n t r e of t he South Stand, t h e r e ' s something
 happeni ng o v e r t h e r e " , and you w i l l do i t ? A.  Yes.

 You, on the o t h e r hand, i f you are wat chi ng the m o n i t o r s ,
 may’spot somet hi ng and zoom i n y o u r s e l f ? A. Yes.

  And i f you can s e e i t , y o u w i l l then say to somebody
  "There i s t r o u b l e t h er e "?    A. Yes.
  I s t h e r e al ways an o f f i c e r o f the rank o f I n s p e c t o r or
  above i n t he Co n t rol Room?            Are t he r e o c c a s i o n s when
  t he senior o f f i c e r t h e r e i s Se rg ea nt Goddard? A. There
  are odd o c c a s i o n s when S e r g e a n t Goddard, P.C. Ryan and
  m y s e l f are i n the Co n t r o l Room.
  But would i t be normal f o r the o f f i c e r i n charge o f the
  same or the commander on the ground to be i n the Control
  Room?     A. I t would be normal f o r S u pe r i n t e n de n t Murray
  t o be p r e s e n t .       ,
                                                6 4



                                                                 T. BICHARD


                          m pu - e r I w o u l d like to ask you about. We
    ha ve °b ee n p r o v i d e d w i t h the V H F Channel 1 tape.  I
    know w h e t h e r you have had an op p o r t u n i t y of seeing it? -
    A . No       sir.
  i   think it ma y well be that this records wh a t you say
' to Snig Hill, and I put It to you, it is at page 16. - A.
  May I have an o p p o r t u n i t y to look at u .

  T f there is one available.         Y ou see in the top left-hand
‘ c o r n e r it gives the tine b e t w e e n 15.13 and l a . 14 at .ne
  l l l t l L h2v. you got that? - A. Yes, I have that.

. if you look at the right-hand side,                                just over halfway down
    it says:

                                                      "Hil l s b o r o u g h ground control could
                                                      y o u c o n t a c t t he F i r e Se r v i c e ,
                                                      F i r e S e r v i c e , w e w a n t some
                                                      h y d r a u l i c c u t t i n g e q u i p m e n t to
                                                      t h e g r o u n d to c u t s o m e of the
                                                      m e t a l fe n c e s .      Fire Service urgent
                                                      required Leppings Lane o v e r " .


     Then      the r e p l y c o m e s ,    a m I righ t:

                 "Roger Fire Brigade
                 u r g e n t u p to L e p p i n g s
                 Lane R o g e r " .

     A. Yes.
o     Am T right in saying what we see on the right is what you
      were saying? - A. That is correct, yes.

o     Therefore          no m e n t i o n there,           if t h is   transcript       is    right,
      i S o u t anybody b r e a k i n g down t h e g a t e s o r a n y t hi ng ? - ... :.o.

Q. And what is important,                         a specific mention by you of leppings
      Lane?       - A.    Yes,     I did.

n     Have you any            idea,     because          s u b s e q u e n t l y we shall    hear,   that
       ,hln a message was sent from Snig Hill, the people at
       Snig Kill a p p a r e n t l y did not know where the Fire Brigade
                •        - a       w e l l it is a u i t e clea r, it is che
       was requi                       the g roUnd.      Obviously the Fire Service
       LeP P in
              „ f aL
                   o ain
                       n g M b r L g thllr fire equipment, the tender
       ar?                 the g r o u n d . They are going to bring it to
       tS nl.rest point, it is the actual cutting equipment t.iat
       w   would require in the ground and that would be dealt witn
           e



       on      the g r o u n d .
                             >■>i l a ^ u n n    c e r t a i n l y accords with that,          not only
       d“ d y our sayC^ P P i n g s ' “ S t t h e Person at Snig Hill
    Q- B
       c o n f i r m e d leppings Lane? - A. That is right.



                                                                                                             1   J
                         12                           tf. JACKSON




Can you help us about that, Hr. Jackson? - A. Yes, that
would be Of ficers uho uere summoned for Operation Support
com in g from the various Divisions.

Then I think, at 3.17, over the page, ue have a reference
to  Hammet, RHSH Ca sualty put on standby for large numbers
of ca s u a l t i e s ? - A. Yes.

Can you help us about that, Hr. Jackson? - A. Yes, during
the implementation of the major incident, I asked for
certain additional things to be done, such as turning out
the Head of CID to look into uhat had actually happened
and also to make sure the casualty....

     LORD JUST ICE TAYLOR:     Sorry, uas that because you
thought that it had resulted from misbehaviour? - A. Well,
I thought basi ca ll y that ue uould need to have the matter
investigated uhen, quite clearly, ue had a number of
people injured, sir.

        HR. COLLINS:     I think the other relevant message
that ue might look at is over the page, on page 12.           At
3.19 there is a reference to cutting equipment.           "GC21
uith c u tt in g equipment to scene.      GF11 COHHS vehicle.
G B S 1 Leppings Lane to block r o a d . “ GC2/21.   Is that a
Police r ef er en ce ? - A. Can you just tell me uhere that one
is?

I am sorry, it is on page 12.     It is the next page from
one ue uere just looking at about RHH.     Have you got it?
It is 3-. 19, about four lines'doun.   "GC21 uith cutting
equipment to scene?" - A. Yes, that uould be a Police
veh ic l e .

Because I think ue heard from Hr. Duckenfield that the
Police garage uas c o mm un ic at ed uith in relation to cutting
equipment- rather than the Fire Brigade initially? - A.
Yes, I heard him saying that.

 And is GC21 a Police garage or someone from a Police
 garage or is it just a Police car? - A. I think that uould
 be a Police car - the Police car uith this equipment.




                  /Q.   LORD JUSTI CE TAYLOR:   Was any.
                                                    W. JACKSON


         LORD J US TI CE TAYLOR:    Was any cutting equipment brought
to bear upon these fences that aftern oo n? - A. No, I think
what happened, my Lord, was that when we implemented the Majo:
In cident Plant the Force O pe ra ti on s room have certain
responsib ili ti e s .     In those responsibilities they turn cut th«
es s e n t i a l services, the ambulances and the Fire Brigade.   I
think on this occasion, having reviewed the situation, the
Force Co n t r o l room did not immedia te ly ask for the Fire
Brigade.         I think we had another call for the Fire Brigade anc
we      asked again.     That was how the calls went out.

      MR.      COLLINS: I think the Fire Brigade     was not in    fact
sum mon ed     u n t i l . .. - A. 15.13.

     LORD JUSTIC E TAYLOR:       I am sorry, that did net quite
answer my question, which was, and I put it more specifically
did any cu tti ng equi pm ent ever get to bear on these fences? -
A. Other than the Fire Brigade, no, my Lord.

        MR.    COLLINS:   I d o n ’t think the Fire Brigade did,   in
fact?

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:        Did any?

     MR. COLLINS:    It had already been kicked in by then as
far as it could be.   Were you were - you could see, no doubt;
you were up in the control room - Police Officers and others,
and fans, trying to kick the wire in? - A. Yes, I could.   I
was not qui te sure when the Fire Brigade had arrived because
of the crowd whether they had still used some.of their
equipment.

 Yes, I follow.       Effectively, whatever could have been achieve',
 by ge t t i n g the fencing out of the way had b e e n ’achieved before
 the Fire Brigade came, as I underst an d? - A. Yes, that is
 correct.

        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         They were sent for at 3.13?

      MR. COLLINS:    3.13 or 3.14,        and they arrived at 3.17,        I
 think, the first fire tender.

        MR.    MULLER:    3.22.

         MR.   COLLINS:     3.22.   I am obliged:

 Mr   Jackson, did you remain in the control room during this
 stage when we have been looking through these various
 mes sa ges ?  Were you in the control room all this time? - A.
 Yes    I did.   I went down to the pitch a little later on to
 speak to Mr. Nesbit.

  That was when you saw him arriving on    the pitch, was it, and
  obvi ous ly taking  charge on the pitch? -A. It was a little
  bit after that.

  Were you aware of him taking charge? ~A. Yes,         sir.
                                                                        i   -
                                                       44

                                                                       W. JACKSON



             Dressing ?or this, as far as you know, because they were
             cuite s a t i s f i e d w i t h the existing means or control? - A.                          I
             d o n ' t know about that situation, I am sorry.

             can I then ask you a bo ut another aspect.               The perimeter fence
    Q.       r oun d the pitch, the track perimeter fence and tne gates m                 ^
               °       T right in un de r s ta nd in g that the Police never regarded
             tho«e“ gates as being a means through which the whole or tne
B            oens w l u l d be ev acuated? - A. I think the evacuation in
             n o m a l c i r c u m s t a n c e s can be one of two ways cepencing on
             the circumstances, whether on to tne pi ten or through t..e
              v ar iou s exits.

              The exits bei ng through the tunnel or through the gate                                   in
    Q.
              the racial fences? - A. Yes.

                 T h o s e w o u l d be   the n o r u a l   means   of e s c a p e   if t h e r e was   ar.
    Q.
                 emergency?       — A.     fes.

                 now as far as t h e p e ri me ter fence is concerned and .the gate
        Q.       in that, that was on l y considered, am I r i g h t _ cy tne So_ic<=,
                 as being a means of taking out a few people ir tne neec a,o*e,
                 not a means of taking ou t the full 1,000 people? - A. i *oulc
D                acce pt that.

                          MR  COLLINS:    Sir, I don't know whether it helps my
                  learned friend and I am trying purely to help, we will be_
                  c 11 ■’nq nr. Ca lve rt who is the Police Liaison 0 ^ ‘ icer .vur.
                  tve Gro un d be twe en 1979 and 1937 . He will be. the O m c e r
                  wh o can deal with all these matters in conjunction witn
                  the pro du c ti on of all the relevant Minutes c. tne ,;crf.-nc
                  P art y .

                           It w ou ld seem, as I understand it, that Hr. Jackson
                  was not di re ct ly in charge of this in the sense that he
                  n o . di re ct ly involved and this was something v/nien v,as      _
                  d e a r l'r d e l ega te d to others and Mr. Calvert I tnin,< -voulc
                  be the* right man to deal with this aspect of the natter.

                              MR. MULLER:         I shall do it in that way.

                   The n there is just one other mat te r I want to ask you about.
         Q.        c S u l d you have a look please at the log .to w m c h you were
                   ref e rr ed to earli er on and particularly at page 12.     C=n
                   vSu help me to in terpret that.     That is at 19-minutes-pas>.-3
                   am I right, there is an entry in relation to cutting equip-
                   ment?      — A. Yes.
                              r"P?n that that is wh e n it has been called for
             Q.     o“8when It I f actually on its way, or what does it mean?
                    -~A. I think that means when it is supposedly on its way.

             n      M O U id one expect to find in this log anywhere the request
                    -o- such equipment.     I say that because I confess I cannou
                    find it? - A . If we call through the extended incident
    H
                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                              1   ■a
                                         18



                                                                             C. CALVERT

Q.    When the 1985 p r o p o s a l s were b e i ng c o n s i d e r e d and g oi ng
      through t h e r e was a s u g g e s t i o n a t one s t a g e from the
      P o l i c e t h a t t h e r e s h o u l d be a second g a t e i n the r a d i a l
      f e n c e s . - A. I have s e e n t h a t on the pa per s.

Q. Was t h a t some t hi ng t h a t you i n i t i a t e d , t h a t s u g g e s t i o n ?
   - A. I have l ooke d a t i t and I w i l l be q u i t e h o n e s t , I
   cannot remember i n i t i a t i n g i t .     I can remember i t now
   but i t was not one o f my main p r i o r i t i e s .

Q. Can you remember what the s p e c i f i c purpose o f the
   s u g g e s t i o n was? - A. Not r e a l l y , no.

Q. Go to page 265 and 6.         Not es o f an o f f i c e r working p a r t y .
   You were not p r e s e n t . - A. No.

Q. The n a t t e r I would j u s t l i k e your h e l p w i t h i s on page
   266, L e t t e r I , a r e f e r e n c e to t he g a t e s i n the p i t c h
   p e r i m e t e r f e n c e b e i n g f o r bot h s e c u r i t y a c c e s s and
   emergency e g r e s s p u r p o s e s . - A. Yes.

0 . Was t h a t your u n de r s t a n d i n g ? - A. Yes. I heard the
    comment about the g a t e s and I have always c o n s i d e r e d
    the g a t e s were used f o r bot h p u r p o s e s .

Q.     Did y o u - g i v e - any t hought as to what emergency untight                  - '
       occur a t t h a t end o f tine ground? - A. One of the r e a s o n s
       I have s e e n t he            g a t e s used f o r i s when t h e r e has been
       f i g h t i n g on. the        t e r r a c e s and I have a l s o se en i t used
       when t h e r e has been a f l a r e d i s c h a r g e d , an emergency s h i p s
     ' f l a r e d i s c h a r g e d on the t e r r a c e s , which has caused
       t o t a l chaos.

Q. And has t h a t r e s u l t e d i n l a r g e numbers o f p e o p l e bei ng
   e v a c u a t e d on to   the p i t c h ? - A. We have c e r t a i n l y brought
   then o u t .       I would n o t s a y l a r g e numbers.

Q. Because we now know t h a t on the day t h i s d i s a s t e r occurred
   the g a t e s were not l a r g e enough f o r p e o p l e to come out
   e i t h e r q u i c k l y or in any numbers.           I s t h a t not something
   you have c o n s i d e r e d b e f o r e h a n d ? - A. When we have had to
   u s e them f o r any purpose i n the p a s t they have been
   a de qu a t e f o r b r i n g i n g the numbers out we wanted to bri ng
   out.       We have brought them out to t r a n s f e r them round
   from one pen to the o t h e r when t hey have got t he ms e lv e s
   i n t o the wrong ar ea o f t he ground and c e r t a i n l y i t has
   been a d e q u a t e .

0.     Can you g o , p l e a s e , to page 292? These are the minutes
       o f an o f f i c e r working g r oup, 13th of November, 1985, at
       which you were p r e s e n t . - A. Yes.

 Q.    And i t     i s i tems 5 and 6 t h a t I would l i k e to ask you
       abo u t .     Item 5, the P o l i c e r e p o r t e d on the c o n t i n u i n g
                                      43


                                                                       C. CALVERT


      fences?        Could you pl e a s e turn to 153 in the bundle?
      Nov; I ' a p p r e c i a t e that you v;ere not p re sent at that
      meeting.        It was the m e e t i n g at w h i c h the radial fences
      w e r e first a p p r o v e d af in 1981, is that right, by the
      w o r k i n ® par tv and the s t i p u l a t i o n was made that they
      s ho uld°b e und er Police c o n t r o l ? - A. T h a : is the record, yes.

0     A nd it was of course for the Police, once that had been
      drawn to their attention, to carry out that ins truction?
      - A. Yes.
Q. To control it. Wer e you awa re w h e n you were trying or
   w h e n the Police were trying to int erpret that of the
   wav in w h i c h the Green Gui de at that time, that is to
   say, in 1981, dealt wit h the q u e s t i o n of con troll ing
   the pe r imeter gates? —A . No t oft h a n d .
Q     Y ou see, if we look at the G r e e n Guide, and I do not
      w a n t t o 5be tedious about it but I m u s t draw your
      a t t e n t i o n to it since I a s k e d the question, what it
      savs at 792 is access points should be con troll ed -
      this is p e r i m e t e r gates — so that immediate access
      to the pit ch or         p e r i m e t e r track can be ensured in
      the event of an          emergency. - A. The p e r i m e t e r gates
      wer e controlled.
0      The y wer e c o n t r o l l e d and h o w were they controlled?
       - A. The p e r i m e t e r gates alw ays had a Police Officer
       on the track.
0      ves    W h a t was happening, w h e n it came to the question
       o f control in r e l a t i o n to p e r i m e t e r gates, the requirement
       for control was car r i e d out by ha v i n g an Officer in the
       immediate v i c i n i t y of the gate? A. Yes.

0 Now, in the c on text of that G r e e n Guide, a further
 ’’ r e q u i r e m e n t for c o n t r o l l i n g ano t h e r gate is imposed
    on the Police? - A. I do not think we ever und ersto od
    it as that.
    0 Wha t I am asking you, you see, is w h y whe n the wor d
     *’ control is use d in that w a y in rel a t i o n to the perimeter
        gate you a p p l i e d a d i f f e r e n t m e a n i n g to it whe n it came
        to the radial gate? - A. I do not think we u n d e r s t o o d it
        as an e v a c u a t i o n gate. M e r e l y an access gate.          Cer tainl y
        the senior O ff icers who a t t e n d e d I am sure did not believe
        it to be an e v a c u a t i o n gate, m e r e l y an access gate.

    0. If the p o s i t i o n arose that the tunnel was blocked, which
       could happen, I suppose, c o u l d not it? - A. Yes.

    0. And you r e a l i s e d in the G r e e n Guide there had to be an
       a l t e r n a t i v e mea ns of escape? - A. Yes.




                                                                                           4

                                                                                           1
                                        44


                                                                    C. CALVERT


Q       People w o u l d have to be taken      to left and right through
        those radial gates, w o u l d not      they? - A. The perimeter
        gates.

Q. Th rou gh     the perim ete r gates?       - A. Yes,    the perimeter        ....

q   .        LORD J US TI CE TAYLOR:         No, no,   you are at c r o s s ­
        purposes. - A. Sorry.

Q       He is talking about the gates at the top of the radial
        fences. - A. Yes, sir.      I am saying he is talking about
        evac u a ti on through there.  I am saying the evacuation,
        as far as we were concerned, w o u l d be on to the pitch
        if we had to.

n            mr. MULLER:       You are suggesting the alternative
        route w o u l d be through the peri me te r gates. Is that
        right? - A. We w ou ld use them.

0    Tf the pe ri met er gates were to be envisaged as a means
 '* through w h i c h the wh ole of the pen should be evacuated
    in an e m e rg enc y then the G re en Guide required that-it
    should be 1 . 1 metre wide even in 1975, did not it? - A.
    It did, sir.

0    Were not you then c o nc er ned about that if that is how
 ’’ vou saw it? -A. No, sir, I was not concerned.      We Jiave
    he ard that the gates on either end w o ul d be used for
    eva cu at io n in an emergency.

    Q.: Either   end of what?      - A. Of   the ground.

    0   Yes.   - A. Andthey w o u l d be and these gates were put in
    ■* a n d ' our und er st an di ng
                                  of control is that if they were
         locked or closed there w o u l d be a Police O f f i c e r ^behind
         them and that was the case and is the case and if they
         were open they would be open for people to flow through.

    Q    Can I iust understand?              Are you saying that it was the
         P o l i c e ' un de rs tan din g that if the tunnel became blocked
         the alt ern ati ve means of escape for all the people who
         were in pens 3 and 4 was to              be through the perimeter
         gate? -A. That wo uld be one of the uses.              You have brought
         these up!           Obvi ous ly you would.    You would use whateve r
         means possible.

    0   But did you not appreciate, the point I am putting to you,
     ’’ that'if anybody, including    the Police, were contemplating
        that the perimeter gate could in any circumstances be used
        to evacuate all the people in those pens ---

               LORD JUSTI CE TAYLOR:   I do not think that is what is
         being^said,  Mr. Muller.    As I under st an d it - we have been
          through this a number of times - what the Officer is saying




                                                                                       A
                                                                                       i
•




                                            INDEX




    1   Hillsborough Judicial Inquiry - Video Schedule.




    2   Transcript of evidence of Police Constable Bichard at Lord Justice Taylor
        Inquiry - Cameras.




    3   Transcript of Dr Popper, Coroner - cut off time.




    4   Transcript of evidence of Professor Usher at Inquest.




    5   Transcript of evidence of Dr Slater at Inquest.




    6   Transcript of evidence of Dr Gum pert at Inquest.




    7   Video Tape TB1 and schedule of video




    8   Video Tape TB2 and schedule of video
    r        i   ■*


                                                                                         PROF.     A.   USHER


                          ($. In fact, of course, the p r o b l e m was that t h e r e we r e                   a l re ad y
                              d e c e a s e d p e o p l e w i t h i n the b u i l d i n g ? - A. Yes.

                              So we did not ha v e q u i t e as mu c h s p a c e          as - it was        not empty,
                              in o t h e r w o r d s ? - A. No.

                              W h i c h did c r e a t e a few p r o b l e m s   for us.     - A.    Yes.

                              But I am r igh t in t h i n k i n g that th er e is a ro om w h i c h we know
                      B       as the S p e c i a l PM room w h i c h is in fact c h i l l a b l e ? - A. Yes.

                              And th a t   was d o n e ?   - A.    Yes.    it was.

                              Prof. Usher, wh a t I want to do was, I w a n t e d to go t h r o u g h one
                              or two of the terms w h i c h we use in post m o r t e m s .

                                        THE CORONER:       This, lad ie s and gentle me n, f o r g i v e me, is
                              a s h o r t c o u r s e in pathology.   What I am g o i n g to do is to ask
                              Prof. U s h e r to e x p l a i n some of the words w h i c h are used,
                              b e c a u s e you will hear them ov e r and ov e r again, and it ma y
                              e a s i e r if you ha v e had them e x p l a i n e d at the beginning, just
                              as w o r d s :

                          o   If I s t a r t off by saying, can yo u help by a word that occurs
                      D       ve r y o f t e n is "petechia'' and " h a e m o r r h a g e ” . C o u l d you just
                              e x p l a i n wh a t the word " p e t e c h i a " me an s and wh a t the word
                              " h a e m o r r h a g e ” for that m a t t e r m e a n s in that c o n t e x t ? - A. Yes.
                              I c o u l d do it p e r h a p s b e t t e r if I s a i d that pe t e c h i a l
                              h a e m o r r h a g e s are s i g n s of a s p h y x i a and then d e f i n e asphyxia.

                              Yes, if y o u would. - A. A s p h y x i a is a pr oc es s w h i c h takes
                              p l a c e w h e n t h e r e is s o m e m e c h a n i c a l i n t e r f e r e n c e wit h normal
                              breathing.           The c a us e s of the i n t e r f e r e n c e m i g h t be external,
                              as w h e n a p i l l o w is put ac r o s s t h e face.                 That is called
                              s u f fo ca t i on .    It m a y be hands or a l i g a t u r e round the neck
                              wh i c h is ca ll e d st ra ngl in g.           It m ay be the i n h a l a t i o n of some
                              f or e i g n b o d y into th e throat, w h i c h is c a l l e d choking.                   Or it
                              may be, and this is r e l e v a n t in this case, t h e fact the
                              p e r s o n ' s ch est is s i m p l y not a l l o w e d to mo v e in and out as it
                              does in th e n o r m a l c o u r s e of re spi rat ion .                 If that happens
                              t h e s e p e o p l e are a s p h y x i a t e d in all t he e x a m p l e s I ha ve given.

                                        In t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a the p i c t u r e is u s u a l l y fairly
                               typical.        Wh e n r e s p i r a t i o n st op s o x y g e n c a nn ot be g iv en into
                               the blood from t h e lungs and the h a e m o g l o b i n w h i c h is p r e s e n t
                               in th e l i t t l e red cells and w h i c h is u s e d to c a r r y o x y g e n from
                               the lungs to t h e t i s s u e s w h e r e it is needed, t h e s e little
                               pa c k e t s of h a e m o g l o b i n g i v e up their o x y g e n and th en tur n into
                               what is ca l l ed r e d u c e d ha em oglobin, w h i c h is a blu is h colour,
                               and this gives a bl ui s h cast to the f a c e and o ft en e l s e w h e r e
                               in the body to a p e r s o n who is bei ng a s p h y x i a t e d .

                                         W h e n this ha ppe ns the he ar t begi ns to fail and th er e is
                               back p r e s s u r e on the ver y sm all blood v e s s e l s c a l l e d
                               ca pi lla rie s.      So the p r e s s u r e in the fine v e s s e l s of the sk in
                               and e l s e w h e r e in the body increases, and t h e cell walls wh ic h
                      H        are onl y one cell thick, are not g e t t i n g o x y g e n either, and so


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                   31
     t        *   r


                                                                                          PROF.     A.   USHER


                                 t h e s e fine v e s s e l s burst, and l i t t l e burs ts of red c el ls pass
                                 t h r o u g h th e wall into t h e tissues.                   If th is h a p p e n s in the
                                 skin t h e y can be seen as l i t t l e p i n - p o i n t h a e m o r r h a g e s in the
                                 skin.        Th e y are not e n t i r e l y s p e c i f i c for asphyxia, but it
                                 w ou ld be d i f f i c u l t to d i a g n o s e a s p h y x i a if t h er e w e r e not suc h
                                 pe techiae.         La rg e r h a e m o r r h a g e s w h i c h a re form ed in e x a c t l y
                                 the sa m e wa y are call e c c h y m o s e s .

                                           So that the ge ne ra l pi c t u r e of a pe rs o n who has di e d from
                      B          a s p h y x i a is of blu is h cyanosis, as it is called, blu is h
                                 a p p e a r a n c e about the face and el se wh er e, and the p r e s e n c e of
                                 p e t e c h i a e s o m e w h e r e in the body, f r e q u e n t l y in the eyes,
                                 f r e q u e n t l y in th e lax skin of bot h the eye lids, f r e q u e n t l y
                                 i n t e r n a l l y on th e s u r f a c e s of t h e lung and on the heart
                                 itself, and s o m e t i m e s elsewh ere .           Th e p i c t u r e that we saw in
                                 g e n e r a l in the p e o p l e who di e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h was an
                                 a s p h y x i a l picture, and it was d u e to the fact that at some
                                 t ime th e y mu st ha ve been p a c k e d so c l o s e that the y we r e u n a b l e
                                 to m o v e t h e i r ch es t s and thus as ph yx i a t e d .

                                           If the a s p h y x i a is p r o l o n g e d it beg in s to aff ec t other
                                 or ga ns and in p a r t i c u l a r the brain.            The br ai n is ve r y
                                 s e n s i t i v e to o x y g e n lack, and so a f t e r four or fi v e m i n u t e s of
                                 a s p h y x i a th e n d a m a g e oc cu r s to t h e brain.     The m o r e p r o l o n g e d
                      D          th e a s p h y x i a is th e m o r e d a m a g e t h e r e is to the brain, and
                                 e v e n t u a l l y the v it al c e n t r e s in t h e b ra in are da m a g e d and then
                                 the p e r s o n is t e c h n i c a l l y dead.

                                 How long does it take for a p e r s o n who is a s p h y x i a t e d to (a)
                                 lose co n s c i o u s n e s s , and (b) get to the s t a g e w h e r e i r r e p a r a b l e
                                 d a m a g e has been do ne ? - A. Well, o n c e the c he st becom es
                                 a b s o l u t e l y and f i n a l l y fixed in the s i t u a t i o n I i m a g i n e as we
                                 had it at H i l l s b o r o u g h - t he re w e r e m o m e n t s of i n t e r m i t t e n t
                                 f i x a t i o n of t h e chest in m a n y of th e cases - but o n c e the
                                 c he st b e co me s f i n a l l y fixed then it is a m a t t e r of minutes,
                                 be t w e e n four and six m i n u t e s usually, b e f o r e the p e r s o n dies,
                                 but it is a v e r y sh or t time m e r c i f u l l y b e f o r e th e y lose
                                 con sc io us ne ss .       They m a y lose c o n s c i o u s n e s s in 10 to 15
                                 seconds.

                          <fc.    So in o th er words, on c e a s p h y x i a a c t u a l l y takes hold properly,
                                 shall we say, th e n the loss of c o n s c i o u s n e s s is ve ry qui ck ? -
                                 A . Yes.

                          <b. And d e a t h b e t w e e n four and six minutes,               of that o r d e r ?    - A.
                              Yes, that is t h e usual.

                                  If a p e r s o n is a c t i v e and struggling, does it m a k e any
                                  d i f f e r e n c e ? - A. T h e y u s e oxygen.          Th e y u s e what o x y g en they
                                  hav e up m o r e rapidly, of course.                    It is also true to s ay that
                                  if s o m e o n e has a d i s e a s e say of the chest or the lungs or the
                                  h e a r t , w h e r e t h e y are a l r e a d y h a m p e r e d w i t h rega rd to their
                                  u s e of oxygen, th en of cou rs e t h e y will s ta nd a s p h y x i a very
                                  badly, and th ey m a y d i e in a m u c h s h o r t e r time than that.

                      H <t>.      Now, in som e cases we will hear in th ese PMs th ere was what                            is
                                  known as coning.    In other words, t h er e was an enla rg eme nt,                       a


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                     32
             « •

                                                                                              PROF.      A.    USHER


                               s w e l l i n g of t h e b r a i n and in o t h e r s t h e r e was not.             If we deal
                               wi th the c as es w h e r e t h e r e is coning, th a t is a v e r y seriou s
                               situat ion , is not it? - A. Yes, it is.                           It is u n f o r t u n a t e l y a
                               n o n - s p e c i f i c si tua ti on .   If you in s ul t the brain in m o r e or
                               less any wa y it re ac ts by swell ing .                    If you c a u s e it to be
                               s h a k e n a r o u n d i n s i d e the head or if you fail to s u p p l y it wi t h
                               oxygen, it r e a c t s by swelling, and s i n c e the skull is a cl os e d
                               boney box w i t h o n l y one o u t l e t and th a t o u t l e t is w h e r e the
                      d        sp i n a l cord le av es it at the base, then it te nds to pus h the
                               br ai n d o w n into that cone.             U n fo rt u n a t e l y , th e part of the
                               brain that is p u s h e d d o w n is the part that c o n t a i n s the vi ta l
                               c e n t r e s for r e s p i r a t i o n and for the r e g u l a t i o n of heart beat
                               and b lo od pr essure.              So if that h a pp en s t h e n it is l i ke ly to
                               c a u s e death.

                          Ct>. But it is not an a b s o l u t e r e q u i r e m e n t         for a s p h y x i a l    death?       -
                               A. Oh, no, by no means.

                          cj). B e c a u s e it is at the c e l l u l a r        level     I t h i n k you are s a y i n g the
                               d a m a g e is d o n e ? - A. Yes.

                          o.   Which     is m i c r o s c o p i c ,   I believe,      if you      l ik e? - A.        Yes.

                          <1). You w e r e t a l k i n g about the v e r y short p e r i o d w h e n a p e r s o n
                      D|       a c t u a l l y be c o m e s a s p h y x i a t e d b e f o r e he loses co n s c i o u s n e s s .       -
                               A . Yes.

                          (b. What is the p o s i t i o n if as I th in k you h a v e also said t h e r e
                              are i n t e r m i t t e n t e p i s o d e s of asphyxia, s h o r t i s h periods,
                              c o m p r e s s i o n and th e n r e l a x a t i o n and th e n c o m p r e s s i o n and
                              r e l a x a t i o n and then final c o m p r e s s i o n ?     Does that m a k e any
                              d i f f e r e n c e ? - A. In the in t e r v a l s wh e n th ey are able to
                              b r e a t h e p r o p e r l y th e n they to s o m e e x t e n t r e p l e n i s h their
                              t i s s ue o x y g e n stores, but of c o u r s e o n c e the p r e s s u r e is on
                              again then the s a m e proce ss operates.

                          <t>. O p e r a t e s again.        So if a per so n has been squashed, if I can
                               say that, and the p r e s s u r e is t ak en off him be f o r e he loses
                               c o n s c i o u s n e s s , and t h er e is no fu rt he r p r e s s u r e on him. then
                               he o ugh t to be ab l e to br e a t h e and r e c o v e r ? - A. Yes.

                          <fc. If he b r e a t h e s and th e n a f ur th er e p i s o d e of p r e s s u r e is put
                               on then the e f f e c t of that a d d i t i o n a l p r e s s u r e will d e p e n d on
                               how m u c h o x y g e n he has m a n a g e d to ta k e in in the in t e r v a l ? -
                               A. In the interval, yes.

                          O.    And of course,           the s h o r t e r   the inter va l. .. .        - A.    Exactly,       sir.

                          O.    We kn o w in so m e ca se s - in fact in m a n y cases                        - t he re is so m e
                                r e f e r e n c e to v o m i t i n g ? - A. Yes.

                          <£. C a n you deal w i t h the w h o l e q u e s t i o n of v o m i t i n g in t r a u ma ti c
                              as ph yx i al d e a t hs and what it s i g n i f i e s ? - A. Well, in any
                              a s p h yx i al death, as a ter min al event, right at the end, the re
                              is o f t e n vomiting, and for that r e a s o n m a n y p a t h o l o g i s t s when
                              r e p o r t i n g s u c h c as es si m p l y say, and I do this myself, if
                              there is v o m i t i n g I s i m p l y say, " T r a u m a t i c asphyxia", and I


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd                                                       33
     *    '   *   *


                                                                                               PROF.       A.   USHER


                                   ta k e it that the v o m i t i n g is part of th e last p h a s e of that
                                   death.        It is t r u e to s a y that it is p a r t i c u l a r l y l i a b l e to
                                   ha p p e n in t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a b e c a u s e the a i rw ay s a r e free,
                                   w h i c h t h e y a r e not if the p e r s o n is b e i n g stran gl ed , and of
                                   course, c o m p r e s s i o n is b e i n g e x e r t e d on the a b d o m e n as well
                                   wi t h a t e n d e n c y to f o r c e m a t e r i a l up.       So you w o ul d e x p e c t to
                                   get v o m i t i n g in c a s e s of t r a u m a t i c asphyxia.

                                   And you w o u l d say it is p r o b a b l y part of the te rm in al                    events?
                                   - A. Yes, it is just part of t h e act of dying.

                          C . In s o m e cases          one i n h a l e s ?   - A.     Yes

                                   If one i n h a l e s any vomit         if t h e r e had been no m o u t h to m o u t h
                                   resuscitation presumably              that w o u l d m e a n it was b r e a t h e d in? •
                                   A. Yes.

                                   A g a s p mu s t   ha v e been m a d e ?     - A.    Yes.

                          c        If t h e r e is a r t i f i c i a l r e s p i r a t i o n do e s it m a k e any
                                   d i f f er en ce , do you th in k ?         Ca n it be b l o w n in? - A. It could
                                   be if the m o u t h had not been c l e a r e d of v o m i t first.              In that
                                   ca s e the kiss of life becomes, of course, the kiss of death,
                                   b e c a u s e you are f o r c i n g the m a t e r i a l do w n into the airwavs.
                      D            It is also fair to say it has be e n shown, p r i n c i p a l l y by the
                                   S o u t h Africans, that m a t e r i a l in the s t o m a c h can be, after
                                   death, for ce d up into the nasal fount and e v e n d o w n the
                                   bronchi.

                          Cl       How do e s it get do w n af te r that, b e c a u s e that c a n ’t be
                                   in ha l e d ? A r e you s a y i n g a g r a v i t y me chanism, or wh at ? - A.
                                   Yes, that is what is th o u g h t to be the answer.

                          Cl       So it is not e n t i r e l y e x p l a i n e d      how that h a p p e n s ?    - A.     That     is
                                   right.

                          (I        So the m e r e p r e s e n c e of s t o m a c h c o n t e n t in the lungs does not
                                    n e c e s s a r i l y m e a n it was i nh al ed be fo r e death, is what you are
                                    sa y i n g ? - A. That is right.

                                    But in m a n y c as es     it may     be,    of c o u r s e ?   - A.    Yes.

                              o.    And i n h a l a t i o n is a v e r y se r i o u s matter, is not it,                b ec au se   it
                                    ir r i t a t e s the l i n i n g s ? - A. Yes, that is right.

                              o.    I think you p r e p a r e d a re po r t for Lord J u s t i c e Taylor, and on e
                                    of the q u e s t i o n s w h i c h are d e a l t wi t h in that, I think, was
                                    the q u e s t i o n of e y e h a e m o r r h a g e s and the ef f e c t s of pe op l e
                                    lyi ng or s t a n d i n g ? - A. Yes.

                        (). Can you just s u m m a r i s e yo u r c o n c l u s i o n s on that? - A. Yes.             I
                            think it was put forwa rd that y o u could d i f f e r e n t i a t e b e t w e e n
                            p e o p l e w h o d i e d s t a n d i n g up and p e o p l e who d i e d ly in g do w n
                            be c a u s e the p e o p l e who d i e d s t a n d i n g up did not have eye
                            h a e m o r r h a g e s and the p e o p l e w h o di e d l y i n g do w n do w n d i d , and
                      H     that in my v i e w is c o m p l e t e l y wrong.



                                                                                3 4
J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                                DR.   D A V I D N EIL S L A T E R



                                   K e v i n Daniel W i l l i a m s who wa s a lso i d e n t i f i e d as No.               51       is
                                   that r i g h t ? - A. That is correct, sir.
                          A
                              Q.   I d e n t i f i c a t i o n wa s don e by I n s p e c t o r T i m m s so far as you are
                                   c o n c e r n e d ? - A. That was the initial i d e ntification.

                              Q. But there          is no doubt         in your m i n d about           the    identity?         -
                              A . No .

                              Q. T he re w ere v a r i o u s m a r k s on the b o d y itself to i d e n t i f y it?
                          B   A. Sir, K ev i n w a s c l e a r l y l a b e l l e d b o t h by n u m b e r and by name.

                              Q.   Dr. Slater, w o u l d you be k ind e n o u g h t hen to t ake me through
                                   the post m o r t e m ? - A. My e x a m i n a t i o n of K e v i n s h o w e d that
                                   the mai n f i n d i n g was that of a s phyxia.                           T h i s o p i n i o n was
                                   f o r me d t h r o u g h th e e x t e n s i v e b l u e n e s s on th e face an d u p p e r
                                   part of the chest.                     In a d d i t i o n t h e r e w e r e small
                          C        h a e m o r r h a g e s in both the face and internal o r g a n s i n c l u d i n g
                                   th e brain, heart and lungs.                          T h i s a s p h y x i a had c l e a r l y
                                   r e s u l t e d from c o m p r e s s i o n of t h e n eck and chest and t h i s
                                   o p i n i o n w a s s u p p o r t e d by the p r e s e n c e of t h r e e small
                                   s c r a t c h e s o v e r t h e left s i d e of th e neck an d a l s o o v e r the
                                   front of t h e v o i c e box.                T h i s had a l s o r e s u l t e d in fou r
                                   f r a c t u r e s to th e small b o n e s in t h e actual v o i c e box.                          In
                                   a d d i t i o n t h e r e was e v i d e n c e of b r u i s i n g to the lungs, a gain
                          D        s u p p o r t i n g c o m p r e s s i o n of the chest.

                                             My a u t o p s y s h o w e d that K e v i n w a s a n o r m a l l y developed,
                                   fit, healthy, y o u n g m a l e with no e v i d e n c e of any natural
                                   d i s e a s e w hich c o u l d h a v e c o n t r i b u t e d t o w a r d s d e a t h an d it
                                   w a s my o p i n i o n that K e v i n had a normal life e x p e c t a n c y .                   In
                                   t e r m s of the m o d e of d e a t h the c o m p r e s s i o n of the neck or
                                   c hest h a s o c c u r r e d h e r e and u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s o c c u r s ver y
                          E        rapidly, c e r t a i n l y w i t h i n a few seconds, and t h e r e is one
                                   r e p o r t e d c a s e o f it o c c u r r i n g a p p a r e n t l y i n s t a n t aneously.
                                   F o l l o w i n g u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s t hen t h e r e is no d i s c o m f o r t and no
                                   pain.         D e a t h t h e n o c c u r s a f t e r a p p r o x i m a t e l y t h r e e to five
                                   minutes, sir.

                              Q.   So b e c a u s e w h e n we say a s p h y x i a p e o p l e t hink of a g o n y for
                                   a g e s and ages.         What you a r e s a y i n g is that the pe r s o n
                          F        h i m s e l f w o u l d ver y r a p i d l y not k n o w a n y t h i n g at all about
                                   what was h a p p e n i n g ? - A. I s h o u l d sa y the wor d “a s p h y x i a " is
                                   u n f o r t u n a t e in that s c i e n t i f i c a l l y it pa r t l y i n c ludes s i m p l y
                                   that t h e r e is not e n o u g h o x y g e n in the blood.                 It doesn't
                                   imply actual s u f f o c a t i o n and p r o l o n g e d death.

                              Q.   Did you s a y t h e r e were four f r a c t u r e s to the v oice b o x ? -
                              A.   Yes, t h e r e are two b o n e s in the v o i c e box, as you know, sir,
                          G        a n d bot h t h e s e s h o w e d two f r a c t u r e s each.

                              Q. Now the r e a s o n w hy I a s k e d you was this, and I want to put
                                 t his to you b e c a u s e I w o u l d like to get you r view on it, o n e
                                 O f f i c e r will be d e a l i n g with the v a l u e of thi s e v i d e n c e in a

                                                                            3
                          H


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
r       L   *

                                                                                          DR.    D A V I D NEIL    SL A T E R



                               moment but she s a y s that at a point w h e n this lad was in the
                               g ym n a s i u m , in o t h e r w o r d s he h a d a l r e a d y bee n m o v e d a c r o s s
                               the pitch, she s ays she h e l p e d h i m into the gy m from the
                               pitch, p r e s u m a b l y she c a r r i e d him-             He s t o p p e d breathing-
                               S he gave hi m the k i s s of life, d i d some heart massage, he
                               o p e n e d h i s e y es s a i d a w o r d a n d died.             Now in the light of
                               you r p a t h o 1o g i c a 1 findings, is that in fact a p o s s i b i l i t y ,
                               do you t h i n k ? - A. Well, sir, I w a s a w a r e of t h i s s t a t e m e n t
                               a n d t h e r e f o r e I h a v e c l e a r l y g i v e n thi s m a t t e r c o n s i d e r a b l e
                               thought, sir-                I t h i n k there a r e several c o m m e n t s to m ake
                      B        but the m o d e r a t e l y large n u m b e r of a u t o p s i e s I d i d from this
                               incident, sir, thi s wa s c e r t a i n l y the most s e v e r e cas e of
                               t r a u m a t i c a s p h y x i a that I a c t u a l l y dealt with.            T h i s was
                               b o t h in t e r m s of b l u e n e s s of the face a n d a l s o the a r e a of
                               p a l l o r of w h i t e n e s s a r o u n d the mouth.            Sir, it w a s a very
                               v e r y s e v e r e form of a s p h y x i a a n d I do not t h i n k that
                               u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s w o u l d h ave b e e n q u i c k e r than t h r e e or five
                               seconds.            I hav e no r e a s o n to a l t e r what I h a v e a l r e a d y s a i d
                               on that a s p e c t .

                                         The o t h e r v e r y s i g n i f i c a n t t h i n g about this, and it als
                               s u p p o r t s th e s e v e r i t y of t h i s case, is that a g a i n of the
                               a u t o p s i e s I did a p p r o x i m a t e l y 15 p e r cent had s o m e sort of
                               f r a c t u r e to t h e v o i c e box, t h e larynx.             T h i s c a s e was h i g h l y
                               unusual in that in fact it h a d four f r a c t u r e s to the larynx.
                      D        It w a s by far the most s e v e r e c ase of v o i c e box fractures.
                               Not onl y d o es t h i s i n d i c a t e the s e v e r i t y of the t r a u m a t i c
                               a s p h y x i a at the t i m e but it a l s o in fact m a k e s it v i r t u a l l y
                               i m p os si bl e for the p e r s o n to hav e s p o k e n by v i r t u e of the
                               fact that t h e re w e r e f r a c t u r e s to the v o i c e box, sir.                 So
                               all I ca n say, sir, that s c i e n t i f i c a l l y and m e d i c a l l y I find
                               that i n c o n c e i v a b l e that th e p e r s o n c o u l d h a v e spoken.

                          Q.   Th e o t h e r t hi ng I n o t ic e is that you s h o w in t h i s p a r t i c u l a r
                               c a s e e x t e n s i v e c o n g e s t i o n of the cerebral v e i n s and
                               c e r e b a l l u m and c o r t i c a l c o n i n g and if a per s o n s p e a k s his
                               n e u r o n s a r e working, aren't t h e y ? - A. That is right.

                               That e v i d e n c e w o u l d indicate t h e r e had b e e n e x t e n s i v e b r a i n
                               d a m a g e and he c o u l d n ' t r e a l l y comm u n i c a t e .   W o u l d that be
                               r i g ht ?     I don't want to put w o r d s in y o u r m o u t h but I want
                               to be sur e about t ha t ? - A. T h e c o n i n g i n d i c a t e s the
                               s e v e r i t y of the a s p h y x i a and a g a i n that w o u l d h a v e r e s u l t e d
                               in i r r e v er si bl e b r a i n d a m a g e w hich a g a i n w o u l d t o t a l l y
                               p r o h i bi t any form of co m m u n i c a t i o n .

                          Q.   I have thought about thi s comm e n t as well, of course, and
                               t he r e are several e x p l a n a t i o n s (1) that it did n ' t o c c u r and
                               that the o b s e r v e r is m i s t a k e n but a n o t h e r p o s s i b i l i t y that
                               ha s o cc u r r e d to me and I want to put it to you and p l e a s e
                               d i s a g r e e if it is not e i t h e r right or you don't accept it;
                               it is possible,          is it not, that if a p e r s o n h a v i n g d i e d is
                               m o v e d ai r or s t o m a c h c o n t e n t s might be e x p e l l e d and might
                               m a k e a s o u n d as it escapes, so to s p e a k ?           Is that a



                      H


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
X ** I
                                                                                               P.s.    JOHN K I L L O C K



                               p o s s i b i l i t y ? - A. It is an i n t e r e s t i n g comment, sir, b e c a u s e
                               it is a p o s s i b i l i t y I c o n s i d e r e d a l s o m y s e l f a n d that is
                               c e r t a i n l y an e x p l a n a t i o n to the n o i s e w h i c h c o u l d h a v e bee n
                               m a d e w h i c h may h a v e m i m i c k e d the w o r d "mum" but it w o u l d not
                               e x p l a i n the o p e n i n g of the eyes, sir.

                          Q.   No-   - A.    But    it w o u l d e x p l a i n   the noise.

                                    M R . FRASER:             No questions, sir, but t hank you v ery
                               much, Dr- S l a te r          for that s y m p a t h e t i c an d d e t a i l e d
                     B         explanat i o n ■

                                         THE CORONER:       Any o t h e r q u e s t i o n s for Dr. S l a t e r ?
                               T h a nk you v ery much, Dr. Slater.                 We s pent a lot of time
                               t h i n k i n g about this s e n t e n c e b e c a u s e it w a s d i f f i c u l t . I
                               didn't t h i nk it was possible, from what I kne w of the
                               e v i d e n c e but, on the o t h e r hand, we d i d n ' t want you to feel
                               that we w er e n ' t t e l l i n g you what was in th e s t a t e m e n t s .           We
                               felt it was b e t t e r for you to h e a r it and have it e x p l a i n e d
                               r a t h er tha n for us to kee p it u n d e r wraps, so to speak, and
                               y ou might p o s s i b l y find out s ome o t h e r time.             I h o p e I have
                               t a k e n the right d e cision.          I don't know.          The o n l y p e r s o n
                               who k no w s that is you.          We did s p e n d a lot of t ime t h i n k i n g
                               about it w o n d e r i n g what to do for th e best.

                     D                         F O L I CE   SERGEANT     JOHN K I L L O C K   - Called

                                                                 Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                          Q.   Yes. - A- P o l i c e Sergeant John Killock, sir, of the West
                               M i d l a n d s Police. I hav e p r e v i o u s l y t a k e n the Oath.

                          Q    C o u l d yo u the n please, if you would, take me t h r o u g h the
                               s t a t e m e n t ? - A. At 070 0 h o u r s on Saturday, 15th April 1 9 3
                               Mr. J ames S t e p h e n W i l l i a m s saw hi s son, K e v i n Daniel
                               Williams, leave the family hom e w ith the int e n t i o n of
                               t r a v e l l i n g to Sheffield.        He w a s to travel by t r a i n wit h a
                               n u mb er of f ri e n d s to w at c h the Semi Final football m a t c h at
                               H i l l s b o r o u g h Stadium.   K e v i n h a d a ticket for the match.

                                         An d r e w D u n c a n t r a v e l l e d to S h e f f i e l d wit h Kevin, T h o m a s
                               James N i c k s o n and G r e g o r y Fagen-              T h e y t r a v e l l e d by train,
                               a r r i v i n g at S h e f f i e l d at 1040 hours.               G r e g o r y F a g e n left the
                               o t h e r s at the station.                The o t h e r t h r e e y o u t h s caught a bus
                               from the s t a t i o n to H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m w h e r e T h o m a s
                               N i c k s o n left them.

                                       A n dr ew D u n c a n e n t e r e d the s t a d i u m w ith K evin at about
                               1330 h ou rs via the L e p p i n g s L ane t urnstiles.                The y i n i t i a l l y
                               s tood t o g e t h e r in E n c l o s u r e 4 but s h o r t l y a fter they m o v e d
                               to E n c l os ur e 3.       At about 1445 h o u r s A n d r e w Du n c a n saw o t h e r
                               friends on the terraces, i nc l u d i n g A n t h o n y Maxwell G r i e r an d
                               Stuart Thompson.             Stuart, of course, a lso lost his life at
                               Hi 1 l s b o r o u g h .



                      H


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                                      DR. ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUMPEKT Sworn

                                                  By THE CORONER:

                          Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
                             names, qualifications and appointment? - A. Ernest John
                             Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
                     B       University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
                             University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
                             College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal_College
                             of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
                             neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
                             Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

                          Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
                             professionally, I dragged you back from Cambridge
                             today? - A. Yes, sir,

                          0.   Where I tracked you down!    I very much appreciate the
                               fact you dropped all your other arrangements in order
                               to be here.    Thank you very much.   Dr. Guinpert, you,
                               of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
                     D         I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
                               following Hillsborough and indeed you may well know one
                               or two people I will be referring to later, but this
                               particular case was not one you came across.     You have
                               heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
                               young man.    What I would like you to do now is to give
                               us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
                               instance and then we will try and relate it to this
                               young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
                               relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
                               became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
                               kidney transplantations, it became very important that
                                the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
                               usually in accidents, could be increased because the
                                life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
                               completely different to the life of a patient who has
                                to have dialysis three times a week.    They can go back
                                to normal life.

                               A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
                               and published.    This consisted of certain examinations
                               of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
                               brain stem.      If you imagine the brain as being like a
                               walnut, and it is, it is like having a carrot stuck
                               underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
                               matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
                               respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
                               controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
                               this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
                               between four    and six minutes after deprivation of
                               oxygen, then    the person is going to die.   They canbe
                      H                              - 15 -


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                           kept alive by artificial means and some of you may
                           remember the case in America which was kept alive for
                           thirteen and a half years.

                            Some of us were concern ed that the guidel ines that were
                            drawn up were not stric t enough and that there was no
                            call for them to be rep eated after a pass age of time,
                            Perhaps unwisely we sai d this and this re suited in a
                     B      BBC "Panorama" programm e one night at ten o'clock when
                            the medical profession for once actually debated it,
                            eight of us.    As a res ult of that debate the
                            regulations were harden ed.    They had to be carried out
                            by senior people who we  re used to doing i t and they had
                            to be repeated.    A sat isfactory outcome from my
                            personal point of view,   although I don't know whether
                            the anguish was worth i t really.

                            As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
                            years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
                            procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
                            duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
                            dead without being disturbed by it still.

                     D      From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
                            experience of brain death and brain damage.   It seems
                            clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
                            probably dead before he was got out of the area in
                            which he was standing.   I would agree with Dr. Slater.
                            I would think consciousness was lost probably within
                            ten seconds.   I would say loss of pain would be almost
                            instantaneous - not quite, but almost.

                            I cannot explain the Liverpool Police Constable's term
                            "convulsion because to me a convulsion is a major
                            epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
                            not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean.   I
                            think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
                            means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
                            any significant movement.
                            Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
                            can twitch and very unnerving it is too.   This is
                            really due to a spinal reflex. What we think happens
                            in anoxia - lack of oxygen ~ is that the brain stem
                            dies first.   The cortex, that is the thinking part of
                            the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
                            longer and the peripheral nervous system probably quite
                            a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
                            what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

                          0. I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
                             statement when he was discussing the question of a
                             pulse says he may have been mistaken, but let us
                             hypothesise that in fact he wasn't and he had felt a
                      H                            - 16 -


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                               pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
                               would that fit in with your understanding...   Is that
                               a possibility? - A. It is a possibility, sir.   I would
                               like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
                               quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
                               pressure, as would have been here.   In fact it can be
                               so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
                               electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
                     B         stopped or not.

                               I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
                               I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
                               house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
                               Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
                               did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
                               died you opened their chest and you massaged their
                               heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
                               It was while I was working for him that one day three
                               of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
                               and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
                               Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
                               twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
                               last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
                     D         to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
                               junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
                               a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
                               quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
                               incredibly difficult.

                          o.   You heard Dr. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
                               Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
                               eloquent,   I felt quite nervous

                          0. You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
                             loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
                             there.  Can you give me any idea that if a person
                             becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
                             can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
                             Slater put it very clearly.   You all read in the
                             newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
                             had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
                             able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
                             the operation.   Again I have experienced this at first
                             hand when I was doing heart surgery because then it was
                             often very important not to depress the state of
                             consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
                             anyhow.   When we used to resuscitate the patients we
                             used to give them an electric shock.   Lord Brock used
                             to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."   The patient
                             would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
                             were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
                             else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
                             question of degree.

                      H                             - 17 -


J. L. H a r p h a m Ltd
I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:     No questions, sir.

            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Dr. Gumpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
deep unconsciousness.   Following deep unconsciousness,
do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
Either may occur.  There is no particular rule.   The
thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
close the dead person's eyes.   I don't think I have
had to do that more than two or three times in my life.
Most of the people I nave seen die have died with their
eyes shut.
Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
feeling any pain or discomfort.   Is then the face of
the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing
pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
Not in my view.

Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
thereafter brain death?

     THE CORONER:      Could you repeat that question?

      MR. LIMB:   I am referring back to the process, or
 the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
 Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
 thereafter again brain death.    The nature of my
 inquiry was as to whethe-- following profound
 unconsciousness, although there may be no outward
 expressions there is this change that the face becomes
 discoloured?
      THE CORONER:     The greyness you are driving at?

      HR. LIMB:      Sir, that is right.


                         -   1 8   -
                                                   O f; 0 e *




VIEWED 3C.*.8?                 HILLSBOROUGH JUDICAL ENQUIRY

                                        VIDEO SCHEDULE


                 Full lenghths/
                  Video Ref No       TB1/A/PART '
                  VHS/Numatic        NUMATIC
                  Duration           From 11.59. 51     to 13.02.08


Real time        Film begins - throughout duration of film at intervals of
Data Base        approximately 1 minute camera switches from the following
 '1.59-51        locations with no incidents of any note*-

                  1.     Pitch and Team benches

                 2.      V iew of Penistone Road

                 3.      View of Leppings Lane

                 u   .   V iew of Leppings Lane

                 5.      View of Penistone Road




                 Film Finishes




                 Film viewed by




            I
            I
r




    VIEWED   3C.-.59               HILLSBOROUGH j u d i c a l e n q u i r y

                                              VIDEO SCHEDULE



                       Full ienghths/
                        Video Ref No            TB1/A/PART 2
                        VHS/Numatic             NUMATIC
                        Duration                i Hour



     Real time
    Data Base
    1302:26             Film begins - throughout duration of film at intervals of
                        approximately ) min. camera switches from the following
                        locations, with no incidents of any note:-

                        1.   Pitch + Team Benches

                        2.   View of Penistone Rd, North from Stadium

                        3.   View Leppings Lane, from Stadium

                        4.   View of Leppings Lane, Turnstiles.

                        5.   View Penistone Road




                        Film finishes.




                  \




                                                                                    JX.hd
                                                                                      I.
                     TBl/A/PART 3
                      NUMATIC
                     60 Mins.




Film starts

Leppings Lane + Turnstiles A-G Compound, crowds increasing,
but flowing freely.

Police van with emergency lights displayed driving into area
near gate 'C '.




Compound at Turnstyles A-G.  Lepping Lane completely compact
with crowds.  Area at Gate from Street also compact.  Police
Horses visible at that Gateway.




Leppings Lane, area n e a v m g with people.




Leppings Lane crowd surge backwards from Turnstyle A-G.




Views inside Ground i Fens at Lepping Lane,    Pen 6 has large spaces
available in crowd.
C   < *    I




                               HILLSBOROUGH JUDICAL ENQUIRY

                                        VIDEO SCHEDULE



                    Full ienghtns/
                     Video Ref No        TB1/A/rAr;. j
                     VHS/Numatic
                     Duration            60 Mins.



     Real time




    - ^ 5 9 ;i9      Fans climbing fence directly behind goals,   Lepping Lane.




    1^59:25          Pen 1 spaces available in crowd.




    1 50 0 : 00      Gate 1   opened to allow small amount, of fans into pen.




    1502:35          More fans spilling onto pitch from Pens 3 & u directly oer.ir.-
                     Goal Post.  Police Officers seen to make area.




          >03: '5    Fans collapsing onto Piter




     '50^*: 08       Film finishes.




                                                                                       i   tt
«   %




                                          TB 2 /A/FART ’
                                          N’UMATIC
                                          FROM 11.59-52 TO    1 3.00.01




    Data 3ase

    1   1 .59.52   Tape commences and shows views cf Leppings Lane, Penistone
                   North, tne pitch and the players tear; benches, Leppings Lane
                   Turnstiles and the turnstiles in Penistone Poad North.   c . a - r . .-1 6 /
                   is for a matter of seconds only before the recording moves to
                   another view.
                   Nothing of any great value is shown on the tape.




    13.00.01       Tape finishes

                   Tape viewed by




                                                                                                  -T<
                                  TB 2/A/PArT
                                  NiJMATIC
                                  60 MINS




Data 3ase

12.59.35     Film starts.
             For duration of filrr: cameras swap from the following
             locations, at intervals cf about 60 seconds, witn no
             incidents cf any note.




             1.   Leppings Lane fron stadium.

             2.   Leppings Lane Turnstiles A - G

             3.   Penistone Hoad ;icrth.

             4.   The pitch ana Team Bench.




13.56.27     View of West Stand tew tans on .^erraces there.




1^ .00 .AC   Tape finishes.
»
                             :i   ._




                                        TB 2/A ?ART 3
                                        NUMATIC
                                        FROM ’3 .59 •58




    )ata Base

                    Taps commences with views oi ^xit v in the Spion Kop and
                    continues with views of Leppings Lane Turnstiles, the West
                    Stand, Per.istone Road North The Spion Kcp.




                    View of Leppings Lane end terraces, plenty of room m   one pen
                    in view, insufficient detaii to identify which pen.




                    View of area directly in front of turnstiles A - G in
                    Leppir.es Lane end showing ±srge number of people packed
                    together with mounted Policemen leaning over and talking to
                    one of the crowd.




                    Tape finishes.




                i
                i




                                                                                     J. t
                                                                                        -I
Part - Commences.   Leppings Lane Turnstiles A - G.
Also in time lapse.
Heavy crowd outside Turnstiles
Mounted Officers in centre of picture.




Shows shot of youths pushing towards Turnstile from left of
shot.  Mounted Sergeant attempting to ease crowd back.




Youth being carried by Officer into ground via Gate ' C .




Distant shot showing crowds outside Turnstiles and in
Leppings Lane.




Distant shot of youths climbing onto Turnstile block.




Close up shot of youths climbing onto Turnstile block,
above Gate 'B '.




Views over to area of 1 - 16 Turnstiles.




Overall views turnstiles area.   Leppings Lane
Very crowded.




Views of A - G and ail Leppings Lane.




 All Leppings Lane Perimeter gates shut.
                                           TB 2/A/PART   4
                                           NUMATIC
                                           1 HOUR




Data Base

14 . 4 4 .d 3       Youths climbing over    *B * Gate.




 4.4t;.Cfc          General views of A - G, Leppings Lane, Gate C.




 4.46.08        I   10 Youths on roof of A - G Turnstiles.




                    More youths on roof of A - G Turnstiles block.
                    View of gate C and outside Leppings Lane.




  u.ub.22           Youths start to jump down of roof.




  4.47.02           Slight problems at Turnstiles, very slow flow through A - G.
                    Perimeter Gates still appear close.




14.47.12            Closer on closed Perimeter gates.




14.47.25        j   Close up closed perimeter gates.




 14.47.20           Stream of youths pouring over roof.




 1h .48.00          Gates open - "Ejection".




     .48.13         Pouring through Gate *C ' into compound.
                                        TB2/A/PART 4
                                        Ji’
                                          JMATIC
                                        1 H JijP




Data Base    !
             1
                 Policemen trvir.sr to stop flow through Gate 'C' .



                 :Oi :   ".orse     sr.o:



                 Police horse at Gate ' C .


                 Gates aocear closed.       Ycjtns moving away from uates ar.a
                 Policemen.



                 near view                         sing through hole    WcLi     tov;ar
                 Pens 6 - '


                 Back on gate + outs ice



Iu .4Q.00        Horse outside Gate           .rolling crowd.



li.4 9 .A8       Perimeter gates closec.



14.49.58         Good view of Leppir.gs _ar.e, large number of spectators backed
                 up Leppings Lane away from Ground.



14.50.59         Area immediately outside A - G, heavy but not bursting room to
                 tne left.  Large number outside perimeter gates, which are
                 still closed.
                 Very slow flow through turnstiles.



14.51.50         3 Mounted Officers outside Gate C perimeter gates.




                                                                                          -r
------------                                                                               1




                                          TB 2/A/PAR"
                                          NUMATIC
                                          •. HOUR




     Data Base


       ■.-
         JC9 .V
              Oj
               '"
                u'    lose up of Police + crowd close up outside uate




                     Right hand of Perimeter of outer fence area A       u open,
         .52.12
                     fans coming through, area packed.




       4.52.20       late closed,   large numbers climbing the wall.




      '4.52.2*       Gate *C * ODer. crowd pouri ng through p erimeter gat es shut.




       4.52.40       Fans moving around from front of A - G
                     Coming in via Gate *C '.




      14.52.57       Perimeter fence still secure people climbing over it.
                     Entrance to Gate 'C ’ flow controlled.




      14.53.00       Crowd swaying outside perimeter gates.
                     Further outside perimeter gates, large number of people,
                     mounted corning in left to right breaking crowd.




      14.53.20       Fans climbing both perimeter walls + fence.




      1^ .53 .40     Second Gate left to right opens and fans enter area in
                     front of A - G.




       14.53.44       .eft hand perimeter gates open.



                                                                                      -H
                                          TB2/A/PAPT
                                          NUMATIC
                                          ' HC UF




 •   T.fi   * ^ se

                     Pens L - m , oer


                      ;tsice .urnstile;           r.eavy crowd pressure.



                     ;iose up back of 1 - 8 .urr.stiles + Gate 'A'.


                     Outside of 1 - 16, very full of crowd ail perimeter gates open.
                     Police Inspector or. roof of ’ - 16, also PC on roof above jate '



14.54.3C             youths on roofs above 1 - i6.      Crowd outside swaying.


                     Leppings Lane Gate   'A' side.    Mounted Officers.



14.55*17             Overall view of rear of A - G and 1 - 16 also up Leppings Lane.
                     Ground side of A - G full of people.  Spectators going through
                     hole in wall.  Perimeter gates outside A - G open.
                     Gate 'C' still open.



 4.55.35             large number at rear of gate 'A'.



14.56.29             Crowd at rear of A - G, people still climbing up outside fences,



14.56.32             Area outside A - G and up to perimeter gates clearer;
                     Leppings Lane, Police holding back crowd, the far side of
                     perimeter fence.
Data Base

            ■lew of insdie      outside A -      urnstiies stii^    Lowing
            through gates.




            View of Hear of A - G and ' — ’o .urnstiles.
            Rear of A - G full, and congested. Some people going through
            hole in walls.




            Fans now coming through Gate 'A' area.




'i .58.23   an'.e's of Police suoervislng flow of supporters via Gate 'A'



            Gate 1C 1 has been closed.




15-OO.li    Overall view of A - G + outside area, Police cordon in situ:
            Not many behind turnstiles.




  .
1 5 02.11   Close up of perimeter gates by wall between A - G and 1 - 16.




15.02.39    Overall view; rear of turnstiles and Lepping Lane relatively
            clear.




15.02.53    Film swings inside ground.        Terrace West Stand.




            P ho to gr ap he rs by fence.
i   •




                                                    TB2/ A ? A n i
                             . d e c ,~ef
                                                    NUM a t ::
                             •3/            i:
                             ;r*a- •^               1 HOUP




    Data Base

                               Lose u p on Pens 3 - 4 , Police by fence.
                             Mar. in Bib (Steward?) on fence.




                             Gate '41 open.      Fans climbing over fence and perimeter tract
    15.03.26



    15.03.25             (   Steady flow over fence onto pitch from inside pen,
    until




         i.■
           >
           jo                Fans on fence starting to pull people out of pen.
                             Cordon of Police along pitch.
        rontinuous           General scenes of people climbing out of pen, focused mainly
                             on pitch.




        15.09.^"             Police at fence.




        Continuous           People climbing out of pen.




        15.16.10         I   Ambulance arrives.




        15.19.57             Senior Police Officer on fence with Loudhailer.




        1 5 .2 2 . 0 8        Police inside pen entering via open gate.




        15.25.42              Changes to long range view of goal area West Stand, congested
                              with spectators.



                                                                                                -J
X   4 ** *




             DAta Base

             15.27.37        Fectle arriving witr,




             '5.27.48    !   People starting tc         >dies on Hoard:Lr.gs.




             15.31.24    i   Ambulance leaves front of Stand.




                             Film stoos.
                           QUESTION                 ONE


Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield W ednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself



Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training fo r such functions should be the subject
o f a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Com m anders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
training in the basic strategy of policing football m atches and would also give
opportunity for the pooling of experience and the solution of common problems.



Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 52

52. Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training course for
senior officers presently acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do so.
Such a course should include training in the basic strategy of policing football
matches.
                                                                                         B.L. HOLE



But there w e r e n ' t any O f f i c e r s                                            d e p l o y e d on you r o rder to
the tunnel?                                  - A. At P h a s e               2 sir.

             p^ase 2       P h a s e 1 w h i c h is w h e n peo pl e are coming
        - A   Th e O f f i c e r s on tho se ser ia ls are at the b ack of
    the -e r-aces at the turns tiles, tha t is on the inside o_
    thl ^ s t U e s and tha t is w h e r e they are ceployed.

                 Rl,i. w h a t is y o u r u n d e r s t a n d i n g of vii, Mr. Mole,
    1                    face    of i t w o u l d a p p e a r to i n d i c a t e t h a t you
    w h i c h o n uhe         f.        a t t h e bac]t Q f the t e r r a c e s tc
                        -he St ewards                         to direct, int er alia to di r e c t people
    hel p               >-he s t ® /ar                             e v e n l y b e c a u s e that is one or     .e
    “                                                         - A  M y u n d e r s t a n d i n g o£ that is the


        U       U       t            M       r
                                                                      suTi-nZrii
                                                                             t
                                                                                                   S o p i e a r o asthr i ^ c u 3
                                                                                                  . S « d C„ the t e r r a c e s .
    That                is m y u n d e r s t a n d i n g                     of    uiot p a r a g r a p h .

                            on riuties in the stands and terra ce d
        ■Officer.> e w r S p S o S S “ s at the rear of the crowds
        areas      r aised   or*otherwise advantageous positions
        using a n y         raised oro        Q r a v a i l a b l e ". - A. T h a t is
        w h i c n m i g h t be P r°         h             d e p l o y e d to t h o s e t e r r a c e s
        c o r r e c t sir, a n ? ^ ® n                    up      b u t in P h a s e 1 of
        t h a t is t n ®                   is a t t h e t u r n s t i l e s f o r p u b l i c
        th e o r d e r              £ p r o o e r t v and advising and directing.
        S ^ r P ^ r r no9
                        p e ^ e r : r t h - e . m a tch they ta,e u ? advan-
                   * ^ — ^ 4- fho            Oi chs t©iT]r&c6i>*
        tageous points at the re^r

                        n r course                    unlike          th e       league matches,             as w e h a v e
• BU" . ° \ ! 2 t h e r e                                     wer e    no O f f i c e r s de ployea on any cue J T
                                                                                                                 CV
                                                                                                                  \>
            f &                              S                M                   S & K E -                        “ “        -


    • s .;-:;; s r . :                                                                 “ ■ s n .::1;;;-4-T“ l” '
o           in fact k i c k - o f f was due at 12 b u t delayed till 12.15?
            -       a   . T hat is correct,                                sir.

q. That,                         I suppose,                    a v o i d e d to sone extent the drink problem?
            _       a   . It did sir.

Q* Beca u s e of course t                                              h     <     ^     ^    ^     ^    “ e l f c ^ y o u l e f
                             licence d r i n ^ o n                         I Sunday .orning? - A. No,                     sa,e
            licensing                            ho u r s .

Q.          Sane                 licensing hours as pubs? - A. Yes.

    q   . I think tha t is r e a l l y ^ “                                                        f^J^involve'd
                K ??                         srtrrh/evfntrofthfisth                                     »*            . - t.

                                                              that y o u w e r e transferred o n the 27th
                                                              US
                of       M   a   r   c   h   a n d     t h erefore It course you w ere aware t h a t your
                                                                      24

                                                                                           3.L. MOLE



                                     successor, C h i s f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k i n f i e l d was going to_
                                     have      to take o v e r the p o l i c i n g of this event? - A. T h a t is
                                     c o r r e c t sir, yes.

                            0         And a l t h o u g h things had gone in your v i e w well in 1988
                                      there was always a p o t e n t i a l p r o b l e m w i t h a rull house
                                      and large n u m b e r s of s u p p o r t e r s coming in from far a u e l d
                     B                from outs i d e S h e f f i e l d ? - A. I t h i n k w h e n e v e r you have
                                      54,000 p e o p l e c o n g r e g a t i n g t o g e t h e r there is always
                                      potential.

                                           :re c t . Duckinfield was b e i n g thrown in at the deep
                            Q.        In e
                                      end, was he not? - A . I t hink his e x p e r i e n c e o_ p o l i c i n g
                                      football is wide.     C e r t a i n l y I think he had not p o l i c e d
                                      a semi-final b u t c e r t a i n l y p o l i c e d crowds m large numbers.

                               Had he o o l i c e d H i l l s b o r o u g h befo r e ? - _ A . He had p o l i c e d
                            Q. H i l l s b o r o u g h w h e n he was there in a d i f r e r e n t rank sir.

                            q       . W h a t r a n k ? - A. I b e l i e v e m y      recollection        is as Chief
                                      Inspector and Inspector.

                                      So he had n e v e r b e en        in the p o s i t i o n of having as it were
                                Q. a o v e r v i e w of the o p e r a t i o n ? - A. I w o u l d be guess i n g n
                                      I said he h a d o r h a d no t b u t I d on't think he had ever
                                      bee n in c o m m a n d of the o p e r a t i o n at H i l l s borough but
                                      c e r t a i n l y S h e f f i e l d U n i t e d he ha d and at other m a j o r
                                      events in the town sir.

                                o      And   vou no     doubt     then briefed          h i m in s o m e d e t a i l   about
                                       the p r o blems     that he m i g h t a nticipate? - A.                I dia sir,       yes.

                                0     D i d y o u go a r o u n d t h e g r o u n d w i t h h i m ? - A. No sir,
                                       Mr. Duckinfield has a k n o w l e d g e of the ground having
                                       w o r k e d there    in the past,            as I have said.

                                       So there was no as it w e r e                 w a l k round w h i c h you consiaerea
                                Q.
                                       n e c e s s a r y ? - A. No sir, in           fac t I called him to a meeting
                                       p r i o r to m y d e p a r t u r e w i t h    the rest of the p e o p l e involved
                                       in the p l a n n i n g and he was             present     at that p rior to nis
                                        promotion.

                                 q   . T h a t was a m e e t i n g on the 22nd of March? - A. T h a t is
                                        corr e c t sir.

                                        This was a m e e t i n g w i t h as it w e r e your sub-commanders?
                                 Q. - A          Yes and o t h e r i n t e r e s t e d parties.    I received n o t i ­
                                        fication of the m a t c h o n the 20th of M arch and conscious
                                        of m v mov e on the 27th I ca l l e d an urgent meet i n g ror
                                        i-he 22nd w h i c h i n v o l v e d all the sector Commanders that
                                        t selec t e d to s u p p o r t Mr. D u c k i n f i e l d together wit h
                                        p e o p l e like the transport, B r i t i s h Rail; Officers in the
                                        Central D i v i s i o n wh o w o u l d be affected by the influx or
                                        p e o p l e a n d the T r a f f i c D i v i s i o n etc.
                            H


J. I. H a r o h a m l t d
                                                        D.G. DUCKINFIELD


        ground for a period of 12 months.

2       Your rank at this stage being? - A. Chief Inspector.         In that
        period I think if I am correct which was between September
        1979 and June 1980, I had experience of policing a Semi-Final
        tie between Liverpool and A r s e n a l , and also the major tie
        between Sheffield Wednesday and Sheffield United on Boxing
        Day.  On both of those occasions they attracted capacity
        crowds.

3       Which was your area of responsibility within the grounds?  We
        know Chief Inspectors have the responsibility of a number of
        serials? - A. At that time the organisation was a little
        different, and to be quite specific I cannot other than to say
        I was on the perimeter track occupying a position very similar
        to the Sergeant who now occupies that position where the
        players run o u t .

Q       Near the p l a y e r s ’ tunnel? - A. That is right.  I had that
        responsibility.         I remained there until June 1980.  In June
        1980 I was transferred again as a Chief Inspector to the
        Attercliffe sub-Division which deals with the industrial part
        of the city, and at that time did not have a particular
        involvement with football matches or public order.          I
        remained there for a period until 1985, when at that time
        after promotion, I moved to West Bar Police station as a
        uniform Superintendent and Deputy Divisional Commander.

             From the transfer to Attercliffe to West Bar then my
        policing role changed considerably.  As you can imagine in the
        city centre I was regularly involved with the policing of
        marches, demonstrations, on a regular basis, and also
        responsible for the policing of Sheffield United football
        ground.  During the initial period I policed the ground on a
        regular basis and took a regular interest in the game and also
        the policing of the ground.

Q        When you say responsible for policing, were you the person who
         drew up the operational plan? - A. No.   The structure is such
         that the sub-Divisional Commander, that is the Superintendent
         of the Central Division would with his planning team draw up
         that plan, and as Deputy Divisional Commander would monitor
         that situation and assist and supervise in the absence of that
         Officer.   The Officer at that particular time was
         Superintendent Marshall, who is now my Deputy Divisional
         Commander.   So he and I worked together for a considerable
         period quite closely on public order matters.

    Q    That was from 1985 u n t i l ? - A. Until I was promoted
         recently.  I may have got that particular date wrong, but
         certainly for a period of three years with Mr. Marshall.

    Q. So about three or four years before your promotion? - a. yes.

    Q. We know you went into post on 27th March, was it, this year? -
       A. Yes, sir.
                                                                   115


                                                                                          D.G. DUCKINFIELD


                               q   . From what you told us, although you had had experience of
                                     policing football matches and as a Chief Inspector had had
                                     experience at Hillsborough and perhaps as a Constable? -
                                     A. Yes, sir.

                               q       . You had not had experience of planning an overall
                                         responsibility for a big tie such as this? - A. In terms of a
                     B                   Semi-Final tie, you are quite correct, but I should make the
                                         point that during my period at West Bar I had an involvement
                                         not so much in the detailed planning but certainly supervision
                                         of the Billy Graham concerts that were held at Bramall lane
                                         football ground, where there was a capacity crowd, and only
                                         last year during the summer Bruce Springsteen, an American pop
                                         artist, came to Bramall Lane football ground for a weekend,
                                         and he'held two concerts on a Saturday and Sunday evening, and
                                         there was an expected attendance of 48,000 people on each of
                                         those days.  It would be wrong to say I know that 48,000
                                         attended, but almost that number attended.   So I have
                                         experience at first hand only last year of policing a Bruce
                                         Springsteen concert and a large number of people attended.

                               Q. But your last direct contact with Hillsborough, if I have
                                  correctly followed what you told us, was some 10 years ago? -
                      D           A. In terms of a Police C o m m a n d e r , yes, s i r .

                               Q.           In terms of any sort of policing? - A. Yes,   it was.

                                   q         So you were in need, were you not, of reconsidering orlooking
                                            again at Hillsborough stadium itself? - A. There was,
                                            u n derstandably, with a promotion only a snort period before
                                            the event, I may not be so well acquainted with the finer
                                            detail a s ’possibly Mr. Mole, but the point is I know the area
                                            and have policed the area before.

                                   Q        Yes, but things have changed since you had been there over the
                                            last 10 years.   Most particularly in that period the radial
                                            pens had been erected, and that of course made a considerable
                                            difference? - A. Yes, sir.

                                   Q. When was it you were first aware you were going to be landed
                                      with the policing of this game? - A. I would say, as Mr. Mole
                                      was, I think it would have been the Saturday or Sunday, the
                                      weekend where the fixtures for the Sixth Round were decided.

                                   Q. 20th March, I think, or thereabouts.  Only about a week
                                      before.  - A. I think the announcement was made on the Monday
                                      morning when the draw would be made.

                                       Q.   I can't immediately remember what date it was.

                                                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Monday,   20th March.

                                                  THE WITNESS:   So I learned then.

                                       q         MR. COLLINS:   You learned then, and you realised
                           H                immediately this was going to land on your plate very shortly
                                            after you had taken over? - A. Yes, sir.

                                                                                                              U
J. L. H a r p h a m L td
                                                                74
                                                                             W. JACKSON



                in the m i n d s of some on the terraces.                          You are unaware of
                that? - A. No, I wa s u n a w a r e of that.

                                     4-n cav is it not, that in determ i n i n g whether
                a ^ a r t i c u l a r event*has been a'success, that is a football
                n   a   t  has been a success in terms of policing, you get
                            c   h


                no input at all from the spectators? - A. That is correct.
B               The o n l y input we w o u l d get is if we got letters.

        __               r-nn=;idered e ver w h e t h e r you o u g h t to ask the
    Q * S u p p o r t e r s 1 A s s o c i a t i o n s , if t h e r e are any, w h e t h e r _ t h e v
        h a d any c o m m e n t s t h a t m i g h t h e l p you w i t h p o l i c i n g ror w e
                    future?              - A.No,         I haven't.

    r.                    -if o c c u r     to you that it m i g h t not be a bad thing
                    *ind out w h a t         the actual consumer, as it were, has to say
                    : A   ? w o u l d have no o b j e c t i o n to that. I know the supporters
                    are v ery m u c h        a l i g n e d to the Club, so I w o u l d nope m e
                    Club M a n a g e m e n t w o u l d pass that on to us.

        O           Yes       bu t the d i f f i c u l t y w i t h a semi-final is you are not
                    an na to qe t a t t e n d i n g it, ce rtainly m numbers, the
                        n n S 'te-s of S h e f f i e l d Wednesday, are you, because you
                    H i e tw o " f o r e i g n teams? - A. I would have no objection to
                     J“h a J-     You w o u l d o b v i o u s l y have to look at it m an
                      indepe n d e n t way b u t I w o u l d have no objection.

        n           RM*             it w o u l d give you c e r t a i n l y an angle w h i c h has so
                    T a r been m i s s i n g ?          A. Yes, X think generally, yes.

        n           ra- I come oh to this year.         M o w you knew, I think, as
                    p - “ about the 20th M a r c h 1939 that H i l l s borough was going
                        to h o ° f this match? - A. Yes, that is correct   I happened
                        to b e i n Mr .Mole1s Division, in fact in m s orflce wnen
                        he received a call from the Secretary.

            o. You also ‘kne w of dourse                             that Hr. Male was about ,to lea-/e
               to go to'Barnsley? - A.                               Yes, I did.

            o           Mr   Mole as you knew was very e xperienced in policing
                         the Sh e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y ground? - A. Yes, he was.

            n           Mr                         the n e w Chief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t -had h a d
                                    D u c k e n f i e l d '

                        e x p e r i e n c e of H i l l s b o r o u g h but t h a t n a d been some ten
                        y e a r s b e f o r e a n d not of c o u r s e as s o m e o n e in o v e r a l l

                        control?               - A. T h a t is rig ht .

            o                    h. ins cominq to some extent new to w h a t e v e r problems
                                 ^     S     crea t e d by p o l i c i n g Sheffield Wednesday? - A.
                            M r    D u c k e n f i e l d was a v e r y v ery e xperienced Commander.
                            He’ p o l i c e d Sh e f f i e l d U n i t e d ground. He also policed the
                            r i t v C e n t r e w h i c h had n u m erous activities, m a t c h e s etc.
                            S e v/ould be s u r r o u n d e d b y v e r y very e x p e r ienced Ground
                            Commanders.

    H           q   . It did not o ccur to you to w o n d e r whether,                      to ask yourself

                                                                                                              0,
                                     75             W . JACKSON


w h e t h e r it m i g h t n o t be an idea to get Mr. Mole to come over
for the da y and deal w i t h the p o l icing or this event? - A.
It w a s n o t c o n s i d e r e d necessary.

It w o u l d n o t have b e e n impossible,           w o u l d it? - A.   It would
not have b e e n •impossible.

Did you c o n s i d e r it at all? - A. No, the reason I did not
c o n s i d e r it is onev that Mr. Du c k e n f i e l d is an e x p e r i e n c e d
Officer* poli c e s S h e f f i e l d United; polices the C ity Centre;
he w o u l d be s u r r o u n d e d by the same team as he was Iasi, ^ear
of ver y v e r y e x p e r i e n c e d G r o u n d Commanders.

    But of cou r s e he is the m a n in ultimate control and I expect
    you w o u l d agree w i t h me that if a prob l e m arises v/hic.i is
    not w i t h i n the a n t i c i p a t i o n of a plan, e xperience is
    e x c e e d i n g l y helpful? - A. I think experience is always
    h e l D f u 1 bu t you can g e t a Divisional C o m m a n d e r W n O moves
    to a r v * p a r t i c u l a r D i v i s i o n and has to deal w i t h a s p e c i n c
    problem that he nay not have dealt with before, b u t in
    Mr D u c k e n f i e l d ' s case he had been involved, v/ith Sne--iela
    Wednesday before, albeit                some time ago and he was also
    involved with Sheffield United, so he was very very rmch
    a ware of football problems.

    Now w e r e you i n v olved d i r e c t l y with, the planning or did
    vou simply let Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d get on w i t h it knowing Jia.
    he was q o i n g to a pply the plan w h i c h haa proved successful
    the vear befo r e ? - A. B a s i c a l l y in my c o n v ersation w i t a
    *ir Mole I- a s k e d 'him if •he w o u l d in tne. initial.vstages               .
    tackle" the p r o b l e m and that wa s on the 20th.. o f .Marctv ,anc
    then-to arrange- a- v e r y q u i c k m e e t i n g w h i c h w a s - d o n e -on
    the 22nd -of March.           Mr. Duckerifield was at that, meeting
    witfr ‘M r - . - ’a n d m y Chief Superin t e n d e n t (Operations^              _
     and a number-1oi o t h e r pe o p l e and from then o n Mr. Du c K e n ^ i e l d
     T oov c^afqe- o f - t h e - p l a n bu t w i t h the same planning .team thau
     prepared**th© •p-l-an--*for -Mr. Mole last, year on..,tbe_same l i n e s .

    " A n d you'“'had* a p p r o v e d the plan the year 'before? - >A.-1 ..approved
*     t h e ' pla^r "the y ear     b e f o r e and I listened to Mr. - Q u c kenneld.
      We did m a k e a slight a m e n d m e n t to the plan.

       that- the r e d u c t i o n in manpower? - A.. No, we .d i d that
‘ £ u f the a m e n d m e n t to be mor e effective- was- i n terms o - -
  t h e p u b l i c order p a t r o l s .  W h a t we d i d we - a r r a n g e a for
  t think i t w a s five s e r i a l s , w h i c h is 50 men, to be m
  a c o a c h at L e p p i n g s Lane.     The yea r before they had been
  a t C l a v w h e e l s Lane w h i c h was some distance away, so we
  felt i t w o u l d be m ore e f f e c t i v e having that m a n p o w e r nearoy.

J. A n d the o t h e r change was, w h i c h Mr. Mole has already
   identified, was the red u c t i o n in manpower.      Were you
   involved in that d e c i s i o n yourself?




                            /A. Yes,      I was   inasmuch                                   tit
•I




                               QUESTION                 TWO

     Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
     prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
     as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
     Semi-Final was based on previous experience. Intelligence reports did not indicate
     that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders.    Police Operations had worked
     previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
     programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
     would have to change our operational plan.

     Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
     the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
     are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control,
     however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.



     OBSERVATIONS

     Please see pages 7 - 1 5 , Volume 2.



     Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 46

     46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
     enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
     match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
     deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                                           81
                                                                 D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D


Q.    In a d d i t i o n , you h a v e the p r o b l e m at all game s w h e r e
      it is a l l - t i c k e t that p e o p l e turn up w i t h o u t t i c k e t s
      in the h op e of b u y i n g t h e m from what are now I think
      euphemistically called t i c k e t -b r ok er s .           A.     On
      o c c a s i o n s , sir, for m a j o r  games, t h e r e are tick e t      touts.

Q.    And   people      turn    up   to     buy    them. A.         Yes,    sir.

Q.    It is t h e r e f o r e n e c e s s a r y , is it not, in any s e n s i b l e
      plan of a c t i o n to e n s u r e that there are Po l i c e O f f i c e r s
      fur t h e r away from the C l u b up L e p p i n g s Lane f i l t e r i n g
      the c r o w d down and i n d e e d on the b r i d g e f i l t e r i n g the
      crowd through there?                      A.That, sir,            is a d i f f i c u l t task.
      The s i t u a t i o n is that           the n o r m a l s t at e of s oc i e t y     is to
      a l l o w p e o p l e to p as s and r e - p a s s and to adopt a filter
      o p e r a t i o n the l i ke s of w h i c h you           d e s c r i b e in L e p p i n g s
      L ane is a c o n s i d e r a b l e o p e r a t i o n and not one that fits
      in w it h n o r m a l p o l i c i n g a r r a n g e m e n t s for a s p o r t i n g event
      w h e r e d i f f i c u l t i e s are not a n t i c i p a t e d .

Q.    Is that q u i t e      right, Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d ? You a r r a n g e d            for
      Police horses           to help in this o p e r a t i o n ?   A.      Yes,               sir.

Q.    Do you a g r e e that the last p l a c e that the P o l i c e ho r s es
      s h o u l d have been o p e r a t i n g was the area b e t w e e n the r a i l i n g s
      and the t u r n s t i l e ?   A.       Are you s u g g e s t i n g the outer
      r a i l i n g s , sir?

Q.    I am s a y i n g that the last p l a c e they s h o u l d have been
      o p e r a t i n g was the area b e t w e e n the ra i l i n g s and           the
      t u r n s t i l e s - b e t w e e n the p e r i m e t e r r a i l i n g s and the
      turnstiles.             A.         It is a d i f f i c u l t area for them to
      operate, sir.

Q.    You never q u i t e c o m e up t o the q u e s t i o n I am p u t t i n g t o
      you.    It w o u l d a c t u a l l y be the last place you w o u l d p u t
      them, w o u l d it not?          A.    I am not an ex p e rt cn h o r s e m a n s h i p ,
      sir.

Q.    If they are not i n t e n d e d for that area, it is p l a i n ' t h a t
      they w e r e i n t e n d e d for the area b e y o n d the r a i l i n g s -
      L e p p i n g s Lane.        That is right, is it not?                   A.    They were
      i n t e n d e d to a s s i s t in c r o w d c o n t r o l in L e p p i n g s Lane, sir.

Q.     Yes, and they a s s i s t by c o n t r o l l i n g the c r o w d by f i l t e r i n g
       the n u m b e r s g e t t i n g t h r o u g h to the concourse.             A. They
       and oth e r O f f i c e r s w o u l d as sist, sir, in as k in g p e o p l e to
       c o - o p e r a t e w i t h the P o l i c e S e r v i c e and form o r d e r l y queues.

 Q.    That is w h a t s h o u l d have h a p p e n e d , is it not?               A.  Yes,
       sir.     We e x p e c t the g e n e r a l p u b l i c to c o - o p e r a t e with the
       Pol i c e and f o l l o w our g u i d a n c e and to form o r d e r l y queues.




                                                           /So    to deal     with     the.
                                                        82

                                                                           D .G . DUCK-Ii7ISLD



             <zo to deal w i t h the p r o b l e m cf people arriving and pac.-:i:
             -hat concourse, vou w o u l d have e x p ected the Police and t:
             horses in h e l p i n g   them to form people into queues? - A.
             U nder normal c i r c u m s t a n c e s sir, yes.

             ,-o,; Che n o n - t i c k e t holders.    As I under s t a n d your anp./sr.
             there is v ery little you can do to stop somebocy v/itncut
             ** * i c ’:er coincj to the* t u r n s t i l e s . Is that '..'hat: your vie-
B            o-‘’voi" duties is? - A. Ho, our role is to speak with
               ceopie and i: p o s sible ensure that ticket holders join
             the q u e u e s .

             v - > o v ’ T'C p ~ c b i e m         a s c e r t a i n i n g .-/no n a s cc <-
                                                   about
    C)
             b e c a u s e a ll yc-u n e e '  is a ;nan    wit h a megaphone near the
               c u n c a b c u t at the cop o: Leppings Lane_ asking p e o p l a ^ c
               ■_      >:,a i j - ckets , chen v;cu know who .vis g o z                  :ic.vs
               u   w             " ,
                                   V.
                                    v." \ Cu can ask   -omecne
                                                       sr           *   cc cc   chat   and
                                                                                       ^     you
             d o n 1 i y ou ?
                     Ngi ieve that t.iat '.,’o uld ca.^s L^lace-                   tn     is t o t s . .
                   r belies
                 :nrealisti

    o. You   s e e , ::r. Ducker.fieId, at other grounds and et !;er
                                            - A ~ ~ <r se? r?
                                                   - - _ svstems          ^ a distance from
       *     ~     .     -            i                       * * T -1- r. C T\ ^ i Ctt’r T
        :ne ^  ciice
             t'UliwC    do use public       accres            «*•
                                    «            ^
         !,e cround to c o m m u n i c a t e w i t h zans.                Do you say z . '. z z zr.a
D        V not a p c s s i b i l ity in Sheffield? - A. Are you sugcestin
         wa t a ^ n stand at the corner of Leppincs Lane with a
         .ecaphcne a n d , can you r e p e a t the latter part?

                                 do r. 11 get into Le;                .ngs Lane unless you                 hr.v
                                 You don ’t wa 1k d c                  Leppincs        Lane      ./ithcut    a
                 t i c . ’i s t.
                                 You den 11      have       to                        he  top     of  Leppir.gs
                     :rg VO i can do it na 1 rw ay                      wn if you like? - A. Can I
                                                                        id ’  .;as a realistic situation
                     *Vo rl*n point, anc. wh a t I
                 >; e G-fc:*v C.U                   *-- ------- --
                                                                        for     this ^articular
                                                                                       -
                                                                                                         game _
                                                                                                       . -*
                 ’->i«-ed o n p r e v i o u s e x p e r i e n c e .         i t v/as a s u c c e s s _ u l o _ c e ~
                 and worked v e r y w e l l .             n J r . . . e u . u - e : .i_ . . . - ^ ^ g ^ c ^
                  n o t i nr • c a t e t h e r e w o u l d b e a l o t o r n c n - t i c . ; e t n o l c e r s .
                                              ■               a man wit h a megaphone at che
                  too of Leppings Lane                   hen    we m us t have a cordon and che
                  m o u t h o: .jeppmgs           -ii k2  Ti *r rL.-
                                                                   V*.ct ooint is considerable.
                                                                     1.
                                                                      <
                                                                  H-




                                                                       at the mouth.         - A. Lei
                                                                  ft




                                                       i do
     Q.
                                                       , a c ros

                  ■ ro    r c " r h e bridge. — A. rlay I ma^e   he point?   You are
                  - o ^ r c ” the''coal posts.                     4
                                                  vie started off at     top  of
                                                                          uWy u_        -



                  Lo^oings Lane and beca u s e I sai d it ««s a difficult situa ticn
                  \ ’2 ~ have m o v e d down the bridge.   Leu s agree on .ial-wa* .

                          r n r , D jus^TCi: TAYLO'1: Hr. Duci;enf ield, nobody is
         0   .    talki n g ^ a o o u t the bridge, as I u n d e r s t a n d ^ i t . ^       are
                  talkinc about the a p p r o a c h down Leppings ^ane ^ o m -..t _
                  o'-he1* end, from the roundabout? - a.                   u n c e r s m x i r . c si.
                  V/CiS • • • •

                  ,T'hai" is '!”v 'ie talking about a man at tne roundapouc.
H        Q.
                  So leave"the’ bridge out. - A. Okay. If ,/e are to form

                                                                                                                       u a
                                          83
                                                          d   .g .   j u c :;e n ? ; z l d




       , co rdon h a I f w a v dow n L e p p i n g s Lane then that is a totally
       di f f e r e n t p o l i c i n g o p e r a t i o n to the one we have been
       -’c c u e tcnec to and once you rorvn a cordon you create uno-wisr
       p r o b l e m 'because v;here do the people 90 that you stop at
       that cordon?             V.'here do the non-t i c k e t nolcers co?      In -i.c
       location 1 have d e s c r i b e d i'c is my understanding we arc
       betwe°~ somewhere in the region of Vere Hoad and Eic.ierten
B      „ a d ^ - v a t e housing, shops, commercial premises.                     Tnere
       “ T,.            an u n d e r s t a n d i n g and consideration for those loca
       residents a b o u t the b u i l d up of a crowd a t _that location
        ~nd where they are going to go.                       Tnose roaus na/e w--:.
       v vri gi-ec off" for very go.oc reasons in the past and manr.ec
        -•rd'i would sa- it causes another prob l e m if there is a
       build           at that location by push i n g the crowd further rou.\

                          viRt   - am not sure that I fellow the p r o b l e m .
        -hose w i t h " tickets simply walk on, they lust hold them up.
         ;.q<t- 2 per ’•cldinc tickets are cola to go ^ac.., _'OU aiO :.c_
        --ominc throuch, pus.', c z i .        ■■>;:at ia wrong ---- _..c._r ^ <-.•
        Tr,        -v that is a c c e p t a b l e . In practice c u r s..p e r i s r . e e
        has not b e e n t h a -
                              c tr.is is n e c e s s a _ ^ .

                                      "-      i-heory:' it is practical because or.;
D   o. I am h^ppy tc i*..y
       ^r^or'civs-' earl i e r in the inquiry was that the Police
       would*have no p owe r tc stop a n o n-ticket holder going t o _
               cround as a signtseer.                    .ne iacu is           i_ ~.e _o-_~v-
                ha v i n e d i f f i c u l t y c o n t r o l l i n g a crcwc, a non- _ic:;e ;
        ■'-lder&wc'’ld be i n t e r f e r i n g with the operation of the Pcli-
        V r c -cw d control and there w o u l d be no problem a^out _to 1 i 1.
        * V -- tc. cush off bach up towards tne rour.caocut, ^wculc; -.’                    .s.-
        - A. '"’There w o u l d if he did not wa nt to go.                    He has a n g n t
         to cass and repass.

         t ? he is o b s t r u c t i n g the Police i n the enecution^of _their
         d u " ’a - ■'’e can be told to "Push o :.'1 can't he?       A. .-e c:..
         if"he"insists on b r e a k i n g through the cordon when you have
         given a directive.
tr O
x        C « rt a ’nlv, so looking at the matter from bey one. tne turn-
               le*    w q u accept that a proper Police operation coulc
         havo c o n t r o l l e d the flow of people before it crushec         _
         into -hat c o n c o u r s e before the turnstiles? - a . m e P o l ^ t
         Q O e r ? t<oa as env i s a g e d had worked previously witn cans
         £; r W inc: over a oeriod of time and obeying instructions
         !; 'he nrograitunes and the Press and it was never er.visacec
          t h a t ’a situation w ould arise on this occasion wnererwy we
          would have to change o u r operational plans.

                ? ->a - c- course it is said it is much earlier out you
          - I v e ’I n s i ^ d on 2.30 so I accept it - by 2.30 this s m a U
          c o n c o u r s e between the railings anc tne turnstiles ...          ^
                  e,i full O f p e o n l e , w a s n ’t it/ - ^y vie, ..as ..o., -
          camera and yes, there w ere a lot of people taere.

H          w     ^P'-e were still         people coming down Leppings Lane?
          A - "eu cir.
                                                    34                D.G.     DUCKLh? iZZLD



        2 ~ the police o p e r a t i o n    in Leppiugs Lane nad beer, an
        c ^ f ^ c i e n t one there n e v e r w o u l d have come an occasion i.v.en
        t:,e v/},ole C — tiiat n a r r o w little co**cou_v»ciS jammed *ull
        q — spectators or p otential spectators, */ou 1c                   ;er e ,  .c -c
        would have bee n queues at the turnstiles? - A. I disagree
        *-ir        ';e police bv c o n s e n t in this country anc you are
         lavinc"the b laae at the door of the Police Service.                      tne
B       cereral public who v/ers approacmr.c t^at location car.
         see the ‘      s i tuation and ou r op e r a t i o n './as designed for c o ­
        operation. and one w o u l d nope i±. tne^ = c.w a c_o.vd ti.e^.
        v/ould wait and form a queue.

        r      w    -
                        -ru w -  **
                                     _ 44
                             ^ v^--amine    that
                                             . i. W answer
                                                    * *W >• ^ —  — for
                                                                .^
                                                                   w —
                                                                       ^
                                                                         ~the
                                                                            _   reality
                                                                               -------------
                                                                              i .r   •
                                                                                             _ of
        T i*       r-   '
                    — -WV             l e t holders       arriving         half-an-kour           before
        - ** ,o     Vi :                          ''       i n e , cc".e dewn L e p p i n e s Lar
                                                           '
                                                      n ' *• i c h t h e P o l i c e . -<Uv e f a i l e d
                                                   .-Nr*i \ ' v- s e b e t w e e n t h e TcL’ 1 ’ - r e nr. v-
        ■_o d i s p e r s e '-'it                                                            r^-~.
        the t u r n s t i l e ,                    u r v i e w a s a P o l i c e 'V--- i c e r c f
        creat enperienc                                1 11a t s t a g e a l l t h e s (Z. —       ans would
                                                                          n ;-- ;_ xi. u •<-w c c no f u r t h 3 1* .
        t u r n round t o e                            C .n C
                                                            L  s  a y :
        ,J3 ..lUS t nO w C.P:-* c a c . : t . n        t u r n s t i 1 2 r*^ t ^r rrS u n t i l t n e
        crowd w i t h i n      h a s d i s p e r : e   d  .    v.:e w i 11 a l l s e a r.c. on L e p p i r c 3
              o ,ir.d           -   -T c - h ->; . \ i l i a t    yo u r e a l l y t h i f^.* p e o p l e dc 7 ~
D       "hel l c e n e r a . i y                                                                         . - :
        who s e e a q u e u e a s t n e y a p p r o a c x i 1 : a l o n g ^ s . i e e t s                     c
         and w a i t .

         A c i r . e ma q u e u e i s a q u e               T h i s was n o t a q u e u e ,
         s e e n i t or: a . - 2 v i cla o a ..        cu have seen i t .                    At 2 . 3 0 , l o n g
         b e r o r e j o u cc.^                         I a be   - cc.TiG  r s ,   t n s r e   was a
         w h i c h had b e e n p e r m i t t o         c    f o r m    i n   t h a t   c o n c ourse.     Is i t
            c u r c o n s i d e r e d vie'.; tr.       P o l i c e m e n can r e a s o n a b l y a n t i c i p a t e
         i
            h a t p e o p l e c o m i n g c.o\.r.         n i n e s Lan e w o u l d t h e n o f t h e i r
         own v o l i t i o n n a l i u n c ••   .    .'.o   f u r t h e r u n t i l t h e y sav/ m o jar
         d i s p e r s e ? - A. I d o n ' t r e e why f o o t b a l l s u p p o r t e r s s h c u l c
          h a v e a d i f f e r e n t a p p r o a c h and m e n t a l i t y t c _ q u e u e i n g t nan
             nv b o d v e l s e a n d _ w o u l d n a v e cnougp. t a s t n e y a r r i v e d c~
                            - ■          - —* — • -           Lt i o n a-■'.nd a c-ueus t .: e ■>■• v.-ou I
           jeppir.gs Lane a n a sa. . _
          ; i c . l t a n c i o . . . 1. a •■iu\=u>_

    o       c a 1" ••ou t e l l u s i n t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , 11 t n a t i s w n a t
            ^ s “ r e a s o n a b l y t o b e e : : p e c c e d o f f o o t b a l l s u p p o r t e r s , wny
                •ere i s any n e e d f o r P o l i c e p r e s e n c e a t a l l                  *   foots
            c r o u r d ' 3 - A. B e c a u s e t h e r e i s a : a i n o r i _ y o : i c o t n a l l
             s u p p o r t e r s who d o n ' t b e h a v e t h e m s e l v e s .

            ■ V d t'na t      isthe only reason for having a P o lic e presen ce,
            lu_     i-        d e a l wi t h, t h e m i n o r i t y ./no a r e a c o l i g a n s r - <*♦
            T h e r e ’ is "an o b v i o u s p o l i c i n g p r e s e n c e f o r s a f e t y a n c p p - i c
            o r d e r , b u t I v / o u l d s u g g e s t t h a t we h a v e t o c e a l w i t . , t n e
            ho o 1 i ga n e 1o n e n t i n - o o t o a l l .

             •.■0 :-od v h a s d i s p u t e d t n a t .       Ar e y ou s a y i n g c-.;ic*. L‘ic-'--
             > > o o l i o a n i s m a n d p u b l i c o r d e r t h e r e i s no n e e d - O t c. ^ o l i v ,
H            p?e=enc€ a; £ football asteh? - A. faor. « =■■=                                             o;
              safety.                                                                                                   J. t
                                      85              D.G.    DUCKEih7IELD



    But no th i n g to do with c ro wd control or forming people into
    cueues," they sh ou ld do that themselves? - A. No, we have a
    resoonsibility there but I w ou ld hope that v;e can as.’: for
    the" ass is t a n c e of the pub lic tc form orde rly queues.

    ■'low we come to the pe rio d before the cates were open.  Is
    "’'t vour view new, still your view, that, at 2.30 and 2.-.Z the
g   centre pens 3 and 4 were not fully packed? - A. Yes sir,
    as far as 1 am aware.

    -;hat is your u n d e r s t a n d i n g of the density cf a crowd on
    tsrrscsjs wr.en capacity ;:c.s                       reached, so _nat          — >_
    c a p a c i t v of the cer. is 1200 and 12 uo are m tne pen, ./..at
    i s ' y o u r P e r c e p t i o n cf the dis t r i b u t i o n of people. _ Car. people-
         .l. -:-*r-oT_r iri3 r.es in tr*<3ii"              cmc i'GclCii _r.s —_         - — --
             :hev r o a d their prccranr.a comfortably?                  Ara they
    Nv the oerson in front or beh.ir.d? :.:hat is tne position as
    vour p e r c e p t i o n of it? - A. I w o u l d say a shoulder to sr.cuia
    chest to back.

    *;hat chest to back touching?              - A.    Yes.

    Shoulder to shculcer touching?                 - A.   Yes.
D
    \;c -com to oick vcur progr amm e up and look at it ir. Jrcr.t
    V    vour face? - A. ho, I think if you are chest to cac :
    and shoulder to shoulder there would be room, but tnera i.
    oackinc.



E




F




G

                                                    /Q.   I don't k.now .....




H
                                                                                                 j.l
                                             25


                                                          W. JACKSO'I


             encourage peoole to come early?      We actually wrote to the
             neople who have the m a t c h programmes; we wrote _o ^Chie
             offi ce rs o c Police; we wen t on the media; we asked people
             to come early so that they could get into the ground in
             pl en ty of time.

             NOW       Mr. Jackson, a Police operation has got to deal_with
             thinas as they develop.                We have heard much or this rrom
B            fir     n u c k e n f i e l d about assessing the developing situation.
             n v " 2 30 it looks from the videos as though there were
             v r e t t v crushed crowds within the turnstile area and
             arriving at the peri me ter outside the railings.

                     Can t no-./ deal with how that perhaps should have bee:
              co ntrolledT   Vou agree that t h e first essential is not
              to allow the turnstile area lO be ^ull.       A. Yes.
C
              You therefore need a cordon of some sort or a filtering
              system outside the turnstile area and at Leppings ^a^.e
              th- one advantage is that you have_ got tne railings .o
              enabi° you tc filter.  Is that rignt? - A. Yes.

              addition you need control of the crowd down Le: 5ir.cs
    Q. But in
              T ha
                 C lt is  rignt, i s n ’t it? - A. VJel 1 we had sufficient
D       jane        L i a
                 ficers on duty to take account o_ m a k e r s
                                                                   i ••

       Police Of
       that.
                                        v:hat I wan to deal with is vp.au can
                  Well that inay be
        Q.                             it was done on this occasion is another
                  be done.  Whethe:
                  matter, but l e t ’; see what can be done.
                              -0 ^h          i-he point of view of trarfic control,
                  that is e n a b l i n g 'traffic to pass and repass along Leppincs
                  'ane and over the bridge, and from tne p o m . o: view
                  C o n t r o l l i n g the crowd arriving at the r a m n g s , ax, you
                                  ic w h a t is done on match days m stadium aicer
                  s o d i u m So and down the country, that is a controlled
                  c r o c o d i l e ’may be six, may be seven, may be -our or -ive
                  cr ocod i             J ontr ol le d crocodile walking on the pavement
                  dowr *T eopincs Lane controlled by mounted Police? - A. v;e-l
                  f ‘
                    S i n k that is wh a t the mounted Police Orficers were
                   trying to do.
                          ’      rhpv did or did not is again another matter,
         Q-        m?   TacksSn^   All I am asking from you is an acknowledgement
                   that"there are means of controlling a crowa arriving au
                   a *stadium^whe ther” 1ate or early? - A . Yes, I accept that.

                   C    -If f n pcontrol of the crowd, whether they had arrived
             Q.                    2 30 or 2 .4 5 , whenever the bulk of them nac
                                     lhev had been escorted down Leppings Lane
                             can s e e very clearly in photographs which I thin.<
                          V          i-pn" i~st year - escorted down in a crocodile and
                   W K re I f v a l l o w e d into the turnstile area through the
                   " ^ e s wien there was room within the area, there would nave
                   been no crushing? - A. I think that is what tne Police
    H               Officers were trying to do-                                            ±2
                                     64
                                                                      W.   J AC K S ON




         The p resence of the Police may, in p articular
Q.
         circum stanc es, prod uc e a n ta g o n i s m ? - A. That is right.      It
         c ould exac er ba te the situation.

         It has been put to you by a series of questions that all
         that is n eeded is, for example, a filtering.       Do you
         foilou^   In the past has there been any practice of
         filtering sup po rt e rs out as they have gone along Leppings
         Lane to ensure that cert ai n individuals do not go in or
         has that been a matter that has been left to individual
         Officers to ask, "Have you got a t ic ke t?     Where do you^
         think you are     goin g" ? - A.When you say "filtering out   ,
         coming to the     g round or going auay from the ground?

         Comin g to the     ground'? - A. It has always been....

               LORD JU ST IC E TAYLOR:       I think he means     filtering in
Q. and w eeding out? - A. Yes, at all ticket matches it has
         always been a pract ic e     for Police Officers to do that
         uherever possible.

               MR. W O O D W A R D - Has that been done by uay of making
Q.
          hoardings across the road? - A. No.

 Q        Bv making a cordon across the entrance at Leppings Lane? -
          A No   c erta inl y not. I think on this occasion, for
          example, that uould have been very, very difficult.

 0        Where you may have boisterous or unco-operative
          individuals, hou is that to be dealt uith by indiVldual
          Policemen? - A. By strict and positive control over the
          individuals concerned.

 Q        And hou is that, in terms of manpouer, to be accomplished^
          - A One of the things that you have got to be careful
          about in an operation like this - I mean, I do appreciaxe
          ue had just over 800 Police Officers in and about
          Hillsborough, but you are very quickly denuded if you
          start m aking uholesale arrests and, consequently, you have
          got to be careful;   you have got to try and deal with it
           in other sorts of uays.

     Q     The gates that come across the approach to the t u r n s t n ^ .
           they form the first barrier - the fi-st physical b a r r i o -
           that the appro ac h in g spectators find. Has it been t h e
           practice to use those gates to endeavour to control
           people going touards the t ur nstiles? - A. I am not rea.iy
           familiar uith it as to uhether they did or they did
           but I should think they uould use those gates for tha-c
           purpose.

     Q.    Have you seen the video conc er ni ng the crouds outside              vr.e
            g at e? - A . Yes.
                                                  R. MARSHALL



         the general b r i e f i n g I think you spoke to your Chief
         Inspectors again? - A. Yes, I did.

    Q. That is Chief I n sp ec tor War ing and Chief Inspector Purdy
       and did you - and I am taking this from your statement -
       reaffirm w h a t you c o ns ide red to be the salient points of
       the duty, that is searching, coach reception and general
B      standards of be haviour? - A. That is right.

    Q. And did you indicate your intention wh ich to patrol on foot
       throughout the sector until kick-off? - A. Yes.

    Q. And y o u wo ul d end up, as I understand what you have cold us,
       you always intended to end up at the Leppings Lane turnstiles?
       - A . Yes.

    Q. And you i n t en de d   to get there at about qua rter-past-2?    - A.
       Yes.

    Q. You we r e not, as I un der sta nd it apart from net being directly
       re sponsible for the Officers on duty outside the turnstiles,
       you" were also not direc tly responsible for the mounted
       Officers? - A. Yes, I had some moun ted Officers wor ki ng for
D      me.   I had s i ” at Wads ley Dridge Station; si;: at the turr.-
       smiles anc - our in     1 j— a i^oad«

    Q. V/ere they under your command? - a . They are under the cc;.-_r.ar.ci
       of their own Inspector, 1:1 ra            lanas-Davis wnc './as
       nomin al ly in charge of the mou nt ed Officers, but
             r T_   T          Ui.C r   Officers to do scmc-th; ‘-s
           chev w o u l d do ii

    0.   Did you liaise '.rich Inspector Hands-Davis beforehand in crder
         to work out with him what use you would, or zo what use you
         w ou ld put the mo un te d Officers? - A. Ho.

    Q.   It was a case, was it, if the need arose you could contact
         him? - A. Well I have worked very close with Paul Mar.cs-Davis
         ove r m an y years on football matches, crowd control, and
         he w o u l d not need me to tell him what to do in a situation.
         He would know instinctively wha t to do.

    q   . w ha t did you understand, what did you believe the mounted
          Offi ce rs in your sector would be doing assuming you gave the:."
          no instructions? - A. The Officers in Halifax Road would have
          the job of stati on in g themselves on the route from the
          station, Wads ley 3ridge Station down to the ground.            The
          chaps up at the S ta tion would have the job of meet ing the
          train w h e n it arrived and forming the fans into a crocodile
          and then escor ti ng the fans down to the ground.          The mounted
          Of ficers at the Leppings Lane turnstiles wo uld have the job
          of m a i n t a i n i n g the queues and doing a generally high, profile
          role, the one that they are used to.

H    Q. Did you antic ip at e that there would be mounted Officers in
        Leppings Lane itself at or before the perimeter gates to
        the ground?- A. Yes, they are usually there on match days.
                                                                                    I
                         QUESTION                 THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?


Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room w ere overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the team s were on the
pitch, the option to delay becam e more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.



OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 6 - 4 1 , Volum e 2.



Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the team s had already
com e onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams w ere coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2 .54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not, however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there w ere others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
control room.

227. The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there w ere some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed w henever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.



 Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

 29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
 command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
 deciding whether to exercise it.
Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration
deciding whether to exercise it.
                                               143


                                                                              D.G.   DUCKINFIELD



             refe re e?    - A.    Yes.

             t_ f ->rt a s we know that a r r a n ge me nt did not work as it
        Q.   h a p pe ne d       but that was the a r r an ge me nt ? - A. Yes, the
             s r r a n E e m e n t was that a Po li ce Off ic er at the tunnel would
                   muni rate wi t h the li ne sma n near est to the players         tunnel,
                                                                                    tunr
             who would th e n i       indicate
                                       n di ca te to
                                                  to" the referee.                     tt
                                                                       Unfortunately, that
             was not pr o mp t e n o u g h .

B       -              Did you dis cus s at all at this stage, or had you
        Q.          •H.ioH at this stage the c i r c u ms ta nc es unaer uhich you
             co ns i d e r e d at this s t a g ^ _ ^ ^ ^  ear li er dur ing the build
             up§ M    ?hl operation,        but not ea r l i e r that particular day.

                     MR.   COLLINS:        I d o n ’t k n o w ,   s i r,   whether   you   would l i k e
             to   go i n t o    that   tomorrow?

                    TORD JUS TI CE TAYLOR:     I think that might b e d e a l t w i t h
                         m o r n
              tom orr ow morning.i n g We will br eak off until 10 o clock,
              Diease.

                               (The Tnmn' rv was a d jo ur ned u ntil         10 a . m .
                                        thp fo llo win g morning)

    D
                                                               1




                                                 EIGHTH             DA Y ' S     PROCEEDINGS

                                                 THURSDAY,                  25th     H A Y , 1989

                                                           (MORNING             SESSION)

                                    n,„n           GODFREY            D U C K E N F IELD.       re-cs-lled

                                          Fvg.i ned by                mb        r.OLLINS      (cont.):

                       ij    k en we a d j o u r n e d y e s t e r d a y I was about to
        H r . DuckenfieI d,             plans for d e f e r r i n g the kick-c...
        ask you a bout c°n t i 9 nk V P sai(j fchat you had h a d some
        Presumably,                       and      I           c i r c u m s t a nces      in    which       the      kick-cfr
        mightSbe°postp on ed.                                  A.          During      the      a f t e rn o o n ,    sir.

                           r                T mean         in       the p l a n n i n g stage - was
        But              before       "                    t        c i r c u m s t a n c e s whi c h might            lead
            n0 C 0 " S l d e r fn          postpone kick-off?            A.       In g en e r a l
            d i s c u s s i o n s a b o u t t h e p l a n n i n g of the o p e r at i o n , yes.

            At w ha t            stage       was         that?             A.        I cannot         be specific.
Q
                                                 .hese             discussions            held?           A.         Superintendent
            w i th         whom      were        these             Oxs.
Q
            M u r ray.
                                                  *. mo nf them?      A.        It was s u g g e s t e d that
q                 What was the                  outco; -o u tside the gr o u n d     and b e y o n d our
                if the re  was                  an ev         side ^                   a ma JQr accident
                control,   for i n s ^                   n'             simiia r event          that would prevent
                on the m o t o r w a y                                t e r s f rom a r r i v i n g at the g r o u n c
                ^ f i ^             then we              should         consider         the      situation.


    Q   .   I t       about u ,                                                                                 K X ’t X S
              a ^ r g e      number                     or ^                ^         g.^^        _ tthgt       stage.
              a c c o u n t at a n -

    Q                           L O R D J U S T I C E TAYLOR:                     That was         the p l a n n i n g

                    A.          Yes ,sir.
                                                               cn      really very little final was decided;
        °           itwas"just*"so m e w h a t                       s p e m u l a t i v e at that stage, is tna.

                    right7             A.          In     what        resPect'

        q                In the s e n s e              that all                                                 f ^ u U o f T h e ^
                ’ r a n s ^ o ^ n o t 0 the° fault                         of   anyone          causing        late    a rr ivals?

                     A.         Yes,        sir.
            Q        But    that          is as         far     as     it had gone?                  A.        We    had   a g e n er a l
                     oiscussion              about         it.
                                                  • ► h t-hP d a v                       in   question, you, I imagine,
            q    . Before I continue with                  ®      *                             i n t e n d e n t , the document,
                   h a v e s e e n , h a v e y o u " 0 $. C h i e f                      !> P           ^     have yQU nQt?

                      P
                      A r° dU i f d e p e n d s           !hich I I I            you are         ref e r ri n g      to,   sU.

                .        . ..                          acout        these        d o c u m e n t s w h « h _were       P-duced^
                                                   20




A                                                                                     n.G.     DUCK2NFIS1Q


        Q       w, know that was in fact the situation because we have
                leari plenty of evide nce to tnat eucact. -  A. I c.i* ..ot
                rece iv e " th a t inform ation s i r .

                Did you instruct, as part of your: briefing, your Sector
B       Q.      Commanders out si de or any Officers to give
                information should tae occasion arise.       A. No b..,
                wo u l d expect them to give it me.

        n       Oh C h i p f S u o e r i n t e n d e n t i s t h a t f a i r t o them r e a l l y t o
                e x o - c t t h e m ' o f t h e i r own v o l i t i o n t o g i v e tna._ =or,. c c
                i n f o rma t i o n , w h i c h i s n ' t i m m e d i a t e l y o o v i o u s a ,
                i n f o r m a t i o n , t o y o u ab a r o u n d C o n t r o l l e r .
C               trained P o lice Ocficero s ir .

        n  v ? - b-’ t t h e y h a v et o be b r i e f e d d o n ' t t h e y , and t.ney ^
        Q*      o - to r e c ° i v e  i n s t r u c t i o n s f rom t h e i r s u p e r i o r s c o n                 _
           e x o e c . >-o                                         _ nC. - ^ o r -
                 thev?  - A * T h e y ar2 c r a i n e a ? 0 L ^ e O - - 1— - =                  —
                 football matches regularly.

            r    v^n s ° 3 w h a t y o u a p p e a r t o be s a y i n g i s t n a t you ' " 2 - - -
D                ; ; a« v o u r s u b o r d i n a t e s t o ^ c a k e a l l . t h e ^ s t e p s ^ n e c e s s a r y
                 o f ' t h - i r own i n i t i a t i v e t o t i l l y ou in. a ,
                 i 3 e a t r e a l l y f a i r t o t hem?             -  A. I - 1 = *. ai- =
                      = - r a i n e d P o l i c e O f f i c e r s , t.ney a r e _ a c c u ^ o m = c ^ - - -
                  s i t u a t i o n and t h e y a r e o u t t h e r e t o a o v i s a m e .

                                         don't         '<now t h a t c i r c u m s t a n c e s a r e s u c n ar._
                                 c i r c u m s t a n c e s have a r i s e n which render the
E
                  • ^ e s s i t y t o g i v e t h e a d v i c e t rom y o u r e nu uha-
                  T n o t about?            -     A. At 2.30 s i r I c i a . n ' t c o n . i c .
                  unusual.
                  M - 1 1 »oa d i 4 * * t <-ow what was usual did you, o e c ^ a e                              you
                  had"no * k s . c W * c * .     - »• 1 "*»« s x c e n a n c e o.                                -
                  f o o t b a l l matches s i c .
    F
                   Vo - hut not a t Hillsbor ou gh and not a t the L e p o i r . g s u a n e
                   I,r, tiles.                -    A.   Mot at the Le o? in3s Lane turnstiles
                   b u t ' s u o e t i n t e n d e n t Marshall, who has experience, coula
                   assess*the s i t u a t i o n and advise me.

                                r>r\i m ba^k to your statement, and I have got oag
                   r       Please   have it in front of you if you wish.  Havi.n,
    G              d o a l 1 with 2.30 and the question about wnetner you *et
                   people in you say this in your statement:

                                      "ftbout this time I asked S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
                                      Murray to clarify w i t h me the c i r c u m ­
                                      stances u n d e r which we would consider
                                      delaying kick-off."

                       -   A. Yes sir.

                                                                                                                      ± C
                                        21



                                                             D.G.   DUCXEN?IZ1D




q        pr es u m ab l y you asked him that because you were concerned
         as to whether you ought possibly to delay the kick-off.
         A. No sir, not specifically.

Q.       Why did you raise it then if it wasn't in your mind as
         someth ing which was a possibility?       - A. As a new
         Commander, and thinking through many of the developments
         in a semi- fi na l tie, I asked him to clarify with me the
         s i t ua ti on for delaying kick-offs, and it was a general
         conversation.

0        Did you not know then what was the contingency plan for
         delay in g kick-off, because it was your responsibility and
         no-one slse's, to decide on whether kick-off should be
         dela ye d wasn't it?  -   A. Yes sir.

0        Had you not clear in your mind before you started what
         ware the c i r c um st anc es under which you would delay kic.<-
         off?        -     A. As I        said earlier I had had a discussion with
         S u o e r i n t e n d e n t Mu rr ay and during the day, as with many
         things to clarify mv thoughts, I asked him for advice
             once more.

    0    Whv did you need his advice because you surely had already
          m=        i-he decision of the circumstances under which <ic<-
          off wo ul d be postponed.      -  A. I discussed witn
          = u o e r intende.nt Murray many things, and I ]ust discussec
          with him that point to refresh my memory.

    n.       and you go on in                your statement to identify what you have
             a ]_r?adv given us in evidence, namely tnat you aad
             oreviouslv aureed that if there was an identifiable
             o r o b l e m , f o t " e x a m ? l e a serious incident, an accident
             the motorway, fog or something like that which orevar.tea
                        numbers on fans arriving on time, you snouid
             sider dela yi ng the kick-off.                 - A. Yes sir.

    Q.       You go on        to say:

                              "As opposed to those who had been brought
                              to the area within a reasonable time but
                              had chosen not to enter the ground as soon
                              as possible."

              -   a   . Yes   sir.

              That suggests that you had taken a policy decision that if
        Q.
              o r o o l e m s "arose due to late arrival of Cans because they
              c h o s e ” to acrive late you wouldn't postpone the kick-off.
                  A. You have got to be vary careful in a situation such a
              ‘-his with regard to delaying kick-offs.         Now if there is a
              major incident then yes I would seriously consider
              de laying a kick-off as I have said.


                                                                                    1 i)
                                             22



                                                                     D.G.       DUCKENFIELD




n   I a o o r e c i a t e t h a t it is a b i g s t e p t o t a k e a n d it is an
    u n o o o u l a r s t e o w i t h the t e a m s a n d no d o u o t w i t h tnoba
    ? 2 ? ™ ^ i b l e f o r s t a g i n g t h e m a t c h , b u t it is a m a t t e r o:
    c o r a o n e x o e r i e n c a w i t h p o l i c i n g f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s is it
        " a t         i e o o l e w i l l t r y , i£ t h e r e is a o u i l d - u p , i-
    !.hsr> ace'ani p r o b l e m s a t t h e e n t r a n c e s , y o u g e t
    d i f f i c u l t i e s ' i f p e o p l e a r e p r e s s i n g in t o g e t in o y < i c < -
    off?              -   A.   Yes   sir.
     You have              potential        crowd   problems.    -    A.    Yes      sir.
Q
n   t - v o u a * t a l a r g e n u m b e r oc p e o p l e w h o a r e          not       m       tne
u ' g r o u n a o y •k <ii-- ^,< - o c E . - A . Xot n e c e s s a r i l y ,

n  Tn?v         fr u s t r a c e d a p a r t from a n y t h i n g     else,         they      ara
Q- T
   U a n l a t o ooush,
     ? !tiI'to                 - n a y a r e l i a b l e to t r y
                    u s n , -.hey                                     t o t t ; . .....
        ii;:.,:.*
        X u U ,
                  tiand
                     « toeoole
                             ^ who
                               °n tare
                                   i M -late
                                          - for
                                             »• u events,
                                                  '"8 °**1,"one
                                                            1-a              wo-.i-
                                                                                                   rf’
        ?                      -*=y queue and          form orderly queues ana
        Lnuvgirt- ^naw - - . - y ^
        t ) phs v3 n o r m a l l y    -




        Ar= vou a Police Officer                    speaking or      ....       -             ^    i
                a .’=
        apoiymg a     n^rali'aiion.
                    ----
                                       or imagine it, but it doesn't r.app---
        You !■na\ r ho pe m a t
                                    1'/  not with football c r o w n s . - A. =
        d o e s 1 *- ~> Cer t a i r n o u l d n ’t be different to anybody else.
        f o o t ba:LI - T0 Wd 5 -
                                    •n't, but it is a recognisable phar.c-ar.c~
        May b uz> t h a v 5" c u _ : -       to an event on time you cc a .. *ou
        that      f yo u v;ant
                                    ;  turnstiles on time , and i: there is a
        c an C g e t . t o t h :: o: oeople you tend to get pushing.        It
        c r u s h and a c r c w■i it tends to happen.       - A. It car. occur.
        may be s t u p i d cu
                                       i-.r vou should foresee.             -       A.    As a ?o.ice
            A.nd 11 i s some t h
                                              the difficulties.
            O f f i. c e x I c a n f o
            -,*v, rnvil- t ^ = i 3a the oroblem that it    there was a crowd
            b=     I ' L l - still trying to get in through the Lappings  ^
            L^ne” turnstiles at 'tnree o'clock, or just before tnras = c
            Jou might have a c r o w d control proolem. -     A.  I ^n..

            , ;             i••’o^ r tan tly vou might have a sacetv problem
    Q*                                can get crushed in that situation.   - A.
            ? r t h e s a ‘ ?aop!e ara frustrated and they are pushing to g a ­
             in   .
    q       And       that     is    something which you foresaw.               -        A. Not on ths
             semi ~ final day.
         v , fnrpww                  surely as something which might happen it you
    Q ‘ h°^ a 1 a r g 3              number oc people trying to gt in or _ 3 till out
               about                 kick-off.  - A. I think the point is sir that
             a t os
                                                                                                         l
                                              23


                                                                      D.G.   DUCKEMFIELD




            thee-           a crowd at 2.30, there was a crowd of people who
            „ a r « ' “ rying to get in, and there is potential for
            1                   but I did n't foresee at that time from -ne
            "information supp lie d to me, that there would be any
            difficulty.

n           ro<- me oat it this way - I know you didn't foresea any
            d if fi cu lt y but let me ask you this:  you as.od y o u ^
            Question oc Su oe rin ten den t Murray at aoout n a U ?a^-  -
            2-3 to wh ether he thought you could get tnem all in on

            time.        -      A* ^ es s ^r ‘

Q.           He said he thought you could.                   -   A. Yes sir.

^            T-         had     said,        "No, I'm afraid we have got a builc-u?
                         t    don't        think we will be able to get taem m           in time,
                             - o i n , ' t o have o r o b l e m s . " what would you have do n e ’
             -     t.Vwould             have seriously considered delaying tics-o::.

-             F.^-tly               Ana why w o u l d you have seriously considered
v-            b u y i n g fcieX-o!E? - A. B e c a u s e the a d v i c e I was
             g i v e n wls t h a t t h e r e w a s a d i f f i c u l t y .
    n         a - why w o u l d you delay kick-cSf in those circums-sr.ces?
               ; ; : ^ c i c u l t v did yoa foresee, or what p r o o f s _c:c iS<
              Forties or what dangers did you forasea if you aic r.ct
              d e l a y kick-off? -      A. Would you rapnrase cnat agai., s...

    n         vou sav           that if Hr. Hurray had said to you,_ "I c o n ' thi-i<
                    -M          be abl= to get all this lot m oy enree o — —
              !e ^           At that stage I would have considered delaying <i=<-
               of f .
    n         whv, -            A. Because if you can't get the fans in, and t h e r
               w a s ' ' c o n s i d e r a b l e -number outside _that weran . g e c t m ,
               there, I w ould have delayed the <ic*-Ocf.

        n        but: for what ourpose?           To accommodate the fans or
                            houci’nt that there might be otherwise crowd c o n . - c
                 o r o b l e m s and d i s order problems outside, or a _ c c m o i n a , i o n
                 nF the t w o ’       - A. No.     We ara taking the point tnat -
                   :        T am eaviia is this:      if there were perceived
                 diffi c ul t i e s   that could have caused a major problem at
                  ?         ! n d the advice I was being given is we snoula delay,
                  I ’w ould have considered delaying.

                             loro    JUST I C E TAYLOR:    We are skirmishing.         Can   I -r
                  and clarify:
                           , ,    , .• ,   a s k i n q is if you had decided to delay the
            Q ' A/ n f f ' a q a i n s t    what risks       would you have made that
                -; :           / g         w o u l d you have thought it right to do it?
                     A I f ’t h e X        was a danger to life and injury.

                                                                                              ~   1
                                                                       24


                                                                                                                          D.G.      DUCKENFIELD

A


                                                                       r ," t ;                                     " S       = “    r        “   • « '

                      i                                                     - it-       -natter then whether people hava cno
         q.   now why doe,                             it * a t t ~                        reason, the fact is if t.nere



                                                r & X i- '- * — —                                                   u     -
                                                          j                     hActt t o v o u r s t a t e m e n t , t h a t y o u
                  But you s a y ,                                      w o u l d o o s t o o n e k i c k - o f f i f t h e r e was
               h   a   dread th a .
                                a   g                         *                w   h      you
                                                                                       ‘i c h       h   at a l k e d a o o u t , as
                                                                                                            v   e


                  an ^ ericieiaoL: o?,,ho had b=en brought to the area wi.a.n a
                  o p p o s e d to      t had chosen not to enter the ground as
                  rea sonab le a j       w h a _ you ap?ear to be saying is tna. ^
                  soon 3 j p o ’ J i _*          • w ,3 *-h°ir fault you were n-^‘
                                                                                 -
                   they were late oeca             u            u cead j_t in that
                  g o U ; to delay :^ c< - o . , o     ^          lacW     ln

                   ^ d f H n f n 1 o ; - l . t. = o ~ r . .                                      I don'. » a n                      that.

n                                                      b* saving is that you had made a
D         Q . what it                               ; wouLd not delay the kick-or: i: the c r 1 y
              d ecision                     that yo                     fans' own d e c i s i o n . i     15
                                                                           U what --ha            a tame
                     that               nght^or             t h a t i s wha t t h e s t a t e m e n t s a y s .
                     says?
                                                         _ ._                 v o u !"he o o o o r t u m t y o . c l a r i : y i n -
                       ^ ^               ?l-              detain              the flexibility to delay the kic<-
                       iha;
    El
                       off
                                                                  =-          half oast two    tnat itwasn        >-    _ ^
              Q.        Anyway you                                            ^ t'
                                                                                 n ree the crowd    had c o n c m u e c   -o
                       necessary.                        By                   “T
                       increase.
              -             s„           -h ,    situation             die     net get any better,                               it got worse,
              vJ .         a^           v.11-
                           A.       Yes         sir.
                                                       i -n ^                 ^ not by twenty                                 to three that you
                           and           it      « B » U   ;                ? i r in in tiine? -                              A. No sic.     It was
              Q.
                           plain                that we had'a dLEEiculty at twenty to three.

                                                                                   i                                                     •-   not         to oos
                           ^ f ^ h a , ;                  been a con sideration sir,                                      but at twen.y to
                                                I was overcome by events.

                            what events ware you                              overcome by,                           -        A. The radio
                            d ev elo pe d a fault.
                                                 .....            a bit about                   that,           which           radio developed a

                            Sf . , 3               -     £    ™
                                        • •                - h a t y o u c o u l d n ’ t c o m m u n i c a t e w i t h who?                                  A
    H                                                     « 5 i c « s in the operational c e l d .
                                          D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D


developing,       sir.

Well, it was mors than d e v e l o p i n g , it had d ev e l o p e d , had
i t~ no t? A.   Yes.   There was a p r o b l e m at that end.

And it was b e c o m i n g clear, was it not, t h a t you were not
g o i n g to get all that crowd in by 3 o ' c l o c k ?  A.   Yes,
sir.

Why then, at that m o m e nt , did you not make the clear deci s io n
to p o s t p o n e k i c k - o f f ? A. B e c a u s e at that time my mind
was taken up w i t h o t her things, a s s i s t i n g S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
Marshall.

You had a c r o w d th ere d e v e l o p i n g .       You had a s i t u a t i o n
w h e r e the c r o w d was such that it was plain, was it not,                       that
p e o p l e m i g h t be in d i f f i c u l t i e s ? A.   Yes, sir.

By 2.47 you knew that peop l e w e r e indeed in d i f f i c u l t i e s
b e c a u s e you had the first re q u e s t from S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
M a r s h a l l to open the g a u s . A.    Yes, sir.

q 0 that    you    knew   you    had   there    a real     crowd        problem.
A.      Yes,    sir.

 If k i c k - o f f was net p o s t po n e d , that p r o b l e m wo uld be likely
 not tc go away but p o s s i b l y to get w o rse as peo p l e tried
 t o g e t  in by 3 o'cl o c k.      A.       Yes,sir.


 :urely at that m o m e n t you have no a l t e r n a t i v e but to say
   K''ck-cff must be d e l a y e d . "     A.    That is incorrect, sir.
 Let me take you back to the s i t ua t i o n .               We have by new
 no i n c i d e n t on the roads or no fog on the P e n n i n e s but
 we have a p r o b l e m o u ts i d e .    At ten to three we p re s u m e
 that we have a p p r o a c h i n g 50,000 pe op l e a l r eady in the
 g r o u n d and at that stage there are 50,000 peo p l e in the
 g r o u n d r e ady and w a i t i n g for the game to kick-off.                There
 is no i n c i d e n t i n s i d e the ground that is going to
 a f f e c t the k i c k - o f f and I had a s i t u a t i o n o ut s i d e the
 g r o u n d that is a very s e ri o u s si tu a t i o n, as you say, so
  I was c o n c e n t r a t i n g on the very s e rious s i t u a t i o n
  o u t s i d e the g r o u n d to try to r e s o lv e that s e r ious s i t u a t i o n

  But what I am s u g g e s t i n g , you see, is that a delay in
  k i c k - o f f w o ul d have been one of the -- p e rh a p s one cf the
  most i m p o r t a n t means by which you could deal with the
  very s e r i o u s s i t u a t i o n o u t s i d e the ground, b e c au s e you
  wou l d -- the e f f e c t of delay, if p r o p e r ly announced,
  the e ff e c t of del a y w o u l d be to take the p r e s s u r e off
  peo p l e t r y i n g to get in b e c a u s e they w o uld know that
   they w o u ld not have to get in by 3 o'clock, they would
  have until, say, 3.15.                        A.   I think we have to a d d r e s s
   two p r o b l e m s .        D e l a y i n g the k i c k - o f f is one thing.
   C o m m u n i c a t i n g that to the c r owd o u t s id e and g e tt i n g them
   to agree wi t h your r e q u e s t s is a n o t h e r and the s i t u a t i o n
   was that a l r e a d y I u n d e r s t a n d that O f f i c e r s were t e lling
   peo p l e that the k i c k - o f f had been d e layed and they were
           r e s p o n d i n g tc tho s e requests.                In addition. Pol i c e
                       34



                                D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D


Officers were asking people to ease back.   They were not
responding to those requests.   They were not responding
to the tannoy message.




                               /But you did net knew....




                                                              ~±
                                          35

                                                     D.G.   DUCK2WFIELD



Q           But you did not know that at the time, die you, tha- is uO
            sav vou did not know that individual Officers were telling
            people that the kick -o ff had been delayed? - A. It was
            b e c o m i n g a p p a r e n t that people were not responding tc
            :;r. Marshall or other Police Officers' directives because
            that situ at io n w o u l d not have arisen.

Q. Did it not occur to you that one of the reasons why they
   w er e not re sp o n d i n g m i g h t be because of their anxiety tc
   cet in to the gr ou nd be fore 3 o'clock because we are new
   a.’-oroaching close to 3 o clcc/c and it is pe^.j.ectly plain
   to’ anyone stuck in that crowd outside that there might
   ^ 0 problems m       ge tt i n g in? — A* x can understand il — *.
   coneor6 arrives at tn.au si tuation a^ tnat time, a>_ ti.at
    late hour, that they m a y bel ie ve tney won't get m .

0           T    those ci rc u m s t a n c e s surely it must have occurred tc you
                    to d el av ki ck-off m ig ht well be to take one way of
            takinc the anx ie ty out of the situation for those wanting
            i._' ce*i j_n £nci thus ma k i n g them hold back, have seme reason
            ^    un rr- v r’c: - a . Sir, at that time the crisis situation
            S a t t e e r e w a s took all ay concentration.

Q. But yc.               were   trvincr to resolve thaL crisis? - A.    I 'was.

o             Arc all I 2" s u g g e s t i n g is that your best weapon to
             resolve it was delay the kick-ozr? - A. I did not cor.sic.er
             that"my best we ap on at that time was delaying the kick-
             cff!" "l >'as trying tc assist Superintendent Marshall.

    0        :      did vou tr.m.-; was you-, bes I'/cg-Ci. .   .uus i.— —
             had "some Idea as to ./hat you m igh t do to try and alleviate
                    situation? — A. j.t was the iar.nOj; messages,     wa^
             the"cublie address system and sending extra Officers to
             a*ssi = t to calm the crowd and to get them to move back.

    0. You felt I imagine, or did you feel that this situation
        ~d b e e r cr eated because people nad nou arr^vec on uii..e."'
       — A    v ° s , there was a large crowd tnac had oovioualv
       arr iv ed very late.

    0.          So you thought effectively:  "It is their own fault they
                are stuck in this trouble" did you? - A . ^ S i r , m a
                situation such as that you never thin.^ uhinc3 O j.thau
                order.

        o       v 0 u se° vou have referred yet again to     there being "no
                maior incident", no reason.    That must     have had_some
                 effect o p your thinking? - A. Mo, as a     Police o.iicer i
                 was responding to that cr owd situation     then and very
                 concerned a bo ut it.

        0. Anyway 2.47, I think it is, we have the first request
           f r0l^ S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Mar snail to open the ga_e. Right?
                - A. Yes sir.
                                           D.G.   DUCKENFIELD



Q. An d you are still c o n s i d e r i n g the question of postponement
   of kick-off, among o ther options? - A. It is an option sir,
   but when he asked    me to ope n the gate that certainly was
   not going through m y mind.

Q. Now when he made that request w hat was your-immediate
   reaction? - A. Tc be ho n e s t I di d not want to open the gate.

Q. W h y not? - A. To open a gate at a football ground it would
   have d e f e a t e d the objectives of our Operation Order in
   that drunken fans may get in; people who had got drink;
   people who had got m i s siles and people who were without
   tickets w ould get access.

Q. Sere you aware by now that there was a problem with a number
   of people outside w i t h o u t tickets? - A. I was aware that
   during the day there had been people without tickets.

Q. But were vou aware that there were a considerable number
   of fans at the Leppings Lane entrance who did not have
   t i c k s t s ? ~ A* I was not c.v/c*z*s sir.

Q. Because I think a lot cf statements, or a lot of evidence
   we have heard and c e r tainly a lot of statements that I have
   read, refer to c o n s i derable numbers of people without
   tickets and asking for tickets.       Is that something that
   had net been drawn to your attention? - A. riot at tnat
   stage sir.

Q. Because that was rather an important factor, wasn't it
   because if there were a lot of people milling around
   without  tickets that was something which would have a
   to the disorder or the problems rather outside? - A. I
   what respect?

Q. Well if you have a lot of people mil ling-around in a
   small area who are w i t h o u t tickets coupled with people
   cominc along trying to get into the ground, you add to
   the problems don't you, because you nave got more people
   there? - A. I w o uld suggest that there are people there,
   there are probably people witn o u t tickets.

 Q   I see.   - A.   But the crowd difficulties are there whatever.

 Q. Anvway  you were reluctant to agree to the gate being
    opened because of the factors you have identified? - A.          Yes
     sir.

 O. VJere vou able to make direct contact with Superintendent
    Marshall or not? - A. I remember receiving a radio message
    but having received the radio message from him, or it
    came into the Control Bo:-: to open the gate, I immediately
    looked at the monitor for the Leppings Lane turnstiles and
    as I did so I would describe it as the gate burst open.
    I have since found looking at the compilation that might


                                                                           ^ 0
                                                  47

                                                                         D.G.   DUCKF.N'FIF'.'


                gates, what action if any did you take to try tc con;
                si t u a t i o n inside as a result of a lot of people comin
                som e of whom may be should not have been in at all? - A.          tra .
                I cave instructions that e very available Officer shcu id = ;zend
                in two d i f f e r e n t locations. In the North Stand to pa
                landings and to en s u r e those who were going into the Ncr-
                Stand area who did not have tickets would net flood t hrci
                the e xit/access entrances on to the pitch.        In additi o n .
B               asked for increased Officers around the perimeter tra ck ‘
                assist.

    O           Tc assist where? - A. On the perimeter track in observing
                si; u = ; i o n in the North Stand, and perimeter generally.

    G.          But your concern was largely in relation to the North Star
                and the conseque nces or opening gate A, is that rignt' -


                what about the consequences of C and the terraces'   Di
                take any steps in relation to that? - A. No, sir, cthe
                tne Officers in the control box were watching that sit
                as wi:                   in the ground, knowing what
                G6V0K
D
                If I :.ay  ■ cac:< ’               ■ statement, page iu, you sa-
                having ce- "C W — u;.              ir.power request at the top c.
                                                   •t covered in vour evidence:




                 What d e v e l opments c m             anticipate or wnat possio:e
                 deve l o p m e n t s die you :        :ipate as a result of the ga~e;
                 opening on the Lepp i r..             m e terraces? - A. 1 was cor.ce:
                 see what the ei                       :ening the sates and allowing :
                 into the ground w c ’     __-

        0.       What effects die                      cioate? - A. I thought that ther-=
                 could be pushing,                     wanted to observe the situation ac
                 the terrace.

        o   .
                 We know the gate was in fact opened at 2.52.           That is the
                 v :deo monitor time.          It may be we are talking or a range
                 within a minute or so either side.           We know that the teams
                 came out at about 2.54, in fact.           I think 2.54, just after.
                 You do say, if I may go back in your statement that you did
                 consider again the q u e s t i o n of delaying the kick-off. and thi:
                 as ^ " u n d e r st an d it was before the decision was made to open
                 t h e ~ £ a t e s . Am I right in that? - A. Yes, sir.

                  Before you could make a final decision on that you realised
                  that the teams were about to come out on to the pitch? - A.
H                 W i t h the events, sir. and that particular timing, in the
                  statement it may b e out of sequence.           My perception is when I
                  was c o n s i d e r i n g the teams coming - when I was considering
                                                                                                 ^ i
                                          48


                                                                   D.G.   D U C K S N F : EL



             d e l a y i n g the k i c k-off because of a request from elsewhere,
             looked to my right and I thought the teams were about to ;un
             on to the pitch beca u s e of the photographers.         I thought :hat
             the teams wer e coming out.           It appears my time sequence i =
             in c orrect there.

        q              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:       I am sorry.  " A request i rcrr.
             e l s e w h e r e ”?  A request from where? - A. There was a
B            s u g g e s t i o n over the radio almost at kick-off time
             for°the k i c k-off to be delayed.

        Q.   From?   - A.   From a P.C.   Buxton.    I believe,    my Lord.




D




                                                    MR   COLLINS     Are you s~'




G




    H

                                                                                               —<3
                                                   D.G. DUCX^NFIoLD




      MR COLLINS:            Are you saying that this request came
after the gates had been opened?              - A. Sir with the
oas sage of time and the events as they were
sim ult a n e o u s l y , my only per cepti on was then and is now
that there was a half circle of pho tographers outside the
olayers' tunnel ana I thought at that stage that that was
when      the players wer e coming out.
Th=t      isn't, w i t h respect, an answer to my question.   -   A.
I ’m s c r r y .
My  que s t i o n was did the request from Mr. Buxton, which you
hav-a been tel ling Lord Justice Taylor about, come after
"he"gatas had been opened or before? - A. In the time
seq uence of events, sir, I am told it came after the gates
war s o o a n e d .
I am asking you your memory.   - A. I believed that it
came sho rtly before the gates were opened.
Wh^n did you make this statement, can you remember?     It
raay be dated.   - A. I- is not, sir, but it was something
lixe  three weeks after the event.
 Because if you go back to page 5 the way you recollected
 i t'" then, is thus"- I look at the penultimate paragraph or.
 page o, have you got that? - A. Yes.
             "The crowd situation was changing
             raoidly.            It bad increased in numbers.
             S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Marshall had asked for
             a vehicle with a PA facility. Tarmoy
             m es sages were being relayed to ease
             oressure. Mounted Officers wers having
             d i f ficul ty and extra resources had been
             s e n t to assist.            I looked at the
             sit ua t i o n on the Leppings Lane terrace
             and saw there was room for supporters
             and c o n sider ed because of the deteriorating
              situation whether or not to delay the
              ;cick-off to ease the difficulties."

 -   A. Yes sir.
             "I looked through the Control Box window
             to my right and saw a half circle of
             oress pho tographers on the pitch at the
             olayers' tunnel, obviously waiting for
             the teams to appear, and at that point,
             whilst considering the position, the
             first team ran out on to the pitch."
                                         50


                                                                   D.G.     DUCKEN’? H I D




             A. Y e s s i r
    n                  "I cons i d e r e d    this   ootion had been
                       removed."

B        -   A.   Yes sir.

    Q.   Well now what you are there saying, and    is this an
         accurate picture, chat before you could   come to a final
         de c ision to postpone, or to ask for a postponement c: the
         kick-off, that teams came out on to the pitch and there­
         fore vou consi dered that that option had been removed?
         A. Yes sir, once the teams ran out on to the pitch.

    Q.   The fact that the teams are out on the pitch doesn't
         itself preclude still postponemecnt of kick-off does it?
         A. That is correct sir.

    Q.   It ma.*:es it, I accept,            more difficult but it doesn't
         actuallv   preclude it.             -  A. That is right sir.

D   Q.   If the situation         in your      view merits   it.   -   A.    Yes sir.

    Q. But that apart, we know chat the teams came out                      at   2.34 or
       thereabouts.   -  A. Yes sir.

    n.   But they did come out earlier than                that cor their ora-
         match v;arm-uo as I ur.uer stand it.               -  A. Yes sir.

    n.   And then went 'oac< in . Are you referring to      that pre-
         match warm-up or are you referring to the 2.54, 2.55?
         A. I don't .<now sir.   My sequence of events, as I can
         h onestly recollect them, and bearing in mind the d e v e l o p ­
         ments of the day, I was of the opinion that when I made my
         statement that in .considering the developing situation at
         2.47, and ..the actions at the Leppings Lane end, that Is
         when I seriously considered delaying the kick-off, and
         w hilst considering that I looked to ray right through the
         Control 3ox window and saw a half circle of press
         ohotograohers waiting for the teams to come out, and
          something occurred that made me think the teams were
          cunning out on to the pitch.    Having said that, since that
          time my prception at that time was that the teams were
          running out to start the game.    I have since been advised,
          because I hadn't access to the material, that that
          couldn't have occurred, that was at 2.54.     Now my
          o »rceotion is that I was thinking through that option
          before I open the gates.    Now I cannot be any more
          accurate than that, to say that I don't know who cams out
          or what made me think that, other than to say there was a
          half circle of photographers and something happened and I
          thought I saw the teams run out.     It could have been for
H          the kick-ocr but obviously now it isn't, and I considered


                                                                                             JO
          that at thac stage the developing situation within the
          gr o u n d had gone to a situation when I had lost the option

Q.        So wha t you ara saying is that what you believed at the
          time you made your statement, and presumably at the time
          you made your decision, was the teams coming out may in
          h indsight not 'nave been.      - A. No, it may have been com!
          out for a kick - a b o u t as you say.

p    . And therefore you may in fact have been earlier, or it ma
       have been at a time earlier than 2.54.  It must have bean
       at a time earlier than 2.54.  - A. Yes.

Q.        Comi ng b a c k     to    page    10    ....

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      If that was right and the
          teams had their !<ic'<-a'oout and went back ocf again, the
          option would have reappeared.     -  A. To delay the kic'<-cf
          sir, yes.

r,                  MR. COLLIN'S:           But by t h a n , h a v i n g r e g a r d t o t h e
          e v i d e n c e y o u g a v e e a r l i e r t h i s m o r n i n g , t h e e v e n t s you
          t o l d us a b o u t e f f e c t i v e l y made i t i m p o s s i b l e      f o r you co
          come t o c h a t d e c i s i o n y o u a r e s a y i n g . - A. Y e s .

          Th a c i s t h e brea'.cdcwn o f c o m m u n i c a t i o n s . . . .         -   A. My
          p e r c e p t i o n i s breakdown in c o m m u n i c a t i o n s , w o r s e n in g
          s i t u a t i o n , 2 . 4 7 - i s h d e c i d e t o t a k e some a c t i o n , c h i n k
          about d elayin g the k i c k - o f f , players out, s tr a ig h c into
          the c r i s i s of 2.47.

          Mow y o uchan yo u t e l l us w a t c h t h e L a p p i n g s Lana t e r c a c ;
           incenclv f o r d e v e l o p m e n t s r e s u l t i n g f rom t h e g a t e s
          opening.    -   A . Yas s i r .

          When, y o u w a t c h e d     that     w e r e y o u a wa r e   oc a s u r g e    into       t.-.:
          c e n t r a l oens?      -      A.     so s i r ,

    Q.     I think that there clearly was such a surge.                                    You
           see it though.  -  A. No.

           !»•a     i t n o t c l e a r f r o m w h a t yo u c o u l d s e e , b e c a u s e     the
           v i d e o was s t i l l r u n n i n g p r e s u m a b l y . -      A. Y e s .

    p      And y o u w e r e k e e p i n g o n e e y e on t h a t I i m a g i n e f rom t i me
           time.       You c o u l d s e e p e o p l e p o u r i n g i n s t i l l , and you
           c o u l d s e e t hem g o i n g t o w a r d s t h a t c e n t r a l t u n n e l c o u l d n '
           vou?      -    A. I c a n o n l y r e f e r t o t h e c o m p i l a t i o n v i d e o I
           h a v e j u s t s e e n , and t h e c o m p i l a t i o n v i d e o d o e s n ' t i n d i c a
           thev were o o u r in g tow ards tne c e n t r a l t u n n e l .

     p.    Wi t h r e s p e c t    C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , t o a n y o n e who knows t
           geography i t           i s c l e a r b e y o n d any p e r a d v e n c u r e t h a c t h a t
                                82


                                                           B.D.   MURRAY


Q.    What el s e could you do, having failed to raise Mr.          Lock? - A.
      With regard to the club?

0.    With regard to the    turnst ile s which you were concerned about?
      - A. Yes.  I could    not raise Mr. Lock. I was then overtaken
      by what I consider    were more serious events, thac is requests
      for the gates to be   opened in Leppings Lane.

Q.    That of co u r s e was all related to the flow through the
      turnstile, was not it?       A. yes, sir.  I would think sc.

Q. Can we, as it were, go back to the ch ron olo gy we were on
   before.       Did you a c o n v e r s a t i o n with Chief Superintendent
   D uc ke nf ie ld about the crowd and getting them in? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q.    Did you have a con ve rs at io n about the delay of kick off ac
      this time? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    How did that arise? - A. I think Mr. Duckenfield asked me to
      remind him what we had dis cu ss ed about delaying kick-off, and
      I said that no rmally we would not de lay kick-off if people
      we re just late, but if there was someth ing that kept them from
      ge tt i n g into the ground or getting to the ground, i.e.
      ac cidents or physical probl ems over the P e n n i n e s , etc., then
      ob v i ou s l y we have to d el ay the kick-off.

G.    I am sorry, did you agree with that principle thac you should
      de la y it only in chose ci rc um st an ce s? - A. I think the option
      is always open chat thac was the general rule.          Thac was our
      sort of ag reement and our perception, and I think thac is a
      fairly common one.

G.    This was a di sc u s s io n you had with Mr. Duckenfield abouc che
      reasons why you may or may not del ay kick-off?       First, what I
      am in ceres ted in is wnat time did this discussion take pj_ace,
      to your best r e c ol lec tio n? - A. It would be about 2.30.

Q. Can you think of any event or anyt hin g that           was occurring
   outs ide that gave rise to this di sc us si on ?        Why should you be
   th in k i n g about it at that time? — A. It was        about the time
   that I sugges ted there were a lot of people            out there and we
   would get them in.

 G.    If you we r e sure you would get them in, questions of delaying
       kick-off would not really arise, would they? - A. You would
       think not, sir, no.

 Q.    If you had thought they would not get in that is when you
       m igh t think about delay ing kick-off, is not it? - A. Yes.

 Q. Was there a time you thought that when you were having this
    d i s c us s io n ? - A. Not at that time, no, sir.

 Q.    Did you the que st io n of de la yi ng kick-off,    was it raised agai
       before 3 o'clo ck? - A. No, sir.
                                   83


                                                           B.D.   MURRAY


Q.   Did you th ink it was a p p r o p r i a t e at any stage before 3 o ’clock
     to co ns i d e r it again? - A. i would think that it probably was.
     Th ere was ob v i o u s l y just be fo re the players came out it was
     obv io us th e pe op le we re not go in g to get in through the
     tur ns ti le s by 3 o'clock.

Q.   That would    be about 5-to-3,        would not it? - A.   S-to-,     10-to-3,
     yes .

Q. Did you m e n t i o n   it? - A.. No,    sir.

Q. You did, however, think it mi ght be app rop ria te? - A. I did
   not think it would appropriate, ot he rw is e I would have
   me nti one d it.  Ag ai n it was a thought that didn't come into my
   head.    Thi ngs we r e h a p pe ni ng then that we re demand ing my
   attention.

Q.   I think you had vari ous bits of informa tio n coming into
     your con tr ol room, had not you, from this point onwards,                from
     h al f - p a s t - 2 to 3 o'c lo ck ? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    Not just of the   ground and Leppings Lane b u t      all a r o u n d , t o o ?
     - A. Th ere wer e many things happening.

Q.   I think you had    some trou ble with a ticket tout, had n o t y o u ?
     - A. Yes, sir. I can't remember the timing,       but c e r t a i n l y
     th er e was a ticket tout selling tickets outside t h e L e p p i n g s
     Lane end for the Kop, and our little conting enc y on t h e Kop
     was already full.     The tout was in fact arrested.

q_          LORD JUS TI CE TAYLOR: Selling tickets outside t h e
     Leppings Lane end? - A. Selling tickets to Liverpool
     suppor te rs for the Kop end of the ground, yes, my Lord.

q         mr. PHI LLI PS:        So I think h e was arrested,     was h e ? - A.
     He was arrested.

 Q. This was a report you had received by radio,            is it? - A.        Yes,
    sir.

 Q. So the radio was wo rk in g then at this stage? - A.            Yes,    it was

 q            LORD JU ST I C E TAYLOR: As a matter of interest, he was
      ar rested for what? - A . He was arrested, I would think,    for
      ca us in g obstruction, my Lord.

 Q. O b s t r u c t i n g Of ficers in the course of their duty or what? - A
    By the c o u r s e of his actions he would have been causing an
    o b s t r u c t i o n in the highway.   People would have been gathe rin g
    round him and he would be cau sin g an obstruction.

 Q. If he had been se ll i ng them for the Leppings Lane end would i'
    have been any di ffe re nt ? - A. I doubt it, my Lord, if he had
     been c a u s i n g an obstruction, no matter where he was selling
    them.

 q          mr.   PHILLIPS:     You were keeping I think a good watch on
                                          i l l


                                                                     B.D.   MURRAY


         Yes.       Well,   it could   be A, 000,   not 5,000.

Q        Yes.        As    far as the W es t Stand was c o n c e r n e d and the standing
         terraces,          a bo ut how m a n y do you r e ck o n still had to come in
         t her e a t ' 2.30? - A.        The West Stand was filling.           It was what I
         w o ul d call filling.          That is over half -f ul l and on its way to
         filling.          Not full, but d o i ng well.         The terraces, it is very
         d i f f i c u l t to establish, but c e r t a i n l y there w er e plenty in the
         c e n t r e two pens and p l e n t y in the r aised area, and there were
         q u i t e a lot in the res t of the terrace.

q           The s i t u a t i o n was this, was not it, at 2.30, that the <_wo
            c e n t r e pens w e r e not filling;    they w e r e full; but t h e two
            w ing pens had t housan ds to come? - A. That was usually t h e
            s t a t e of af fa ir s on a m a t ch like t h i s .

Q           So again we h av e got a s it u a t i o n at 2.30 w h e re there are      very
            m an y tho us an ds of p eo p le still to come into the ground? - A.
            No    you said that, sir.        I said t he re w e r e prob ab ly 4 , 000 to
            5 000 to go into the N o r th Stand at the e xt r em e and p r o b a b l y
            4,000   to go into the West Stand         terrace.

Q.           Yes,   v ery m any thousands.

q                   LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:     How m a n y to go into the West
            Stand? - A. I would think, my Lord, p r ob ab ly if I had to put a
            f ig ur e on it I would t hink there was prob ab ly about 4,000
            s paces on the t errac e at h a l f — p a s t — 2 .

    G       On the t e rr a c e or the t e rr ac e and the West Stand? - A.
            Pr ob a bl y up to 4,000 spaces on the terrace, my Lord.

    o              MR. HYTNER:   Again, these figures may well be
             approximate, but we are g et ting to some th in g like 8 , 0 0 0          in all
             .to come? - A. Yes.

    Q.       Did you t hink you w ould get all t ho se in by 3 o ’clock? - A.
             Yes, I t h ou g ht h a l f - a n -h o ur was sufficient.

    Q        A g a i n this has been e x pl or ed with Mr. Duckenfield, but I have
             to ask it you be c au s e it is c er ta i nl y plain on your statement,
             o n e of t he c o n s i d e r a t i o n s w hich w ei gh ed with you as to whether
             t he k ic k -o f f was to be d el a ye d was whether it was the fault of
             the fans or w hether it was not the fault of the fans? - A. I
             t hink "fault" is not the word I w ou ld use, sir.                   I think what
             was said was if it was purely a c as e of peop le not turning up
             at the r ight t ime for the kick -o ff then it w ould not norm al ly
             be delayed.

    Q        Yes     b ec a u s e it is their own fault? It is their own look out.
             W a s ’that the a ttitude? - A. I d on 't think it was ever meant to
             be as d o g m a t i c as that.                  ,

        Q          L OR D J U S T I C E TAYLOR: What is the distinction between
              having a large crowd outside who are not going to be able to
              get in by 3 o'clock because there has been fog on the Pennines
              or having the same crowd similarly unable to get in because
                                            112



                                                                         B.D.    MURRAY


         they h ave c h o s e n to c ome late? - A. I d on 't t he re was ever an
         i n t e n t i o n t hat b ec a u s e p e op l e c am e late d e li b er a te l y en m as se
         that we w o u l d not d e l a y the kick-off.              It could have been
         24,000 p e o p l e that c a m e late, and o b v i o u s l y t he situation
         w ould h ave b een c o m p l e t e l y different.          I think e v er yt hi ng we
         set has to h ave an a l t e r n a t i v e option.           The o p ti on is always
         there.

q                MR. HYTNER:           O n e of the reasons for d el a yi n g the kick-
         off is to avoid the i mp a t i e n c e that arises o ut s id e the ground
         of fans who think they are g oing to miss the kick-off and who
         may i nd u l g e in s ome p us hi n g or s ho vi ng in order to get into
         the g round e ar ly ?         Is not that one of the reasons why you do
         d e la y a k i c k - o f f ? - A. That would be a consideration.

Q.       It is not just a reward for t hose who have not d on e anything
         wron g or a p un is h m e n t for those who have come late
         d eliber at el y.     It is a m atter of crowd safety, is not it? - A.
         I don't see it as a r eward or a punishment.                    I see it as q uite
         an i m p or ta nt d e c i s i o n to make.    T h e re are other
         c o nsiderati ons;        the b e ha vi ou r of the p eople inside; what
         will h a p p e n after the event;           the arr an ge me nt s that have been
         m ad e after the event.            I think it is s om e th i ng that has to be
         g iv en a lot of t h o u g h t .

q    .             L OR D J U ST I C E TAYLOR: I s up p os e if you do it too lightly
         then p eo pl e just get to rely on the fact that kick-off will be
         d e l a y ed ? - A. This is o ne of the m ai n problems, my Lord.

                   MR. HYTNER:            And you may get impa ti en ce inside the
          ground.           N o bo d y is s u g ge s ti n g it is an easy ques ti on to solve.
          What I h av e to put to you, however, is that the one
          c o n s i d e r a t i o n you should never take into account is that
          p e op le h av e t urned up who turned up late who might have turned
          up earlier.              That s imply should never be part of the equation,
          should it? - A. I thought that was w ha t I was just saying,
          sir.

    Q.    It is not a pp ar e n t l y what you said in your statement.                      Do you
          follow? - A. No, sir.         I don't.

    Q.    Perhaps I had better read it to you, because it              may be a total
          c o n f u s i o n and it may be you said s om et hi ng you did not mean to
          say.        H a v e you got your s tatement in front of you? - A. Yes, I
          have.

    Q.     I think    it is p age 9.         The m i dd le of the page:

                  "About this time C h i ef S up er in te n de n t Duckenfield asked
                  me to r emi nd him of what w e had d ec ided about dela yi ng
                  the kick off.           I info rm ed him that w e had agreed that if
                  t h e r e was an i d e n t i f i a b l e problem, such as a serious
                  a c c i de n t on the motorway, or bad weather over the
                  P e n n i n e s , w hich prev en t p eople a r ri vi ng on time, that w e
                  w ou ld d e l a y - but if it was m er el y that people had
                  a rr iv ed in time, but decided to go elsewhere, rather
                  t ha n t he g ro un d and arrived at the last minute, then w e
                                          113


                                                                         B.D.   MURRAY


                would    not n o r m al l y d el ay i t ” .

         - A.   Yes,    sir.    "Normally” .       "Not n or m al l y d e l a y ” .

Q.       W h e n you t hin k about it that s h ou l d not be a c o ns id er at io n at
         all, s hould it? - A. What, that p eo pl e come w h e n they want and
         we have the m a tc h w hen they a r r i v e ?

Q.       If t here is a press of p eo pl e o u t s i d e the grou nd and they are
         i m p a ti e nt to get in t h e r e may be a danger of c r us hi ng and
         disorder.        It does not m at te r why that is, does it? - A.
         No. If we are ta lk i ng about the c ir cu ms t an c es you are
         t a lk i n g about, no.

Q. Was it a c o n s i d e r a t i o n on this p a rt ic ul ar day that it passed
   th ro ug h you r mind and was p er haps d i sc us se d with Mr.
   D u c ke n f i e l d that these were lat ec om er s who had been drinking
   a ro un d the town? - A. No, s i r , not at all.

Q. C an         I just go on.

q    .             LORD JU ST IC E TAYLOR:     I s u pp o s e the thin ki ng behind it
         is this, that p e o p l e who are held up by fog or an accident
         w o n ’t take the d elay of kick -o ff to be held up by fog or an
         a cc i de n t next time, b ec a us e that is just s om et hi ng that
         h a p p e ne d to them, but if p eople s ta y in the public houses
         u nt il the last m in ut e and roll up then and know that last time
         it h ap p en ed the k i ck -o ff was delayed, then they would
         be e n c o u r a g e d to do it more?   H av e I got it right or not? - A.
         Yes, my Lord, exactly.

q.       It is a d i f f ic u l t equation.




                                                  /Q.     MR. HYTNER:           There were




                                                                     I
  And the people in his immediate front, one can see a.mos.
• dSun to their waists, some of them.  People standing
  turning, looking around, lighting cigarettes? - A   I ie :
  there is some room at the front, but it looks full ai the
         back
      Whilst you were up in the Control Box before the incident
    ' h^uened        did you have any worry or concern over the s a , .
      of t h o s e 'people in the terraces? - A. No, sir, I ha. no
         concern.
3        In    1988 ue knou that the same game had been played - the
                  venue      same teams, supporters, siailar allegia:.^    ^
         ltd in 1Q88          to the best of your recollection, hou r.ac. trie
         t e r r ac es ^b ee n? - A. The terraces were similar to uhat tney
         uere        in   1989.

n        Hav I ask you about another matter - the question of
         delaying the match? - A. Yes, sir.

          A n d it was b e i n g put to you that you h a d       the   discussicr.
Q-        w i t h Hr. D u c k e n f i e l d ? - A. Yes, sir.

0.        About the c i r c u m s t a n c e s   in which the game would bs
          delayed? - A. Yes, sir.

          And the point was           being made about people coning a.ong
    Q.
          late? - A. Yes,          sir.
                                                                                ►    ar
          u          ^    vnu     know uhen to draw the line? - A. I think
    Q         l l p t r h l p s one of the most difficult decisions that there
              •« tn make as to when you decide that you are going to
              iilav the kick-off.            I think if you are in a situation
                    . 1 VQU knou that there is something definite that is
              f / e v e n t i n g  people getting to the venue, then the decisio,
                               eL y , but if it is just that people are arriving_
               and Y O U are uonderi ng whether they are going to get in m
               time, the decision is very difficult.

     n        nf   course     I suppose it might be said that even one
                            of angry, frustrated and late supporters might
              ciuse some problem if they are rushing into the ground ana
              the game is not delayed for their benefit.            Do you follow?
              T h a t would be an extreme proposition, but it migh. be
              foreseen or f o r e s e e a b l e that those individuals, in their
              r u s h to get in, m i g h t cause problems for others? - A. That
                        ---Me    sir  but my experience is that there are some
              p e o p l e «ho come to galles L ? e anyuay rather than be m
               before kick-off.

         Q.    And       is it very much a matter of judgment? - A. Very much
               so.
                          D

                                                        B. D. y.USHAY




 , j          this the situation, that that judgment, uhilst
      , rp easily to be exe rc i se d in obvious situations iiic
 i h e ? f t h e r a has been a motor accident blocking a motor-iay
 o r s o m e t h i n g serious on the Fenn in es is a Judgment tha.
 has     to take into account a ll matters.        A. Yes, sir.

  A ^ •+ is not a judgment in respect of uhich there is any
' hard and fast rule a c c o rd i ng to uhich you .ill or ulll not
  delay the game? - A. I do not think there can be a hard
  and fast rule.
  ,n j ha55 it ever been the practice to have such a rule'’ -
‘ A. Mo, I have never been to a match uhere the kick-of. has
  been delayed.

  A-e   you auare of any rule uhich says,      "Never mind.  >e GO
  not   stop it because they are late"?        A. There a.e no. any
  rules,      n o , sir




                                     /Q.   Did the thought c c c u
                                               6

                                                           B.D.   MURRAY



    n id the th ou gh t occur to ycu that the game should be delayed?
    - A. The t hought d i d n ot o c c ur to m e . I thinx I was prcoaoly
    p r e o c c u p i e d w i t h o t he r events.

    Of course w i t h h in d s i g h t we can achieve miracles?             - A. With
    hindsight,             yes.

    v,ay i now move on to ask you a bout the communication facilities,
    Vnc- a little b ecause Lhere m ay be detailed evidence as to
    its '"complexity, but first of all was a consequence or the
    r ? d i0 diffic ul ti es t ha t we're b ein g experienced, tnat tr.e
    Control R oo m s witched to using the hand-r.elc portable
    radios?           - A. Yes       sir.

        nir that mean that the C on tr ol R oo m by adopting that course
          *    iP -,ust the same position, in effect, as anvcedy else
        e c u ’n-ed w it h a h a n d- he l d radio? - A. Yes sir.    I.'her. we
        u s ^ t ; e m ain set we can o ve r ri d e anyone wr.o is f e n c i n g a
        -e-sac- into control, but by using personal racics e v e ry ­
        one is~or. the same circuits and everyone is competing :cr
        the same signals.

        Tr orce- to achieve the communication, because of ti- circu...-
        s ^ n c e s w h i c h one u n d e r s t o o d to obtain, aic_it_~ear._t.-at
               -i- e ^ e c t no longer had the control wit:, tr.e s u c s t ^ - . u :
                   e v s t®H? - A. Yes sir, we no longer had tr.e z a c m t y
                           to cut ceoole off and overrice tr.em anc pass
            messages     trom ccr.t-Oi.

                    r q p D JUSTICE: TAYLOR:     You could net gc on to
0
            ta 1 k-through? - A. No sir, us.a was ;av impressicn on the
                                              ■I-’
                                                 ,- s

                              id coerat e our personal radios arter
            day anc we c
            radio, breakdown, my — o_c

                      M Qo cw aR D • Or course tnere was a radj.0                -•
            you had With the ground, the C l u b ’s Operations Room?            - A.
            Yes, we did have a personal radio on tneir system.

            T'n?t was a personal s ys te m w h i c h was possessed by the
            ground w h ic h p ro vi d e d you the facility to lm.-; m ?
            Yes sir.
                    jc a seoarate radio s y st e m from the Police radio system?
             - A.   It is a*" separate personal radio system run by the Ciuo.

                   TORD J USTICE TAYLOR:               T ha t is the one the Club use _
             to contact their Stewards?               - A. Contact their Stewards anc
             their O f f i c i a l s ,   yes   sir.

                    MR. WOODWARD:  You can contact them and they could
    2   •
             c ontact you using it? - A. Yes sir.

    h        Did vou also have a t el ep ho ne link with the Club?            - A. Yes
               ir, on the Club's priva te network.
             s.
                                                                           T. BICHARD


t h a t were d e v e l o p i n g a t the t u r n s t i l e s r a t h e r than what
was happeni ng in Leppings Lane.                  Obvi ous l y the l a r g e r
number were arcund t he t u r n s t i l e s .

I f o l l o w t h a t , but di d i t not occur to you or to anyone
t ha t the two s h oul d not be l ooked at in i s o l a t i o n because
the more you have corning down the worse the problem i s
<*oing to g e t , i s not i t ? - A. I can a p p r e c i a t e t hat po i n t
but s p e ak i ng f o r m y s e l f my i n t e r e s t was d i r e c t e d at the
pe o p l e around the t u r n s t i l e a r e a .

I t di d not g e t b e t t e r any way, di d i t ,             as mi nutes went by
- A. C e r t a i n l y n o t , no.

Inde ed,     i t g o t worse? - A. Yes, i t di d .

Did you v o l u n t e e r t o Chi e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e i d or
anyone t h a t the p o s i t i o n was g e t t i n g worse? - A. At the
time t ha t t h i s was happeni ng Chi ef S u p e r i n t e n de nt
D u c k e n f i e i d was s t o o d j u s t i n f r o n t o f my p o s i t i o n
on the m o n i t o r s .

So he c oul d s e e them? - A. So he was l o o k i n g up at the
mo ni t o r we were l o o k i n g a t and we were d i s c u s s i n g the
general s i t u a t i o n together.

What was t he d i s c u s s i o n as f ar as y u can r e c a l l ?
Obv i o us l y do not e x p e c t you t o remember e x a c t words.
- A. The"matters we were s e e i n g , p a r t i c u l a r l y
i n d i v i d u a l e v e n t s , was in r e l a t i o n to a mounted O f f i c e r
who seemed to be s t r u g g l i n g wi t h crowds who were pushing
h i s h o r s e around.

I t must have been f a i r l y o b v i o u s , s u r e l y , t ha t the crowd
was g e t t i n g worse r a t h e r than b e t t e r ? - A. I t was obvi ous
t hat the crowd was b u i l d i n g up, y e s .

Was a n y t h i n g s a i d as time went on t ha t you can remember
about p o s s i b l e d e l a y of k i c k - o f f ? - A. A c o n v e r s a t i o n
di d take p l a c e bet ween Mr. D u c k e n f i e i d , Mr. Murray,
p o s s i b l y whoever e l s e was i n the c o n t r o l a t t ha t time
and I remember Mr. Murray s a y i n g t ha t i t was not our
p o l i c y to d e l a y the k i c k - o f f f o r p e o p l e who had j u s t
a r r i v e d l a t e a t t he ground.          Somebody e l s e threw i n t o
t h a t c o n v e r s a t i o n i f t h e r e had been a problem on the
motorway or roadworks t he s i t u a t i o n i s d i f f e r e n t .

So i t was your u n d e r s t a n d i n g - I a p p r e c i a t e i t i s not
your d e c i s i o n . - A. Yes.

Senior O f f i c e r s . I t was your u n d e r s t a n d i n g , was i t ,
t ha t be c aus e t he   fans were c h o o s i n g t o a r r i v e l a t e
then t h e r e was no q u e s t i o n o f d e f e r r i n g k i c k - o f f ? - A.
Yes.     I t hi n k t he s i t u a t i o n i s i f f ans become aware
t h a t by coming l a t e k i c k - o f f w i l l be d e l a y e d they w i l l
                                                                         T.   BICHARD


c o n t i n u e to come l a t e .
Yes I s e e .         Nov; a g a i n a t about t h i s time between 2.3C,
2.40      t h a t s o r t o f p e r i o d , were you aware o f the c i v i l i a n
r a d i o communi cati ons o f f i c e r c odi ng to de al w i t h the
r a di o ? - A. Yes, he di d come i n and commence work on
the s e t which i s below t he de^k in f r o n t of me.

We have heard S e r g e a n t Goddard t e l l us about t h a t and
I am not g o i n g t o^a s k you t o go over t he same ground.
Did t h e r e come a time a g a i n s h o r t l y a f t e r or about
t h i s time t h a t you heard somet hi ng t o do w i t h the g a t e s
ove r t he r a d i o ? " - A. That i s r i g h t .       Mr. Marshal l was
•■’ >-kin® f o r t he g a t e s t o be opened be c a us e o f the problems
outside'         When r e f e r r i n g t o g a t e s the g a t e s I am t a l k i n g
a b o u t , i t i s i u s t C Gat e.       Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d ' s a t t e n t i o n
v/as d i r e c t e d to C Gate as was mine.              That i s the g a t e
we were l o o k i n g a t .
Which i s not s u r p r i s i n g b e c a u s e i t was b a s i c a l l y the onl y
g a t e t h a t you c o u l d r e a l l y s e e through t ha t camera? - A.
That i s c o r r e c t .
And i t i s the o u t s i d e o f whi ch t o g e t h e r w i t h the i n s i d e
of which you c o u l d s e e? ~ A. Yes.
         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                    Are you si mpl y g i v i n g us
 your u n d e r s t a n d i n g o f i t or what Mr. Marshal l s a i d .
 - A. No.            Mr. Marshal l was r e f e r r i n g to openi ng g a t e s
 be c aus e o f the problems o u t s i d e .           I d i r e c t e d Mr.
 D u c k e n f i e i d ' s a t t e n t i o n to C Gate and,      i f you l i k e ,
 when r e f e r e n c e was made t o g a t e s by Mr. Marshal l t hat
  i s the g a t e t h a t I was l o o k i n g at on the moni tor and
 payi ng a t t e n t i o n t o .
          MR. COLLINS:             That was c e r t a i n l y the g a t e t’n a:
 vou c o u l d se e in the v i d e o .       Did you unders t and or
 di d you t h i n k Mr. Ma r s ha l l was si mpl y r e f e r r i n g to
 •-hat <>ate or to t h a t and t he o t h e r g a t e s or di d not
 you know? - A. My b e l i e f was t h a t he was r e f e r r i n g
                          ,/
 i u s t t o C G a t e p o s s i b l y be c a us e t hat i s where my
 a t t e n t i o n was d i r e c t e d from what I c o ul d s e e .

  And you drew Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d 1s a t t e n t i o n to Gate C?
  - A. Yes, t h a t i s r i g h t , s i r .

  You were a w a r e , I ima;               t hat Mr. Du c k e n f i e i d was :no
  experienced at p o l i c n                over s e e i n g the p o l i c i n g a
  f o o t b a l l match a t Hi l           ough? - A . I knew he was n
  to the s p e c i f i c dut y.

  Yes.       Now, a g a i n , you          .ing i s a l i t t l e out on you
  n o t e s . We know t ha t                s at 2 . 4 3 t hat the g a t e in
  f a c t opened and i t wa                 2 . 4 7 , j us t a minute or so
  b e f o r e , Mr. Marshal l              i s t e d the g a t e s be opened?
                         QUESTION                  FOUR

Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?


No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4.                Chief
Superintendent Duckenfieid saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfieid in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings
Lane.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.

245. The 20 officers detailed to the perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

247. "Senior officer1' meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in
charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
players’ tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said:

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4, he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to climb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed.     They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding interim
recommendation 5. That provided:-

  * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room."

 I repeat that recommendation (with a slight change of working to achieve clarity)
 but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                                                                     n.G. d u c k i n ? i e l d



     T h a t b e i n g so, the 1j ^ j ^ o s ^ i a t ^ a i l y H g w v i t t U towards
     c o m i n g in t h r o u g h A - G _ w o u p r o v i d e d they liked to w a t c n tne
   that central                         the goal, yes sir.
                                         '   f

   came trora the rear u-                                                            ^
                                   • 4- wpc; t h e o n l y o b v i o u s way i n t o une
2- But    not     onl y  t h a t '    w a s      no sign at all to the left,
   t e rracing b e c a u s ® “ ®ii v..ith an open i n g in b u t no sign
   i n d e e d there « as ® “a i aht t h e re was a sign but it was a
   w h a t e v e r a n d to the r i g h t th an:<1        i n v i s ible unless

      °ouSreally1                                                              ^         ^       ^
      L t        is a fair d e s c r iption,                   is        it not, - *. *es,            that     is
Q.
      a fair description.

      •Therefore s u r e l y a n ^         e                               .her or no*
                                                        ^ral° tu nn el whether
Q.    ;a y , g r a v i t a t e towards t h a t hc cnt ^                . A_ ^     T
                                                                                  _
      say, g r a v i w t c      d i r e c tlv beh i n d
      he w a n t e a ^ 9                  assessment.
      thm:< thau is a
                                    c            -t-he-e n o t an o b v i o u s p o t e n t i a l p r o b l e m
       That being              so,was            the.             L p e n s u n l e s s some s e eps
       o f o v e r c r o w d i n g in            tnose centr        P ensure that people were
       w e r e t a k e n as p a r t              Oj. t he p l a n                          th     becone
       directed awav from                        those cen r - * *           I t b i n k the s i t u a t i o n
        f ull ? - A. I d o n ’M           C e n ? e r t h- g r o u n d t h er e a n d o r d i n a r i l y
        is t h a t p e o p l e w o u * a e n t e r tl      g         r c e p t ion.    They woulc
        ass ess the s i tu at io n.             rliis       Y c h o s e to g o into a p o s i t i o n
        a s s e s s t he s i t u a t i o n a n d         -                   fche t u n n e i.   iz
        b e h i n d the goal then t he y                              ^            area that a d not
        they w e n t d o w n Jie tunnel                               tu n lt i es to e ither (a)
        suit them t h ey nad go. t                                 PP ^       Qr mo     to elther s.ce
         ^ “ rthrSacrofiSrwall                                 of the We s t stand.


         Provided              those    gangways           w   e     r     s       i    d    e       to side    an d
         e n a b l e t h e m to g e t r                    n',11 p e o p l e c o m i n g d o w n the
         pr-ovided thav. t h e r e <■                    d i f f i c u l t for t h e m to t u r n roui.d
            ^              £   5   ^                                                   - r    i ^ i n d

          S T & t S S                g r o u n d s 1 and^the"peculiarities of footb.ll grou nd s

          ^                                    -a *.o 4-hat the v a s t m a j o r i t y of t h ose
        . w e l l d i d y o u n o t a P P £ ® cl £    u s e d to A n f i e l d w h e r e t h e y go
          f an s w o u l d b e f a ns v;ho ” e * ® a c i n g w h i c h has no p e n n i n g
          t h r o u g h o n to an                         m i d d l e a n d far. o u t all o v e r
            a n d thus t h e * c a n T5 ° k e the p o i n t sir?       Liverpool P ^ d
            t he ....     A. C a n i ! s t t e a r a n d h a d the s ame a c c o m m o d a t i o n
            at Hil l s b o r o u g h last ye*.                   same accoiran o d a t i o n
            a n d as   I  under                           s                it was not new to t.,e,.
            t hi s y e a r a t a         league
                                                                               fL - n to r e m e m b e r     in
       3 . T h a t m a y be but y o u w o u l d e n p e c .                    ^             that £ o o t b 2 l i fans

             ? ^ i d at S S             tre of s u c h a - ^ ^ r f t ^ - n t                                           to
             T     2   S       th e s e° f an s i t is their thiSd v i s i t in twelve months.
                                                                         121


                                                                                         D.G.   DUCKINFIELD



                                        p r o b l e m are not a c c e p t i n g that r e s p o n s i b i l i t y and dealing
                                        l l t h it e ff ec ti ve ly , then I t hink that p r ob l e m s hould oe
                                         leEt     w i th them. I f 'i t gets o u t of h a n d and there is a
                                        l ik eli hoo d of i nj ur y then I w il l step m                 and co m y 3 0 0 .

                                         T h a t sounds like a r eci pe for disaster, c h i e f Superintendent,
                            Q-           LTcl u s e v h a t you are e f f e c t i v e l y sayi ng is t m s , is it no,,
                     B                   that Jou let them get on w i t h it and o n l y if the w o r st comes
                                         t-o the w o r s t do you take a ny steps.             What I _ am suggesting
                                         is y ou s ho u l d f oresee areas of p ro b le m s sucn as t m s anc
                                         take or m ak e c o n t i n g e n c y p lan s? - A. Can I ta.-ce you bac..,

                                                        If   1   said that I apologise,          that was noi
                                Q . Y e s . - A.
                                         no     I w a n t to give you the o p p o r t u n i t y to make a bsolutely
                      C Q.               c lear w h at y o u are saying? - A. T a k i n g it stage b y stage
                                         -hP r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for c r o wd m a n a g e m e n t ana control anc
                                         Jhe f illing of pens is the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of the d u o .
                                         t f i-he f il li ng of pens gets to a s i t u a t i o n where^ tney are
                                         o v e r f i l l i n g a nd it b e c o m e s a p p a r e n t to m e that they are
                                         o v e r f i l l i n g a n d d i f f i c u l t i e s are likely to o cc ur   then I
                                         shall take some action.                       Mow i h av e n ot g ot to the siuicti rs
                                         5 here there are m a j o r d i f f i c u l t i e s o r a di sa st er lively
                      D
                                         occur.

                                o         But surely it m u s t be g ood p o l i c i n g and good practice to
                                          T ry and f oresea s it ua t i o n s w h i c h m i g h t leaa to t o neec
                                          -.0 fake e m e r g e n c y steps so as to a vo id tnem arisinc at all?
                                          - A   v es   T can a cc e p t your p o i n t tnat v/e snoula nav.
                                          P olice O f f i c e r s in p o s i t i o n s w h o can m on i to r the position.

                                 0        Did you take any steps to see if there were Police Officers
                                          as oart of the plan w h o c o ul d m o n i t o r for e x a m p l e _o v e r ­
                                          c r o w i n g in those pens? - A. Yes sir, if you examine
                                          Serial 1, the track serial, t here ar e 20 Officers tnere vmo
                                          are s paced e q u i - d i s t a n c e a r o u n d the track and tne^re were
                                          O f f i c er s a l on g the L e p p i n g s L ane side or cue .rac.c o e m n c
                                          that goal and looking towards G a t ® 1-8 Police Or.icers we.e
                                          in p o s i t i o n there and they c o u ld m o ni t o r visu al ly .r.e _ U l i n g
                                           of the pens.
                                           So you considered, did you, t ha t Serial 1, looking at^the
                                    0    . Operational O r d e r w h i c h is D o c u m e n t 14 u you w i sh before
                                           vou, it is T ab 14 on the d o c u m e n t that looks like t m s .
                                           Have you got it? - A. Yes sir.

                                     o      it ^s Serial 1, p e r i m e t e r track. T ha t part of Serial I          ^
                                           b ec a u s e they are s pr ea d out, as I u n de r s t a n d it, all rouna
                                           the peri me te r?      ~ A. Yes.

                                     n     T h a t p art of Serial 1 w h i c h is in front of the Leppings
                                           T         for rs ri na      it is p a r t of their responsibility, is it,
                                            o   ryou c o n s i d e r e d it was p a r t of their responsibility,
                                                    "                                                                 to
                                           m o n i t o r a n d r ep or t on the n u mb er s m  the pens ana to chec*
                            H              o n t h e possibility of o v e r c r o w d i n g ? - A. It is a r e s p o n s i ­
                                           b il it y Of theirs if the f i ll i n g of the pens gets to .he


J. L. H a r o h a m L t d
                                                   52



                                                                                  D.G.    DUCKZNFIZ-2

A




            w as    w h e r - thev w e r e f l o w i n g i s n ' t it?  And you d id <now
                    o-ogcaohy*          -     A. W h e n I s aw the c o m p i l a t i o n I saw
            : a o o 3 > w a l k i n g in, o r d e r l y , n ot rushing, not c n a r g m g
            t o w a r d s a p a r t i c u l a r po i nt , a nd that was my p e r c e p t i o n o:
            the s i t u a t i o n .
B
            Buc they w e r e all f l o w i n g , if yo u look at t h e ^ i d e o , in a
        G   d i r e c t i o n w h i c h to a n y o n e w ho icnows tna g r o u n u i-^ m         u,e
            d i r e c t i o n of the t u n n e l w e r e n ' t they?       Of c o u r s e tnere
            w     I o n e or two w h o w e r e p e e l i n g off in o t a e r d i r e c t i o n s
            b u t ” the v a s t b u l < wa s g o i n g in the d i r e c t i o n of tne ,unne,
            wasn't iK             -    A. I d i d n ' t p e r c e i v e that s i t u a t i o n sir.

            Rnr if v c u w e r e a w a r e of the g e o g r a p h y of the g r o u n d you
        o
            m u s t ha"/3 o r c e i v e d it.    -    A. I looked a: tne ccmoi.av.icn
            an d I w as s u r p r i s e d to s ea that pe o pl e w e r e w a l x m g , an-
            the d i r e c t i o n s th ey w e r e g o i n g .

             n o n " b e l i e v e e v e r y t h i n g y ou read in the papers!           But tne
             d i r e c t i o n they w e r e g o i n g was c l e a r l y in tr.e d i r e c t i o n o.
                                                              T hat is not my b el i e f sir
    D        that t u n n e l w a s n

             W h =r ^ d i d      v ou th ink t he y w e r e going?         - _A. My ccncer.. •*-
                                 w e r e c o m i n g into the g r o u n d anu I saw tne~
             w a l k i n g " ” in w h a t I t h o u g h t was the g e n e r a l a i r e c t i o n s , an,
             some w a r e g o i n g t h r o u g h that g a t e w a y m         tne wa_l.

              r      ;neo u t   at  le ast this: y o u w e r e         _awar a that b e c a u s e         =
                                       o e o o l e had c ome in        m    a snort s oace c.
              l a r ge n um o e
              tim= that t h e r e m i g h t b e a o rob lea     .       if they war.:   . a
              S o ; c e n t r e oens.          -   A. T h e r e is      a c r o c l e m in at
              w h e n a l a r g e n um b e r of p e o p l e come        m .

              But p a r t i c u l a r l y   t h o se    centre   pens.     -    A. T h e r e   c o u ld    be a
              difficulty.                                                          •

                 an-1 -ha*- is w h y y o u w e r e k e e p i n g , as you say, an intent
              oye     w a t c h i n g the L e p p i n g s L a n e terr ac e i n t e nt l y was it?     -
                 I t    w a s n ' t l o o k i n g s p e c i f i c a l l y at the c e n t r a l pens. I
                 was l o o k i n g at the t e r r a c e a n d the re st oc the g r o u n d as a
                 whole.

                 T- m u s t h a v e o c c u r r e d to y o u that o n e p o s s i b i l i t y was
                 o v e r c r o w d i n g in the c e n t r a l pens r e s u l ti n g . ro m '-:us. - A.
                 ? h e r e w as a p o s s i b i l i t y of o v e r c r o w d i n g e v e r y w h e r e si..

                  o ,r-iriila rlv      in the c e n t r a l pens.      -  A. It w as a
                  possi bil ity       but it was a p o s s i b i l i t y of o v e r c r o w d i n g       every­
                  where.
                   vou  th-n s ea a g ate, w h i c h y o u think was s i t S e r g a t e 3 or
             '              b e i n g o o e n s d an j s o M p eo o l e c om i n g ou t on to t««
    H              oeriineter t rack              A. Yes
                                                           53


                                                                                        D.G.    DUCKENFIELD




    Q.          It p r e s u m a b l y   must     h av e      o c c u r r e d to y ou to ask   y o urs elf
                why t ha t     was       happening                    A. I was surpcis         in on!
                r e so e c

    Q.
                T h is was a PC a c t i n g c o n t r a r y to i ns tr u ct io ns ,           wa l l h.
B               not so m u c h that.             He w a s n ' t a c t i ng c o n t r a r y to
                i n s t r u c t i o n s it t h e r e was i nj u ry or there was d i ff i c u lt y.

                t am o b l i ~ = d .     So it o c c u r r e d to you that if the Police
    Q
                O f f i c e r wis d o i n g t h at it was l i o l y to be b e c a u s e it was
                i n i u r i ^ s or d i f f i c u l t i e s . - A. The O r der =ays tna- ne
                s h o u l d ask for an i n s t r u c t i o n from a se nior Orr ic er .    i
                w a n t e d to k n o w w h y he had o p e n e d it be c a us e he nac no:
                asked      for    permission.

    n           Fxa^lv      so t h e re m u s e h av e been some sort of e m e r g e n c y                    to
                            do i t .nustn'-- t h e c a ?   -   A. Not n s e s - s s j c i l y a j
                 t'-at sta~e .    It m i g h t h a v e oaen s o m e o n e wnc ]ust w a n te d
                 get o u t of t he re tor w h a t e v e r reason.

     q    . But s o m e o n e just w a n t i n g to get oa t was one reason, or one
D           uh in q w h i c h a c o n s c i e n t i o u s     O C c i c e r = n o ul a ncc ...^v^
                    .(- = for w a i n ’t it?         -     A. I t h ink the revers al or tnat,
            a g;
                 r      is t h z t a c o n s c i e n t i o u s O f f i c e r w o u ld spea;c to a ... be r
              if"the c r o w d and d e t e r m i n e w h a t the s it u a t i o n was ana i
             n e e d be o p e n the qati

                 cut s’   -'ortlv t h e r e a f t e r y o u have an i n c r e as ed t r a m c or
        'j. ■
                 o e o ol e c o m i n g cur of t n o se pens, an d people b e g i nn i ng t
                                                                    rent.           A. Yes sir
                 climb over tne iiaes an o v e r the
                  c;vat d'd you thi nk was c a u s i n g chat?                   -  A. i rh ougn t           it_
                  was         D i t c h i n v as i o n b e c a u s e the g a t e haa ceen oce ne a           ar.c
                  c e o o l e " w e r a taking a d v a n t a g e ct tne sit uatio n.

                  Climbing-to            the   s i d es
                                                   c o u l d n ' t ha ve been a n y t h i n g to do
         Q. W i - h ' a oitch- i n v a s i o n     c o u l d it?      -  A. My p e r c e p t i o n is
                  t h a t the g a t e was o o e n e d first of all and there w e r e one or
                  two fans c o m i n g on to t h e p e r i m e t e r track, and I loo<ec
                  and I c o u l d n ' t see a r e a s o n for it, and tne s i t u a t i o n
                  d » v ° l o o e a w i t h one or two m o r e p e o pl e c om in g on to tne
                  o o r i m e t e r track, a nd at that s t a ge I tho ug nt i n di vi d ua ls
                  w e r e taking a d v a n t a g e o t ^ the g a t e being o p e n e d to come ouu
                   on   to the p e r i m e t e r        track.

                         LORD J U S T I C E T A Y L O R : W ere ther e also pe op l e c l i m bi n g
                   the ‘e n ces b e t w e e n the pens at that time?           -   A. Mot at
                   fir st my Lord.        The g a t e was o p e n e d and p e op le s t a r t e d
                   wal<ing       ou t     i n it i a l ly .

                              MR      C O L L I N S: The s i t u a t i o n q u i c k l y d e v e lo pe d, as I
            Q.      u n d e r s t a n d it, from w h a t I have seen a nd from your s t a t e - _
H                   ment, fairly quic.cly d e v e l o p e d from the ga tes bei ng o p e n e d
                                                              D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D


p t (-his to y o u — c o u l d n o t s ee t h r o u g h the                 tunnel.
T h e y c o u l d n o t see w h a t the p o s i t i o n was on              the t e r r a c i n g
u n l e s s t h e y w e r e t o l d to go d o w n and h a v e a             l o o k and if
n e c e s s a r y do s o m e t h i n g a b o u t it.  A.    Are             you m e a n i n g
Police       Officers,        sir?

Yes       I am.        A.        P o l i c e O f f i c e r s , sir, who w o r k that
area      c an a c t   on    t h e i r o w n i n i t i a t i v e and a s s e s s the
situation.

It     is n o t m u c h o f a c o n t r o l l e r w ho d o e s n ot do a n y t h i n g
to     c o n t r o l w h e n he c a n s e e       s o m e t h i n g h a p p e n i n g , is it.
A.         W h a t a r e y o u s u g g e s t i n g t hat I am s e e i n g ?

W h a t I am s u g g e s t i n g t h a t yo u are s e e i n g is s o m e t h i n g
g o i n g w r o n g on the t e r r a c i n g .        A.       I h a v e j u s t said,
sir, I d id          n o t s ee a n y t h i n g g o i n g w r o n g on the t e r r a c i n g .

You did.               Yo u s a w p e o p l e c l i m b i n g o v e r the fence.
A.        No, l e t me t a k e it b a c k a s t a g e .               I d i d n ’t see
a n y t h i n g u n t o w a r d on the t e r r a c i n g and w h e n the g a t e
wa s o p e n e d       I c o u l d n o t u n d e r s t a n d why.

 Y ou    needed        to    find cut.         A.     Yes.

 A nd one t h i n g t h a t         s h o u l d h a v e o c c u r r e d to you, a nd I waul;
 s u g g e s t it m u s t h a v e o c c u r r e d to you, was, this c a u l d be
 o v e r c r o w d i n g - p e o p l e t r y i n g to get out for s a f e t y r e a s o n s
 right9            Or d i d t h a t n ot o c c u r to you?                A.   That cid not
 o c c u r , sir .

 It did not o c c u r to y ou at               all?        Not e v e n as a possibii-...
 A.         It is a p o s s i b i l i t y .      W h a t I am s a y i n g is that on
 t h a t p a r t i c u l a r o c c a s i o n I w a s l o o k i n g and I s aw the
 O f f i c e r o p e n the g a t e a n d I w o n d e r e d why.

 D i d i t not o c c u r        to v o u for on e        m o m e n t that it w a s s
 p o s s i b i l i t y ___       A.     It c o u l d     have been a p o s s i b i l i t y          ---

  --of      overcrowding.              A.       It   could     have    been    a possibility
  of     overcrowding.

  If it w a s o v e r c r o w d i n g , the o ne t h i n g you m u s t do and do
  c u i c k l y is to s t o p a n y o n e e l s e g o i n g down that c e n t r a l
  t u n n e l to a d d to the o v e r c o r w d i n g - r i g h t ?  A.   Yes, sir.

  A n d the o n l y w a y y o u c a n do t h a t is by d i r e c t i n g P o l i c e
  O f f i c e r s to go and do s o m e t h i n g to b l o c k o f f t h a t t u n n e l
  a nd      to go d o w n the t u n n e l and get p e o p l e out if n e c e s s a r y .
  A.        I    am n ot a w a r e , s i r , t h a t that t u n n e l was s t i l l
     filling      at   that    point.

     B ut y o u c o u l d s ee it w a s from the video, if you h ad b o t h e r e d
     to lock, b e c a u s e y ou c o u l d see p e o p l e s t i l l c o m i n g in.
     A      Is*that a fact, t h a t the t u n n e l was f i l l i n g w h e n t h a t
                                                                                    D. G. D U C K E N F I E L D


    gate        w as    open?

    I am        sorry?            A.         Is    that      a    fact,     that    the   tunnel      ---

    P e o p l e w e r e s t i l l c o m i n g in a n d w e r e s t i l l a b l e to go
    d o w n t h a t t u n n e l b e c a u s e n o - o n e h a d t a k e n any s t e p s to b l o c k
    it o f f          A.    W e l l , I w a s n ' t a w a r e of the fact t h a t the
    tunnel'was filling with spectators.                             I w as l o o k i n g at the
    gate.

    A l l I am s u g g e s t i n g is t h a t the on e t h i n g you s h o u l d do
    is to t a k e s o m e s t s p s to e n s u r e t h a t n o - o n e c an - n o - o n e e x t r a
    c a n qo d o w n t h a t t u n n e l and p e o p l e s h o u l d be h o i k e d out,
    if p o s s i b l e , to r e l i e v e the s i t u a t i o n if it w as o v e r c r o w d i n g .
    A.     If t h a t t u n n e l w a s o v e r c r o w d e d , as you say

    Not     the       t u n n e l , the t e r r a c i n g .     A.    If the t e r r a c i n g was
    o v e r c r o w d e d ,      as yo u sa y, t h e n r e a s o n a b l e p e o p l e g o i n g
    down        t h a t t u n n e l w o u l d s u r e l y t u r n r o u n d and w a l k back.

    C h i e f   S u p e r i n t e n d e n t , y o u h a d the p o s s i b i l i t y of a
    d i s a s t e r on y o u r h a n d s as t h i n g s t u r n e d out.            You had
    the p o s s i b i l i i t v of o v e r c r o w d i n g .     You h a v e a f o c t b a i                i
    m a t c h that h a s j u s t s t a r t e d a n d that w i l l e n c o u r a g e
    p e o p l e to c o m e d o w n a n d get to s ee iu, w i l l i c n o t ?
     A..        It     will.

     A n d u n l e s s you t a k e s o m e s t e p s - a nd by "you" I m e a n
     the p o ’ ice - t a k e s o m e s t e p s to c o n t r o l t h i n g s and e n s u r e
     n e c o l “ do n c c o n e d o w n , you h a v e tne p o t e n t i a l i t y or
     * a'reat c i s a s t e r , go you n o t 9             A.       D i f f i c u l t i e s can
     be ~°xDer i e n c e d   b ut t h e r e w e r e O f f i c e r s ana s t e w a r d s i n
     t h a t a r e a a n d r e a s o n a b l e p e o p l e w o u l d not g o de w p. t h e r e
     and push;         they     w o u l d t u r n a nd w a l k out.

     A n d t h a t is w h y y o u d i d n o t h i n g , is it, b e c a u s e y o u c n c u o n t
     t h a t t h e r e w a s n o t h i n g t hat n e e d e d to be d o n e ?        A.        I am
     not s a y i'rvq rl 'drd n o t h i n g .      -I d i d n ot r e c e i v e any i n f o r m a t i o n
     s u b s e q u e n t to t h e g a t e s o p e n i n g -that O f f i c e r s and s t e w a r d s
     w e r e n ot in t h a t a r e a a nd I s a w n o t h i n g on the t e r r a c e s
      initially               to c a u s e    concern.

      Anvway         w h e n v ou s aw p e o p l e c o m i n g out, you                      presumably
Q
      w a n t e d * to g e t ’ s o m e i n f o r m a t i o n fr om s o m e o n e            as i t w e r e
      nearer            the     scene?            A.         Yes,    sir.

P     Did you            r a d i o to a n y O f f i c e r on t he              perimeter.        A.    I
      believe            a r a d i o m e s s a g e w as p a s s e d ,          sir, b ut t h e r e was
       no       response.

       So       what     di d    you    do?             A.       Chief     Inspector       ---
G
                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:                             I am    sorry.       The r a d i o m e s s a g e
Q
       w as      p a s s e d by w h o m to w h o m ?                  A.      The C o n t r o l R o o m , sir.

       y0   7                   i asked           the    controllers           in   the   Control      Room       to
       ask        the    P.C.      on    the       t.rack        what   wa s   happening.
L




                                                                 D .G . DUCK-lh-ZZ1D



         B u t n o t h i n g to c o w i t h c r o w d c o n t r o l o r _forming
                                                                              w -
                                                                                l .il-*.- peopl;
    O.
         c u e u e s " t h e y s h o u l d do t h a t t h e m s e l v e s ? - A. No, we hav e ,
         ’- e s o o n s i b ’ l i t v t h e r e b u t I w o u l d h o p e tn at v/e can as.': :cr
         the* a s s i s t a n c e of the p u b l i c to for:,; o r d e r l y queue s.

         -;]ou -.;e c o m eto the p e r i o d b e f o r e the_ c a t e s w e r e open..      Is^
         2_t v o u r vis'./ new, s t i l l y o u r view, i_hat at 2.3u            a nd - • ~ J ^ ’
                                                                                                 -e
         c e n t r e pens 3 a n d 4 w e r e n o t f u l l y pac.-:ec? - A. ^es sir,
    B    as   far as      I a m a war e.

         Uhat      is y o u r u n d e r s t a n d i n g of the d e n s i t y cf a c r o w d cn the
         t e r r a c e s " v;hen c a p a c i t y has b e e n rea ch ed , so t.iat i_- ::.c
         '--’paci tv o~‘ the cer. is 1200 a n d 1200 are ir. tne pen, •.;:;ac
         i s y o u r p e r c e p t i o n cf the d i s t r i b u t i o n of people.           Can^so.fo
                 .>>-oi t h a n d s m      t n e i r p o c ^ s l j u.iiC i ^ ^ c h w.e^.— :.anc..0 -.-..-^
                 Pi-*ev - c a d t h e i r pro g r a m ” a c o m f o r t a b l y ?   A re t n e y ; c £ z ii c
         n?"/t'e ^ e ^ s o ^ '■ n f r o n t o r b e h i n d ?          '.'i'.at is cne p o s i t i o n as
         y i u r p e r c e p t i o n of it? - A. I w o u l d s ay a s h o u l d e r to should
         chest     to back.

         -hat     chest       to b a c h   touching?      - A.    Yes.

          Shoulder       to    shoulder      tcucnmg?        - A.     -e^>.
    D
          •:o r o o m to p i c k y o u r p r o g r a m m e up a n d look at it in               front
            of v o u r f a ce ? - A. M o , I thin:-; i. y o u are c.iesc co                     o t-.c..
          a nd shoulde;        :o s h c u l d a r t h e re w o u l d be room. bu
          oackincr.




    E
                                                    86

                                                                                             D.G.     DUCKENFI ELD


    0 . I d o n ' t k n o w to w h a t e x t e n t you h a v e h e ar d the e v i d e n c e g i v e n
        sc far or r e a d it. but a r e you a w a r e that s p e c t a t o r s who w e r e
        in t he g r o u n d at 2. ^0 f elt u n c o m f o r t a b l y p a c k e d and w ere
        s o m e w h a t a p p r e h e n s i v e ? - A. no. sir.

    0 . 2.45?            -A.      I was     not    aware       of   that.

B   Ci. 2.^+5? - A.               I have     not    seen       a ny s t a t e m e n t s   f ro m w it n e s s e s .

    Ci. O n y ou r u n d e r s t a n d i n g today, f r om w hat you h a v e b een toic.
        w h e n do y ou t h i n k was t h e f i rst t i m e t hat p e o p l e beg an to be
        fea rf ul , b e g a n to feel pain, feel t h e m s e l v e s c r u s h e d ? - A . I
        d o n ' t know. sir.           I c a n ' t a s s e s s that.

    Q.          You h a v e n e v e r t r ie d to find out? - A.                    No.    sir.       Are    v:u
                s u H H S s t i n s s i n c e tne m c u i r y s t a r t e d ;

    q   _ yes. - A. My               role    since       the    Inquiry started              has    been     to r e m a i n
          detached.

                Well, be fore.            I d o n ' t m e a n s i n c e a f o r t n i g h t ago.        S i nc e the
                i n c i d e n t at H i l l s b o r o u g h ? - A. No.        S i n c e the i n c i d e n t at
                H i l l s b o r o u g h I h a v e p l a y e d no p ar t w h a t s o e v e r in m a k i n g any
D               e n q u i r i e s at all.        I h a v e r e m a i n e d c o m p l e t e l y de ta ch ed .

    G.          If it t u r n s o ut t hat p e o p l e w e r e i n de ed b e i n g c r u s h e d b e f o r e
                H a t e C was o c e n e d . it w o u l d r a t h e r look as t h o u g h your own
                a s s e s s m e n t of th e t e r r a c e was in error.'' - A. Is t hat tr.e
                a c c u r a t e s i t u a t i o n , s ir?

    0           We d o n ' t k n o w w h a t facts t h e T r i b u n a l w i ll tind.            we o n i y k now
                at the m o m e n t w h a t p e o p l e say, a l t h o u g h i n d e e d I h av e to say
                t h e i r e v i d e n c e has not b e e n g e n e r a l l y c h al l e n g e d . - A . I can
                o n l y r e l a t e to w h a t I saw. and as far as I am co n ce rn ed ,
                l o o k i n g t h r o u g h the c o n t r o l box w i n d o w at t h e c r o w d prior to
                t h e g a t e s o p e n i n g on t he p e r i m e t e r t r ac k t h e r e d id not a p p e a r
                to be a d i f f i c u l t y .

     Q      ,
                So if in f ac t p e o p l e w e r e b e ing c r u s h e d and w e r e f e a rf ul
                b e f o r e th e g a t e s w e r e ope ne d, it looks as t h o u g h y our ow n
                a s s e s s m e n t m a y h a v e b e e n in e r r o r ? - A. You h a v e g ot to a c c e p t
                m y p o s i t i o n a n d w h e r e I was st a nd in g.      My a s s e s s m en t , I w o u l d
                su g ge st , is c or r ec t, b e c a u s e I d id not s ee it. and t hat is my
                p e r c e p t i o n of t he s i t u a t i o n .

        Q. O n e y o u n g         l ady who was s t a n d i n g on t he ^ p i o n Kop l o o k i n g
                 d i r e c t l y at t h e t e r r ac es , s ai d t h at at 2 .45 t h e pe ns 3 and 4
                 w e r e o v e r c r o w d e d . - A. M ay I s u ggest , sir, t ha t from p o s s i b l y
                 150 y a r d s a w a y that is a v e r y g o o d a s s e s s m e n t if it is
                 accurate.

        u   .
                 So w h at it c o m e s to is this, is it, that by 2.^+9, 2.50. t h e r e
                 was l i t t l e d o u b t in y o u r m in d t hat e ve n t h o u g h t h e two pens
                 w e r e no t o v e r c r o w d e d t h e y w e r e g e t t i n g on to b e i n g n e a r ly
                 full.        Is t ha t c o r r e c t ? - A. I w o u l d a n t i c i p a t e that. sir.
H                l e a d i n g up to t he kic k -o ff .
                                                                                       D .G . DUCKENFIELD


    Q               Not ant icipate.     It is what you saw. - A . no, I would sav they
                    w e r e filling, sir. but a c c u r a t e l y the assessment, I c a n ’t rive
                    it.

    0   . Mr. Duckenfieid. you saw the terraces at 2.45. 2.50.             Was it
          not your p e r c e p t i o n that e ven if the cent re pens were not over
          full they were s etting on for being full? - .            I would sav
B         they w ere g e t t i n g on for b ein g full.

    u.              Now. b ea ri ng in mind that the c a p a c it y of those pens is i.000
                    and 1 . 2 0 0 apiece, g et t i n g on for being full means there will
                    be what, room for 1 0 0 more in each pen, 2 0 0 more in each pen?
                    - A . I can't be specific, sir.             You are a sking me to itck ;; a
                    s i t u a t i o n and count n u m b e r s .

    G   .
                    No. I am not a sking you to be specific.    That is whv I am
                    c ut ti ng it broadly.  90% full:  would that be what they were?
                    - A . No. sir, what I would say is this.    I looked at tr.e pens
                    as I looked at the rest of the ground, and my general
                    perc ep ti on was that the ground was filling anc tnst area was
                    filling.     As to how much, whether it be 60%. 90%, I c a n ’t say.

    u       .
                    Mr. D u c k e n f i e i d . the t r o u b l e is w e h a v e got p h o t o g r a p h s .   we
D                   h a v e s e e n videos, and it r e a l l y is not anv use you saying
                    that.       It is p l a i n , is not it. that by 2.50 t h e t w o wing pens
                          t h e L e D D i n g s Lane e n d w e r e p r e t t y e m p t y , w h e r e a s the two
                    c e n t r e c e n s . if you w o n ’t h a v e t h e m as lu ll , w e r e getting on
                    f o r being f u l l ? - A. res. sir.

                    You agree with that?             It must, therefore, have been verv
                    important to e n s u r e that there was no further crowding of pens
                    3 and 4?-’ - A. That there w e r e not more than the number :: fit
                    in c o m f o r t a b l y be aiiowed into those pens;

                    vaj      and another lOu or so even on your per ce pt io n wcu.                         live
                    put those pens at full? - A. You are quoting numbers. •
                    i.;r.'jld say they were a p p r o a c hi n g being r u i i .

                     Yes. T h e r ef or e they had reac he d on your view a critical stage
                     in crowd control.        There was going to come a time shortly when
                     som eb od y would have to cut off the inflow into those pens' -
                     A. Yes, sir.

                     ^ t ' ^ a t in your view was            the r e sp on si bi li ty ox tne ciut
                     s tewards? - A. Yes, sir.

        u       .
                     You did not. of course, know in the control room whether at
                     that stage there were anv stewards at the front of the tunnel?
                     - A. Yes, sir.

        G . You did or did not know?                       - A.    I did not know,         sir.

        G       .
                     A reauest was made to vou at 2.49 bv an o bv i ou s ly agitated ana
                     v e r y con ce rn ed e x pe r ie n ce d Superint en de nt for the gate or
                     gates to be o pened? - A. Yes, sir.
H
        G            And you very n aturally             had a number of concerns which we ail
                                                               106
                                                                                D.G.    DUCKEHFIELD



                         .     -               ny     reply     to      that was     t ha t   t hes e   are     tra i ne d
                police* O f f i c e r s , they k n o w the s i t u a ti o n and it is -y view
                they w o u l d r e po rt to a * if there was a difficulty.

                vnur a ss es s m e n t of w h e t h e r there was crow di ng in that p a r t i ­
    O.
                c u l a r stand d e p e n d e d on your s ta n da r d of people b . i a ? « « :
                t o b a c k a n d sho ul de r to shoulder. Is that n g n t ? - A. ...

8               sir.

                You p r e s u m a b l y Know w h a t                 is laid down in the Greer. 0 ui4*
    Q.                '-o t'^e m a x i m u m           n u m b e r or p e o p l e uia. or.t s n o u ^ _ i.e.._
                t e n ^ s u u a r e 'y a r d s ?       - A. I a * a w a r e there is a r o r m u l a ^ n _
                >re G ’-een G u i d e .                W h e n X w a s a s K e d roi L e ir.,c                 .
                -;as ^ t S e i n g         sp ec if i c a bo ut the G r e e n Guice.                    i was civir.,
                a personal            visual         vie'.v.

                T ,r.v 1=.- n e a s h v ou t hi s q u e s t i o n :                  a c c o r d i n g to t.-.e Greer,
                r u i d ® ^ e " m a x i m u m n u m b e r of p e o p l e           in ter. squ ar e yards,
                it^ is I'*     . - .1*-^n*h1 2
                          paracj               22 -
                                             Act.,    " Th e m a x i m u m         n u m b e r of p e o p l e sr.cu.t
                               CUU'yi.w.*'*.                                                    V^-
                  Vv2 54 c ersons          per ten s quare metr es                  ? - A.      -e:

                  v ni,        nQf s e r i o us l v suggesting, are you, tr.cit i_ •_
    0       .                                                                           cr.sb ■_
                  5 ° oeople in ten square n e t r e s they will be chest tc
                                                                                      n t>~ 1 -
D                 r.nc*" shou ld er to s h ou ld er ? - A . To oe nonest, sir, i
                  v is u al i se that at tr.e moment.

                  -.oll         =     trv a n d v i s u a l i s e , let's d i v i d e i _                ue.;   .

        Q.        c q u a r e ^ y a r d ” "* Do you f o l l o w m e ? - A. Yes sir.

                                              7 i v e p e o p l e i n o n e s q u a r e me e r e .    .r.ey
        0         One s q u a r e             -- - .        .        _       _•—,,, ,-.a -      3 . c ,■    -
                  a r e n o t g o i n g t o oe c r . e s . to oac,. a.ic                   — o...----------
                  are        they?    - A.     r.c sir.

                   a-r              is the m a x i m u m ? - A. /Jell tne re ere                      a ic.         --c —
        n
                   grounds         sir w h e r e that is n ot the case.

                   W o u l d v o u n o w loo*: p l e a s e at C o m p o s i t e A l b u m No.              2 arte
         Q.
                   P h o t o g r a p h P R 1 / 1 2 A ? - A. Yes sir.

                   t f vnr l o ok a t t h a t p h o t o g r a p h , w h i c h is a vie'.: or tr.e
            •J'      ”        . £S x S ay at 2 - m i n u t e s - p a s t - 3 , it is q u i t e ap pa re nt ,
                   i s n ' t it, t h a t t h e s i s m u c h g r e a t e r d e n s i t y at the f ro n t
                   t h a n at        the b a c k ?       - A. Yes       sir.

                   t s that         s o m e t h i n g t ha t y o u t o o k into a c c o u n t w h e n you w are
            Q.     T o o l i n g d o w n o v e r this area, the d e g r e e or d e n s i t y m            ^
                   d i f f e r e n t p a r t s of the t e r r a c e ? - A. No sir, it v/as n o .
                    obvious          to rae.

                    But is it s omething y ou were looking for? - A. It w o u l d be
             o,     s o m e t hi ng I w o u l d be looking for but it was not i ^ e d i a . e l ,
                    obvious          to me.

                    rs tv,e f ac t of               the m a t t e r ,    I think y o u  i n d i c a t e d y e s t e r da y ,
             Q ’ t ' a nncicibilit'' o c c r u s h i n g w a s n ot a dan ger wi.icn was                              _n
    H               tne p o s s i D i i i ^ u-         _ 3
                    the f o r e f r o n t of y o u r rand.
                                                                           _
                                                                           is
                                                                                          hf, _ A
                                                                                Lnat n o n . .        a .
                                                                                                          v-es sir,

                     tiiciw raay oc c o r r c c ^ •
i   I   i


                                                                         107
                                                                                                    D .G . DUCKENrlELD



                                                  x.h e o o s s i b i l i t v m a v be                   that when           y ou w e r e
                                                  t h . K . ! t - t. r r , - e e , y o « « r . not real ly thinking

                     a b o u t th® ^ ^ “ ^ ^ ^ i n ^ h r c r o w d ' a n d d if fi cu l ti e s in the
                     c ^ H s ^       result of the gates o p . » i n g a n d from w h e r e I was
                     I d i d not a p p r e c i a t e there was a density.


            8           But were you l ooking s p e c i f i c a l l y to see w h et h e r o r net
                        c“ u s 'i ng it, taking P ^ c e ? - A. I f y o u. sa y    crushing
                        specifically- n c , I was looking zor ir.cica.xc..,.

                                       inn',- o v e r the n a c e in t h o s e p h o t o c r a p n s w m c n i s
                Q ■ I:                                S ;   is a tine I thir.k v h*» you agreo
                    t Z t l T O u ' ^ a l i s a d there was serious probl *a « anc it was r.c
                                    ^                                       A
                                         -* ni           *’r'Vn C 1 0 n 7       “   AT ? \•» p i^-
                                                                                                 ic O
                                                                                                   .C^ :Se    ~ " i S^
                                                                                                                    o—  *
                                                                                                                       -.   Ci —   w   / C   «—   -. £* i. « . —   .

                        i o r c s r ^ pi

                        It       is ? A 2 / 1     a nd     that     is      actually               at        4-rainutes-?ast-3 .                       l-c     :
                        that?           - A.     Yes.
                        t       . , inv vou v i 11 accept,, b e c a u s e it has b e s n c r a w n to y our
                Q.’ - S n t V n           a l r e a d y b y :ir. C o ll i n s , p e o p l e lying on the grcu.
                        cuLC  -                       _ * . v'pc
                                                            Yes sir.
                        'nd sc on. cine so _oi. w*i -
            D   0 . At tha
                            t time it must have been apparent to^you^Lha!
                            rying to get out or tr.at pen? -   ---
                    w ere t
                         And they were having difficulty in doing so by yetting
                         through tne gate? - A. Yes s i -

                            _     ., lie,-ofl<-a ’"iIv succesting this would be the solution,
                                         the~possibi 11 ties that would arise woulc oe t=
                            cuJ sone of the fence co,n? - A. Yes sir.

                            Tv.^ ,-o u id be a pretty obvious thought that would go tnroug
                            anybody's mind, isn't it? - A. Yes s u .
                                                                                                 A. lict immediately sir.
                    i;• u id i i- g°
                                                        juch y
                                               u^., lone it tcck before anybody ashed tor zi
                            ^ r;°".icade to come with their cutting equipment arter
                                 p h o t o g r a p h was taken? - A. I con't sir.

                                                                                                  you as a very long tine? -
                    o       Ten minutes.                  Does tn.
                            A . Yes sir.
                                   ,, n r p vou saving then even though you knew there was
                    0   .          *    s‘ 7 nr un ag--inst the front and you knew tnere wc£
                                ? - - > ? l i l in ^ o o l e retting out, it never crossed your
                                            ce- conebodv to bring sone cutters to release cne
                                mine -c gee ^ e o o ^ .             a request for cutters very
                                P ® ° ? Ie; “ ^        t^e moment the call was put out for other
                                e a r :7 .?!!’ .:d a request was made then for cutters anc ■
                                n c c i        u iiC *  ^ * M               *>*t — , » « , • i 2 U 1 /-» y“ n r ' f l i p
                                hel^eve that because none were reacily * v « , l a b U - ° ....
                                Police Service the I’ire Brigade were callec..
                H


                                                                                                                                                                       J
*




                             QUESTION                 FIVE


    Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
    became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
    Final?


    The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid did not perceive
    overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
    Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid took no steps to block off or stop people going
    down central tunnel.

    The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
    Superintendent Duckenfieid or brought to his attention by any other person,
    consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel.
    On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,
    hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
    In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
    All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


    OBSERVATIONS

    Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

    231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
    there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
    be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
    could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
    have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


    Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

    9.    Arrangements should be made:-

     (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
     maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
     either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
     otherwise, and

     (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is
     about to be reached.
                                         D. G. D U C K I N F I E L D

there in recent years and I was l oo king at recent history
and recent hi st or y did not i n di ca te that there would be a
pr o bl e m   there.

So what you are telling us is that, apart from the
c o nv e r s a t i o n the d eta il s of w hich you cannot recall with
S up e ri n t e n d e n t Greenwo od , no other steps were taken to
m oni tor or to keep au fait with the situ at io n of those
pens, other than your own o b s e r v a t i o n and those with you
in the Contro l Box?              A.    There is no other means of
m o ni t o r i n g at all b e ca us e the turn st il e counts do not
register for the pens.

There is an o bvious way of moni to ri ng , surely, with respect,
and that is to have O f f i c er s at the back of those pens
p os it io ne d in order to see for themselves, with a specific
duty in the O p e r a t i o n Order to keep control of the numbers
qoing into those pens and p er haps to shut the tunnel up
and block it off when they get filled u p .                A.   I make
the point that Serial 13, who were in the West Stand,
had many r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s and one of which was looking over
into that terrace, and they w ou ld have moni to re d that
s i t u a t i o n in a d di t i o n to any other Officer and had the
numbers in those pens got to a d a ng er ou s level then action
would have been taken with seri al s in that concourse,
Serials 13 and 14 -- 14 and 15.

 Can you explain, in the light of what you have said, why
 no action was in fact taken by Serial 13 or any Serial 1?
 A.   Because they did not perc ei ve o v er cr ow di ng in those
 pens .

 You are saying that they ought to have known that they
 should p er c ei v e it, or look for it, are you?               A.  What
 I am saying is that as trai ne d Police Officers, if they
 see d i f f i c u lt ie s o c c u r r i n g then they will take action in
 respect of those dif fi cu lt ie s.

  But surely you have said to me that there was not any
  other thing that could be done - surely the most obvious
  thinq         and I do not know whet he r you thought of this or
  not       i s , as I have said, to have Officers in the back
  a v a i l a b l e there and ready and able to shut off the tunnel
  should the central pens become too full.            A.  There
  were Offi ce rs there, sir.

  There were not.          A.      No, not at that particular point,
  sir.        I take your point about you may consider extra
  Officers at the tunnel but if there was a need to shut off
  that tunnel, then other O ff ic er s - Serial 13 or the
  track serials - would point out the difficulties being
  e x pe r ie n ce d to the C on t ro l Room and the Control Room
  would then advise the O ff i ce r s on Serials 14 and 15 to
  take some p os i ti v e action in the concourse area at the
  back of the West Stand.
                                      43

                                                                  D.G.   DUCKENFISLD


      r ad io system.

Q. And did not get t h r o ug h ?          - A.   And did not get through.

Q.    Did you ask Mr. M ur ra y to try to contact? -A. No. sir.           As I
      h av e said e a r l i e r t he re are acti on s that individuals take of
      t he ir own accord.

Q. So you knew then that w h e n you d e ci d ed the gate should be
   o pe n ed the club did not know that that d ec i si o n had been made'
   - a . No, sir.

Q. So they were u na w a r e of what was g oing to happen? - A. Yes.
   sir.

G. So far as the P oli ce w e r e concerned, that is the Police at ant
   a bo ut the L epp ing s Lane conc ou rs e, they were not informed in
   advance,            w e re they, that the gate was going to be opened? - A
   No, sir,            but we may be able to presume, and as I say I have
   not seen o ther O f f i c e r s ’s ta tements, that bearing in mind the
   radio is on t a l k - t h r o u g h so that e v er yb od y can hear it, and
   S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h al l had m ad e the request for the gares to
   be opened, and we in turn, that is the control room, gave
   p e rm i s s i o n for them to be opened, I can only assume that the
   O f f i c e r s who were in that l o c a t i o n who had personal radios
   w er e b e c o m in g a ware of the d e v e l o p i n g situation and would
   resp on d to it, but I did not g iv e a direct instruction.

0.    what on e a r th c ould they be e x p e c t e d to do?               Even assuming
      thev heard the m e ss a g e from Mr. Marshall, how could they ce
      e x p e c t e d to a n t i c i p a t e your r e s p o n s e to it or to know what
      they might be able to do to c a t er for it? - A. It is
      difficult.         If they saw p eo pl e c o mi n g in they could direct
      them, but I c a n ’t a n t i c i p a t e t he ir actions.

Q. You see, you knew by now, did you not, that there were spaces
   at the ends of the t e r r a c i n g but that it was pretty crowded i
   the m i d d l e s e c t io n s? - a . Yes, sir. . . . . .

Q..-You k n e w - -that the tunnel, the c en tral tunnel,             gave on to thos
    two m i d d l e s e c t i o n s ? - A. Yes, sir.

G.    You knew by now that it was                 10-to,   after 10-to? -
      A. A p p r o a c h i n g kick-off.

0.    You knew w h e n p eo pl e got in t he y were likely to get to their
      p ositions in o rd er to w a t ch the m at ch as q u ic kl y as possible,
      b ec au se you w er e g e t t i n g c l os e to kick-off? - A. Yes, sir.

 G. You knew, therefore, that t he y w e r e likely to take the most
    obvi ou s r ou te to the t e r r a c i n g ? Right? - A. They would take
    the e a si e st route, sir, yes.

 0.    And you knew that the e a s i e s t r o u te was that c en tral tunnel?
       A. Sir, at that time you m ay s ug g es t it was a consideration.
       At that t i m e m y m in d was filled w i t h    the   other events that
       were t a ki ng place.
                                            4 4



                                                                       D.G.   DUCKENFIELO




            W hat you are s ay i n g is this, that you did not realise or you
Q
            did not t hink that w h e n that g a t e was open ed these people
            w ou ld go d o w n that c e nt r al t u nn e l ? -A. Sir. the s i tu at io n was
            s uc h that w he n I was asked to m a k e that d e c i s i o n and gave it,
            my t ho u gh t p r o c es s es w er e all c on su me d in that and did not go
            to the c e nt r a l tunnel.

                L O R D J US TI CE TAYLOR:         O n c e that flow had started through
            the g a t e and vou c ould see it on the video - we have all seen
            it on the v ideo - was not that a m o me n t at w hich you might
            have ® iv en some i n s t r u c ti o ns to the O f fi ce rs on the c o n c o u r s e _
            to try and direct        this flow, after you had made your decision.'
            _ A    Yes, I might have done, my Lord, but I did not.

                  MR      COLLINS:    Why not? - A. B ec a us e I was busy watcmng
u.
            the e v e n t s and the t ho ug ht at that s tage did not cross my nir.c
            to i ss ue an instruction.

o           Did it o c c ur to you at any time that if a large number of
            o e o o l e w en t d ow n that c en tr al tunnel they would be likely to
            c o m e out s t r a i gh t into pens 3 and A and cause overcrowding in
            t ho se s e n s 7 - A. Yes. t he re was that possibility, but tnere i;
            a ' po i n t here, ands I r es p ec t what you are saying.       We have cut
            off the s e q u e n c e of e vents as t h ou g h w he n I issue the
            i n s t r u c t i o n to o pe n that g at e that that is the ceasing o: tne
             problem.

    U        I am not i n t e n di n g to.      I am s im pl y trying to see wr.at was ^ in
             V o u r mi n d . w het he r you t ho ught of this possibilityr - A.       on
             the* o ne hand if we cut off the s e q u e n c e of events as^tr.ougn
             the o rd er to o pe n the gates is the finality ^ot it, <=-:c               ,
             "Why d i d n ’t you do this, this and t h i s ? ” , if we go further ir.
             mv s t a t e m e n t it shows that the s i t u at i on is still deve-opin*
              in a c r is i s s i t u at i on and I have not got the time iO s t cr = i 3
             the p ro b le m s w h i ch people may see here have to be addressea.

•O Can I. r hope, put it f airly this way, that the fact of tne_
  ' ' m a t t e r I s; that there were no p r ep ar at io ns made and no specif 1
:     w a r n i n g s ' ' g iv en e i th e r to s te wa rd s or to Officers , that tnat
      sate was g o i ng to be o pe n ed ?               That as a matter 0 1 fact
      happened?              Right? - A. I g av e no speci fi c instructions.

    a         Y ou g av e no s p e c i f i c i nstructions.          It did not occur to ycu
              that o n e of the c o n s e q u e n c e s of o pe n in g the gate would be to
              c au se a lot of p eo pl e to go d o w n that central tunnel ana
              c r e a t e o v e r c r o w d i n g ? - A. I was a wa re of the possibilities,
              but I m u s t add we have got to add on the next d ev elopment
              w h i ch takes my mind away.

        a     Just b e fo r e we come to that, can I say the fact or the ma^tei
              was t h e r e w er e no p re pa rations, but you say you simpiy were
              not able in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s to do anything about it because
              of the p r es s u r e of time and the p r es su re of circumstances.' -
              A  That is i t . sir.        I t hink it will come out if I can go to
               t he n ex t stage.
                                                                                              J u
                                           51

                                                                  D.G.   DUCKENFIELD




            that at that stage the d e ve l o p i n g situation within the
            g r o u n d had g on e to a s i t u a t i o n when I had lost the option.

n           So w ha t you are saying is that what you believed at the
            tim* you made vour statement, and presumably at the time
            y o u ' m a d e your d ecis io n, was the teams coming out may in
            h i n ds ig ht not have been.       -  A. No, it may have been corning
            out for a k i ck -a bo ut as you say.

0           And t h e r ef or e you may in fact have been earlier, or it may
            h a v e "been at a time e ar l ie r than 2.54.   It must have been
            at a time e arlier than 2.54.         -  A. Yes.

Q.          C oming   back to page    10    ....

Q                     LORD JU ST IC E TAYLOR:       If that was right ana the
            t*ams had their k i c k - a b o u t and went back off again, the
            o p t i o n w o u l d have r ea ppeared.   -  A. To delay the kick-ct:
            sir,   yes.

                      MR. COLLINS:      3ut by than, having regard to the
Q.
            e v i d e n c e you gave e ar l ie r this morning, the events you
            told~us about e f f e c t i v e l y made it impossible for you to
            come to chat de ci si on you are saying.          -  A. Yes.

o           That is the breakdown of c o mm un ic at io ns ....        -  A. My
            p e rc e p t i o n is b r e ak do wn in communications, worsening
             situation, 2 . 4 7 -ish d ecide to taka some action, think
             about'"delaying the kick-off, players cut, straight into
             the crisis of 2.47.

    0       Now you then you tell us w atch the Leppings Lane              terrace
             intently-, tor d e v e l o p m e n t s resulting from the gates
             opening.    -  A. Yes sir.

    Q. When, you- w a t c h e d that w er e you. aw ar e of a surge        into those
       c en tr al pens?       -   A. No sir.

    q         j think that there c le a r l y was such a surge.          You didn   t
              see it though.  ~  A. No.

    Q. Was it not clear from w h a t you could see, because the
       video was still running presumably.     -  A. Yes.

    Q         And you were keepi ng o ne eye on that I imagine from uifne to
              time.       You c o u l d ' see p eople pouring in still, and you
              c o u l d see them g oing towards that central tunnel couldn t
              vou?      -   A. I can only refer to the c om pilation video I
              have just seen, and the com pi la ti on video d oe s n' t indicate
              they were o o u r i n g towards the central tunnel.

        0     With resoect Chief SuD erintendent, to anyone w ho knows the
              g eo g r a p h y it is clear b e y o n d any peradventure that that
                                             52


                                                                           D.G.    DUCKENFIEID




         was w h e r e thev w e re flowing isn't it?      And you did Know
                aaogcaohy*.    -   A. W hen I saw the c o mp il at io n I saw
         n o o o U wa lk in g in, orderly, not rushing, not charging
         towards a p ar ti c u l a r point, and that was my perc ep ti on o:
         the situation.

         But they w e r e all flowing, if you look at the video, in a
Q.
         d i r e c t i o n w h i c h to a nyo ne who knows the grou nd is m the
         d i r e c t i o n of the tunnel w e r e n ' t they?     Of c ou rs e there
         w er* one or two who w e r e pee ling off in other directions
         b ut'" the vast bulk was g o in g in the dire ct io n of the tunnel
         w a s n ' t it.       -    A- 1 d i d n ' t perceive that situation sir.

C        Bu t if v o u w e r e a w a r e of the g e o g r a p h y of the g r o u n d you
         m u s t h a v e o r c e i v e d it.     - A. I l o o k e d at the c o m p i l a t i o n
         a n d I w a s s u r p r i s e d to     see       that p e o p l e w e re w a l k i n g ,   anc
         the d i r e c t i o n s t h e y w e r e g o in g .

0        Don'" be li ev e e ve ry t h i n g you read in the papers!    3ut the
         d i r e c t i o n they w e r e going was clearly in the dire ct io n of
         that tunnel w a s n ' t it?        -  A.  That is not my beliec sir.

q         W h°r° d id you think they were going?   -  A. My concern was
          that thev w »r e coming   into   the  ground     and Isaw tnem
          w ai ti ng In what I thought was the general directions, anc
          some were g oing through that gateway in the wall.

 o        L°t hip out at least this:   you were aware that because a
          i^rg^ number of oeoo le    had come in m a short space cc
          time that there might be a problem      if they went acwn into
          those c e n t r e pens. -  A. T here is a problem in any pen
          when a large number of     peop le come in.

    Q.    But p a r t i c u l a r l y   those c e nt r e pens.       -   A. There could be a
          d i f fi cu lt y.                                      ■          -

     n    And that is'why you w er e keeping, as you s a y ,.an intent
          ova w at ch i n g the L ep pi ng s Lane terrace intently was i_?        -
          A  I w a s n ' t looking s p e c i f i c a l l y at the central pens. I
          was looking at the t er ra ce and the rest of the g ro un d as a
           whole.

     0     V- m ust have o cc u r r e d to y ou that one possibility was
           o v e r c r o w d i n g in the c e nt r al pens resulting from this. - A.
           T h e re was a p o s s i b i l i t y of overcrowding e v er yw he re sir.

     0     P a r t i c u l ar l y in the c e nt r a l pens.    -  A. It was a
           p o s s i b i l i t y but it was a p o s si b il i ty of o v er cr ow di ng e v e r y ­
           where.

     0     You then see a gate, w h i c h you think was either gats 3 or
           g ate 4 , being o pe ne d and some people coming out on to tne
           p erim eter track.    -   A. Yes sir.

                                                                                                    0 (
                                                              54


                                                                                                           D.G.      D U C K 5 NFIELD




             J            -OJ noooie coming                    out        to people               beginning          to climb
        a" d \ T , i d ° ' n c « of o e n -3 3 and 4 into 1 aad 2 ana into
        r i n d 1, r i g h t ? ” - A. vi, , e l i d i n g over the r a d ^ l
        fences.
      , ■ u- ,            —     the radial fences, that began, and squally
Q - o e o o l e " b e g a n ' t o clitfib ove r the front fence, right over tne
    o e r i m a t e r fence.         — a . Ye'o.

        *nd that developed fairly quickly.                                                    -     ». It developed in
        due          course           sir.
                                        , ,.„n ,i-iv a f t a r k i c k - o £ £ t h a t w a s                    s t a r t i n g to
        W e l l oy
        h a p p e n wa=n
                           Jre,rX-                   1   can       I ask
                                                                    ^
                                                                             you         to       look
                                                                                              D3l7l4.
                                                                                                          foe     e x a m p l e a:
                                                                                                                T h a t is at
         p h ou og ra .        3 r 3 C i 5 =>ly.    W el l t h r ee o ' c l o c k w i t n i n                               a _
         t h r e e j D c £ ^ a ? £-     t h I n ' b e t w e e n 2.59 and 30 s e c o n d s                                   ana
         t h r e e ' c ’c l o c k            an d    30       seconds        I think,               to oe     precise.
         -           A.   Yes      sir.

         And          vou       can      see     there        someone         climbing               over     the     perimeter
          fence            c a n 1t you?             -        A.   Yes      sir.

                          LORD        JUSTICE        TAYLOR:                And     the           sids f ence on        17.

                          MR.     COLLINS:                Yes,          D 81 717:

            - ■ - A          np l7 1 7, w h i c h is at one m i n u t e past thrae,
    q   . Ana i n a e e d on D B   .             £ o e o ol e by now w h o h a v e got
             we can f % ^ 1 r     0 ; 4 m e ^ c ' ' b y o n e m e a n s or a no t he r, an d you
             ° Ut                   s t a n d i n g uo c l e a r l y tr yi ng to ge t o u t and
             ca n se e p - o p l - *      *           * T - ^ a n by t hr ee o ’c l o c <
             °f'*cti%                      o»oole        had       started          to        try    to g e t t h e m s e l v e s
             o»i“          e                              hadn't           they?      -       A . Yes

                                  i                 erv/inj        to g e t o u t o£                the si de ' as       well.
    Q . A n d ^ e o o l e ^ e r . ^ ^ ^ . 3^                                          ?henom9r,o n '.though,                  ?eooie

              going            over       pens      at    times.

              t - n ->w - h a t                  b ut     oeoole          coming          o v e r the         front,     you
                                                                                                                                  1c l o c k
        Q-                                     ' - a Pjopie 3 t i U f l o w i n g « a«                                        -

                 s°ill^oeoole                  coming         in   to the^ground                                  * « « ’         -
                 a   " I d o n ’t r e c a l l            that       specifically                   sir.

                           . - i                         at    th e v i d e o at three o ’c l o c k y o u woul'i
        0-       l£ y ° u naa                                     c o m ing into the g r o u n d.   I' m not
                 n av e s ee n p e o p l e                                oti     c . tc e r tainlY     t h r o ug h
                                                                                                         u.      -    A. That may

                 have          b ee n     so   sir.
                                            , wari t-qk^n no                st so s       at all          to b l o c k o f f        tnat
H       «•           tunnel*oc^to s?tp people going down the central tunnel.
                                                 55



                                                                                  D.G.   DUCKENFIELD




                                A. Yes s i r .



                       B




                        C




                        D




                                                      /Q.   You c o u l d   sea




                            F




                        r




                        H

J . I . H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                   88
                                                                                    D jlG ^ _ D U C K E N F I E L D

A
          r e s p e c t o f t h e d a n g e r s of d o i n g that,         namely that         people would
          c o m e in w i t h m i s s i l e s a n d d r i n k ? - A.        Yes. sir.

    G.    J u s t s t o p p i n g t h e r e for a m o m e nt , w h a t c o n c e r n s me is this.
          W e h a v e h e a r d a lot of e v i d e n c e f r o m p e o p l e who e n t e r e d the
          g r o u n d e a r l y , 2 o ’clo ck , 1.30, 1.45.           T h e y w e r e all s ea r ch ed ,
          a n d of c o u r s e s e a r c h i n g is a t i m e c o n s u m i n g    e x e r c i s e , is not
B         it? - A. Yes. sir.

    G.    Y'ou a r e n o t s u g g e s t i n g , a r e you. t h a t at f r o m 2.^*5 o n w a r d s
          w i t h a m a s s i v e c r o w d o u t s i d e w a i t i n g to   g e t in. it was
          c o n t e m p l a t e d that eve r y b o d y coming into           t h e g r o u n d w o u l d ce
          s e a r c h e d f o r m i s s i l e s or a l c o h o l ? - A. T h e s i t u a t i o n at that
          s t a s e, sir. was s u c h t h a t it w o u l d n o t be po s si bl e.

C   G.    Exactly.            So w h e t h e r t h e g a t e was o p e n e d or w h e t h e r the s s t e
          w as n o t o p e n e d , t h e s a m e p r o b l e m w o u l d a r i s e in r e l a t i o n to
          d r i n k a n d m i s s i l e s ? - A. no, six'.           Ix p e o p l e w e r e g o i n g
          t h r o u g h t h e t u r n s t i l e s t h e y w o u l d be p a s s i n g P o l i c e O f f i c e r s
          who. w h i l s t t h e y m a y n o t s t o p t h e m and s e a r c h t h e m d i r e c t ly ,
          w o u l d h a v e a v i s u a l view, or a v i e w of t h e m g o i n g t n r o u g n t h e
          t u r n s t i l e s , a n d t h e y w o u l d n o t if t h e g a t e was op en ed .

D   G.    Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .     w i t h g r e a t r e s p e c t , p e o p l e d o n ’t u s u a l l y
          carry offensive               w e a p o n s i nt o a f o o t b a l l g r o u n d in t he ir h an d
          in f ul l v i e w of          a P o l i c e o f f i c e r , do t h e y ? - A. No. but you
          c a n s e e if t h e y        h a v e a n y t h i n g s t i c k i n g ou t of t h e i r p o c k e t
          like a billiard               b a ll or a b e e r can.

    G.    Yes. a l l r i g h t.          Let us a c c e p t t h a t fo r a m oment.        In a d d i t i o n
          to t h e p r o b l e m s y o u h a v e j us t o u t l i n e d an d w h i c h y o u p r o p e r l y
E         t o o k i n t o a c c o u n t , in f a v o u r of o p e n i n g t h e g a t e was the
          d a n g e r to t h e c r o w d o u t s i d e of b e i n g k i l l e d ? - A. Yes. sir.

    G.    W h i c h y o u h a d b e e n w a r n e d about.      Did y o u or d i d y o u n o t h a v e
          at t h e f o r e f r o n t of y o u r m i n d in a d d i t i o n .to m i s s i l e s and b e e r
          t h a t t h e i n c o m i n g fans if t h e g a t e s w e r e o p e n e d w o u l d or m i g h t
          s e t o n to t h e t e r r a c e t h a t was a l r e a d y n e a r l y f u l l ? - A. It
          d i d n o t s p e c i f i c a l l y c r o s s m y mind.  I k n e w t h e y w e r e g o i n g to
F         e n t e r t h e t e r r a c e as a whole.

    Q.     S i n c e y o u k n e w f r o m y o u r o w n i n s p e c t i o n t h a t t h e r e w e r e no
           w a r n i n g s i g n s a n d no d i r e c t i o n a l s i g n s l e a d i n g to t h e two w i n g
           pens, a n d s i n c e y o u k n e w t h a t t h e t u n n e l was d i r e c t l y in f r o n t
           of t h e gat e, d i d it not o c c u r to y ou t h a t t h e o n e t h i n g t h a t
           wa s e s s e n t i a l if t h e g a t e s w e r e to b e o p e n e d was to h a v e
           p e o p l e d i r e c t i n g f an s to t h e w i n g p e n s ? - A. Yes. sir, bu t I
G          made the point that other agencies who have a re s p o n s i b i l i t y
           fo r t h e g r o u n d a n d h a d n o t s e e n t h e l a c k o f s i g n i n g or
           f o r e s e e n d i f f i c u l t i e s of t h i s nature, an d I had to a c c e p t t h e
           g r o u n d as it was.

     G.    Yes, t h a t is q u i t e right.              You c o u l d n o t r u s h a n d put s i g n s up
           y o u r s e l f , b u t w h e n y o u p o l i c e an o p e r a t i o n y o u t a k e a g r o u n d
           as y o u f i n d it? - A. Yes, sir.

     G.    There     w e r e no s ig ns .         Therefore       if as y o u s a y      it was        in y o u r     ^
                                                                          P.O.     DUCKENFIELD


mind that people            were     to be d i r e c t e d    away from the centre
pe ns, t h a t c o u l d    only     have been done           by s t e w a r d i n g ? - A. Yes.
sir.

T h e s t e w a r d s , of c o u r s e , t h e S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l
C l ub, w o u l d n o t h a v e a n t i c i p a t e d t h a t g a t e C w o u l d be o p e n e d
10 m i n u t e s b e f o r e t h e k i c k - o f f . w o u l d t h e y ? - A. No. sir. but
t h e s t e w a r d s in t h a t l o c a l i t y w o u l d be a w a r e of t n e c e v e ± c p i n g
situation.

Well, t h a t is w h a t I had b e t t e r ask y o u about.                U n l e s s they
w e r e t o l d h o w w o u l d t h e y k n o w ? - A. I p r e s u m e a n y o n e in the
c o n c o u r s e a r e a at t h a t t i m e w o u l d be a w a r e of th e s i t u a t i o n
outside.

W h v w o u l d s o m e b o d y in t h e c o n c o u r s e a r e a be a w a r e t hat
s o m e b o d y o u t s i o e m i g h t be c r u s h e d to d e a t h a g a i n s t tn e ou ter
w a l l ? - A. T h o s e c o m i n g t h r o u g h t h e t u r n s t i l e s ma y h a v e a v i e w
a n d e x p r e s s t h a t view.

T ha t
     is a f a i r a ns w er .           H o w w o u l d t h o s e in t h e c o n c o u r s e k n o w
that o n e of t h e o p t i o n s       b e i n g c o n s i d e r e d by t h e P o l i c e was tne
oDenins of g a t e C ? - A.             W h o in p a r t i c u l a r , s i r ?   Do you m e a n
the stewards?

The stewards.               T h e c h i e f s t e w a rd , t he m a n in c h a r g e of the
stewards from              Sheffield Wednesday Football Club? - a .
S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M u r r a y t r i e d v i a his p e r s o n a l r a d i o link w it h
S h e f f i e l d W e d n e s d a y F o o t b a l l C l u b to g e t in t o u c h w i t h Mr.
Locke, t h e ch iei s t e w a r d .               U n f o r t u n a t e l y , he was u n s b - e to g o
so .

 A r e y o u s a y i n g t h a t b e f o r e th e g a t e was o p e n e d S u p e r i n t e n d e n t
 M u r r a y t r i e d to w a r n t h e c h i e f s t e w a r d to get s t e w a r d s on to
 t h e t u n n e l ? - A. S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M u r r a y s p o k e or t r i e a to s p e a k
 w i t h m r . Locke.        T h e s p e c i f i c t i m e I c a n ' t oe certa in , out
 c e r t a i n l y at t his p a r t i c u l a r m o m e n t of crisis.

           L O R D J U S T I C E T A Y L O R: I am sorry.        W h e n y o u ha d m a d e the
 d e c i s i o n y o u w e r e g o i n g to a l l o w the g a t e to be opened, or
 w h e n ? - A. A b o u t t h a t time, m y Lord.           I c a n ' t be ac c ur at e .    I
 k n o w he spoke.
                                                                                                      rt DO




 W h a t I w o u l d l i k e to k n o w is. if he had m a n a g e d to get t hr ou
 to Mr. Locke, w h a t as y o u u n d e r s t o o d it was h e g o i n g to say
 him?        T h a t "W e a r e g o i n g to o p e n t h e gate", or "We a re
 c o n s i d e r i n g o p e n i n g t h e g a t e " ? - A. T hat w e w e r e c o n s i d e r i n g
 o p e n i n g t h e gate, b e c a u s e I u n d e r s t a n d an i n c i d e n t had
 h a p p e n e d p r e v i o u s l y w h e r e t h e P o l i c e had t a k e n a c o u r s e of
 a c t i o n a n d n o t i n f o r m e d t h e club, a nd t h e c l u b w a n t e d to k n o w
 a b o u t it.        So Mr. M u r r a y, of his o w n accord, t r i e d to m a k e
 c o n t a c t w i t h t h e club,

        MR. H Y T N E R :     Y o u see, y o u a p p r e c i a t e , Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .
 so far I h a v e not m a d e a n y c r i t i c i s m of t h e d e c i s i o n to o p e n
 t h e gate, n o r am i g o i n g to m a k e a n y c r i t i c i s m of that
 decision.      T h e r e m a y be c r i t i c i s m of the s i t u a t i o n t h a t led to
                                                                                                          0   ,i
                                                  91
                                                                                       D.G.     D UCKENFIELD


         t h e o p e n i n g of t h e gate, b u t t h a t is a d i f f e r e n t ma tt e r.           Once
         y o u h a d ha d t h e r e q u e s t m a d e it m u s t h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s to     you.
         t h a t is at 2.49. it m u s t h a v e b e e n o b v i o u s to you, m u s t not
         it. t h a t o n e of t h e d a n g e r s of o p e n i n g t h e g a t e w a s p e o p l e
         s w a r m i n g i nt o t h e   a l r e a d y a l m o s t f ul l t e r r a c e ? - A. As I s a i d
         e a r l i e r , sir. t h e     d e c i s i o n I wa s a s k e d to m a k e a n d t h e o p e n i n g
         o f t h e g a t e s w a s s u c h t h a t I w as c o n c e n t r a t i n g u p o n that, a n d
         I d i d n o t i s s u e a d i r e c t i v e a b o u t t h e tunnel.

Q.       Bu t th is is t h e w h o l e poi n t, is no t it?                         Y o u h a v e s a i d that
         e v e r y d e c i s i o n y o u m a d e o n t h a t d a y w a s a c o r r e c t one.              icu
         m a y n o t h a v e b e e n t h i n k i n g a b o u t t h e t u n n e l . W ha t I h a v e to
         D u t to y o u is t h a t it w a s a p l a i n e r r o r not to h a v e c o n s i d e r e d
         t h e t unn el ,       a n d as it t u r n e d o u t a f a t a l e r r o r ? - A. I
         c o n s i d e r , sir, t h a t at t h e t i m e I w a s f a c e d w i t h a v e r y
         d i f f i c u l t :s i t u a t i o n .    I m a d e a d e c i s i o n and I d i d not
         f o l l o w it u p w i t h           a d i r e c t i n s t r u c t i o n , but as I s a i d
         e a r l i e r , t h e r a d i o was o n t a l k - t h r o u g h . P o l i c e         Officers
         were p atrolling the c o n c o u r s e area and I would hope
         t h e r e w e r e s t e w a r d s in t h a t c o n c o u r s e area, a n d w h i l s t
         I did not issue a s p e c i f i c directive. Police Officers
         a r e t r a i n e d to a c t o n t h e i r i n i t i a t i v e , an d I w o u l d
         h a v e h o p e d t h e y w o u l d h a v e t a k e n s o m e a c t i o n at t h e
         tunnel.

q        Let us just d e a l w i t h y o u first.                 Everybody here sympathises
         w i t h you, I am sure, in h a v i n g b e e n p u t i nt o an e m e r g e n c y
         situation.             It w o u l d be a h a r s h p er s on , indeed, who d i d not
         have that sympathy.                  W h a t is b e i n g p ut to yo u is this. Mr.
         D u c k e n f i e l d . t h a t in d e a l i n g w i t h t h a t e m e r g e n c y y ou t o o k into
         a c c o u n t v e r y p r o p e r l y s o m e f ac to rs , bu t h a v i n g m a d e y ou r
         d e c i s i o n , w h i c h was p r o b a b l y t h e r i g h t one. you c o m p l e t e l y
         f o r s o t to d e a l w i t h o n e of the f o r e s e e a b l e c o n s e q u e n c e s of
         v o u r d e c i s i o n ? - A. In v i e w of m a k i n g th e d e c i s i o n , sir. I d i d
         n o t f o l l o w it u p : bu t t h e r e a r e O f f i c e r s in t h a t a r e a who I
         w o u l d h a v e h o p e d w o u l d h a v e t a k e n a c o u r s e of action.

O.        T h a t is a d i f f e r e n t m a t t e r w h i c h I w i l l c o m e to. - The fact
          t h a t yo u m a y h o p e an d e x p e c t t h a t o t h e r s w ill r e m e d y y o u r o w n
          e r r o r is a s e p a r a t e issu e, but. Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d , c a n y o u f a c e
          t hi s p r o b l e m ?      Y o u m a d e a m i s t a k e in f o r g e t t i n g this
          c o n s e q u e n c e , f o r e s e e a b l e c o n s e q u e n c e , of m a k i n g y o u r d e c i s i o n
          to o p e n t h e g a t e ? - A. Sir, I d i d n ’t i s s u e a d i r e c t
          i n s t r u c t i o n to c l o s e t h a t t u n n e l .

 0.       B u t t h a t was an er ro r, w a s not it? - A. Sir. it was a m o m e n t
          of c ris is , a n d I was d e a l i n g w i t h a d i f f i c u l t s i t u a t i o n .

    0.    T h a t is a c c e pt , b ut it w a s a m i s t a k e , an error, an o m i s s i o n ,
          to h a v e f o r g o t t e n to g i v e an i n s t r u c t i o n to c l o s e o f f the
          t u n n e l ? - A. Sir, I a m n o t w i s h i n g to e v a d e t h e issue.              I
          h a v e s a i d I d i d n o t g i v e an i n s t r u c t i o n .       There are many
          o c c a s i o n s as a C o m m a n d e r y o u g i v e i n s t r u c t i o n s and y o u
          e x p e c t o t h e r s to t a k e a c o u r s e of a c t i on .         I am not
          mov i n g that r e s p o n s i b i l i t y whatsoever.             All I am s a y i n g
          is I d i d n o t i s s u e an i n s t r u c t i o n .

                                                                                                                    0^
                                                              92
                                                                                                  D.G.      D UCKE NFIELD


                       I am s o r r y to h a v e              to p r e s s you, a n d I r e a l l y am sorry, but it
                       h a s to b e ’ g o t c l e a r w h a t y o u a r e         saying.       T h e r e a r e t wo w h o l l y
                       d i f f e r e n t w a y s of p u t t i n g thi s, Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d .        O n e is. "I
                       d i d n o t g i v e t h e i n s t r u c t i o n b e c a u s e I w a s e n t i t l e d to e x p e c t
                       O f f i c e r s o n t h e g r o u n d to t a k e t h e i n i t i a t i v e to d o w h a t is
                       suggested             T h e r e f o r e I d i d n o t m a k e a m i s t a k e ” . T h e o t h er
                       w a y of p u t t i n g it is, "I m a d e a m i s t a k e but in f a c t o t h e r
                           f i c e rs s h o u l d h a v e r e m e d i e d t h a t m i s t a k e by u s i n g t h e i r
                       initiative".              Now.        w h i c h of t h e m is it ? - A. T h e latter, sir.

                       You made       a mistake           bu t y o u   would have        hoped     t ha t    others would
                       remedy      it ?   - A.    Yes.

                       Well, t h a t at l e a s t        is v e r y    frank, a n d I am s o r r y to h av e
                       p r e s s e d y o u to t h a t    an sw e r,    but it wa s my d u t y to do so. Mr.
                       Duckenf i e l d .




                   F
                                                               /I   ought.      I think,       to f ol l ow. .. .




                   G




                   H
                                                                                                                               0-j
L. H a r o H a m Ltd
                                                                   D.G.    D UCKENFI ELD




I o u g h t I thin'* to E o l l o w it up by a s k i n g y o u a b o u t
O f f i c e r s on th e g r o u n d in f a i r n e s s to them.            You, h a v i n g
f o r g o t t e n to g i v e t h a t i n s t r u c t i o n , a r e yo u s a y i n g that
e i t h e r an I n s p e c t o r in th e c o n c o u r s e or i n d i v i d u a l
O f f i c e r s w i t h t h eir p e r s o n a l r a d i o s s h o u l d h av e r e a l i s e d
w h a t w a s h a p p e n i n g a n d r a c e d to th e t u n n e l ?      -    A. Yes, I
w o u l d h a v e e x p e c t e d t h a t they w o u l d ta<e a c o u r s e of
action.

W e k n o w t h a t t h e r e w a s o n e s t e w a r d in the c o n c o u r s e , ws
see h i m on the v i d e o , bu t he wa s near g a t e C.                    Are you
s a y i n g that y o u w o u l d h a v e e x p e c t e d the i n f o r m a t i o n that
the g a t e was b e i n g o p e n e d to h a v e b ee n r e l a y e d
s u f f i c i e n t l y to the s t e w a r d s t ha t they w o u l d <now to go to
che t u n n e l ?       -  A. B e c a u s e we c o u l d n ' t c o n t a c t Mr. Loc.<e
the o n l y m e a n s of c o n t a c t w o u l d h av e been verbal c o n t a c t
b e t w e e n the P o l i c e O f f i c e r s a n d the s te w a r d .

T hi s was .an a p p a l l i n g b r e a k d o w n in c o m m u n i c a t i o n w a s n ' t
it, that the P o l i c e c o u l d n ' t g e t h o l d of the c h i e f s t e w a rd
at a c r i t i c a l time.       D o y o u k n o w w h y the P o l i c e c o u l d n ' t
g e t h o l d ot Mr. L o c o ?       — A. I d o n ' t sir.

T h e w h o l e p o i n t of h a v i n g the, I t h i n k he is        c a l l e d the
c h i e f s e c u r i t y o f f i c e r , a n d the P o l i c e on the g r o u n d is
t h a t they l i a i s e t o g e t h e r d o n ' t they?         - A.  Yes sir.

How w o u l d t h o s e    in the c o n c o u r s e h av e k n o w n the s t a t e         of
p a c k i n g of p ens     3 a n d 4?   -     A. P o l i c e O f f i c e r s or
s t e w a r d s sir.

 Both?         -    A. P o l i c e O f f i c e r s w o u l d be looki ng , s e r ia l 13
 f r o m the t o p of the W e s t Sta nd , for a c t i v i t y there and
 t he y w o u l d m o n i t o r it there, but as I h a v e said the
 s t e w a r d ' s r e s o o n s i’
                                  o il i ty , w h i c n is tne p r i me
 r e s o o n s i b i l i t v , I c a n 'c be c a t e g o r i c h o w they w o u l d dc it
 o t h e r than l oo ki ng .

 Were       the O f f i c e r s   in the stand, w h o I a c c ep t s h o u l d have
 s e e n the s t a t e of         o v e r c r o w d i n g , w e r e they u n de r any o r d e r s
 to oass on by p e r s o n a l r ad i o t h e ir a s s e s s m e n t of c r o w d i n g
 in the p e n s ?          -    A. Sir s p e c i f i c i n s t r u c t i o n s w o u l d have
 b e en g i v e n to t h o s e p e o p l e by S u p e r i n t e n d e n t G r e e n w o o d ,
 a n d I w o u l d e x p e c t them, as t r a i n e d P o l i c e O f f i c e r s , and
 t r a i n e d in c r o w d c o n t r o l , to a s s e s s the s i t u a t i o n a n d if
 t h e y saw a d i f f i c u l t y r e l a y that back.

           L O RD J U S T I C E T A Y L O R :    But s h o r t of e i t he r the
 O f f i c e r s or the s t e w a r d s on the c o n c o u r s e , a s s u m i n g t h e r e
 w e r e O f f i c e r s a n d s t e w a r d s on the c o n c o u r s e , s h o r t of
 t h ei r b e i ng told, " Pens 3 and 4 a r e g e t t i n g to be n e ar l y
 f u ll " ho w w o u l d they k n o w ?         -   A. T h e y w o u l d n ' t sir.
                                                                 94
                                                                                                 D.G.   D U C K E NFIELD




                    q.            mr. H Y T N E R :        Y o u a c c e p t d o n ' t y o u that o n c e the m a s 3
                          of s u p p o r t e r s w a l k e d - b e c a u s e t he y d i d w a lk , t h ey d i d n ' c
                          rush - ' t h r o u g h the t u n n e l a n d into the o v e r c r o w d e d pens,
                          it is f a i r y l a n d to s u p p o s e t ha t t he y c o u l d turn b ack w h e n
                          t h e v sa w the o v e r c r o w d e d t e r r a c e s a n d push their w a v b ack
              B           with e v e r y b o d y pushing forward.                      A. I d o n ' t k n o w w h a t
                          the s i t u a t i o n   was sir.

                    Q.    Well     you      know crowds          d o n ' t you?    -   A.   Yes.

                          If    t h e re    is a c r o w d m o v i n g f o r w a r d d o w n a tu nn el ....
                          A.    There       is a p o s s i b i l i t y of a d i f f i c u l t y as y o u say.

                          I c n l v h a v e to pu t t ha t to y o u y o u see o e c a u s e m                        yo ur
                          a n s w e r s to Mr. C o l l i n s y o u s u g g e s t e d ot         h e r w i s e ,  an  d  I have
                          to pu t to y o u that y o u h a ve g i v e n w h o l l                y   u nr ea  l  is t ic
                          a s s e s s m e n t s of h o w p e o p l e can b e h a v e in this so rt of
                          situation.            I am n ot g o i n g to go o v e r t he terri tory
                          a l r e a d y t r o d d e n by Mr. C o l l i n s , I ' m sur e you wi 11 be
                          r e l i e v e d to Know, I j u s t w a n t to se e ho w the ma t ter 1 s
                          summarised.             Y o u d i d n ' c r e a l l y a p p r e c i a te unt il far too
              D           l a t e chat t h e r e was r e a l t r o u b l e on the t e r r a c e s di d you?
                                A. Do y o u m e a n p r i o r to the s t o p p i n g of the g am e sir?

                    n     Yes              A.   F r om my    visual       insoection         I              aware     sir

                          Y o u see a p i t c h i n v a s i o n is a t e r m of art, we all <now
                          w h a t it m e a n s .       It is f ans d e l i b e r a t e l y g e t t i n g o u t of the
                          t e r r a c e s a n d i n v a d i n g t h e p i t c h for a p u r p o s e , e i t h e r to
                          s o o i l t h e g a m e , or to a b u s e the refe re e, or to go for an
                          o o p o s i n g p l a y e r w i t h w h o m t he y     a re d i s p l e a s e d , or
                          o c c a s i o n a l l y to i n v a d e p r o p e r l y to g e t to the o t h e r en d to
                          g e t at the o p p o s i n g fans.             T h a t is a p i t c h i n v a s i o n isn't
                          it?                   Yes  s n

                           You    are w e l l    aware      ot    that.       -   A.   Yes       sir.
                     Q.

                     Q.    T h i s was the b e g i n n i n g of the g am e.               T h e r e was no incident:
                           on the f i e l d that c o u l d h ave p r o v o k e d a n ge r a m o n g the fans
                           a n d a b o v e a l l the fans n e v e r g o t on to the pitch.                   How
                           c o u l d it p o s s i b l y h a v e b e e n i n t e r p r e t e d as a p i t c h
                           invasion?*" -          A. Sir m y v iew f r o m the C o n t r o l Box was such
                           t h a t t h er e w a s no a b n o r m a l i t y a n d I q u e s t i o n e d in my m in d
                           w h y th e g a t e wa s o p e n e d .

                     Q.    W e l l that is a s e p a r a t a thing.                 Y o u ar e now g o i n g ba ck to
                           the v ar y b e g i n n i n g .          W h a t I h a v e to a s k y o u a b o u t that is
                           this:         t h a t k n o w i n g f ul l w e l l t h at y o u had just g i v e n
                           o r d e r s to o o e n the g a t e , a n d they c o u l d be c a l l e d the
                           f l o o d g a t e s , ~ a n d k n o w i n g full w e l l t ha t the t un n e l was very
                           m u c h in l ine w i t h the g a t e , a n d k n o w i n g that the p en s w e r e
                           n e a r l y full, a g a i n it o n l y w o u l d take a c h i l d of less than
                           a v e r a g e i n t e l l i g e n c e to say, "We ll if that has all
                H
                                                                                                                                 i) 0

H a r o h a m Ltd
                                       94
                                                                      D.G.     DUCKENFIELD




h a p p e n e d a n d p e o p l e a r e s p i l l i n g o u t of the f r o nt of the
c r o w d it is b e c a u s e p e o p l e h a v e c r o w d e d into the pe ns at
the rear.           T h e r e is o v e r c r o w d i n g in the p a n s . "      T h a t is
r i g h t i s n ' t it?       -   A. T h a t is y o u r s u g g e s t i o n sir.         It
w a s n ' t my perception.              I d i d n ' t se e a n y p u s h i n g .      I saw a
s t a t e of n o r m a l i t y a n d t h e g a t e o p e n e d .

Bu t it     m u s t be o b v i o u s     m u s t n ' t it that it the g a t e was
opened      a n d t h e n p e o p l e w e r e c l i m b i n g o ve r the fen ces that
what       has h a p p e n e d is th at t h e r e has b ee n no s t o p p i n g    the
fans       g e t t i n g " i n t o the b a c k of t he pans.        - A. T h e r e has
been       no s t o p p i n g , y e s sir.

And w h e n the fans d o n ' t go on the p i t c h but         stand
d o c i l e l y on the t r a c k a n d wal.< a r o u n d in a d a z e d fashion,
the one t h i n g it p l a i n l y w a s n ' t was a p i t c h in v as i on .
A. No it w a s n ' t at t h a t s t a g e sir.

It c l e a r l y    wasn't      was    it?      -    A.   Mo sir.

Y o u see t o d a y y o u h a v e s a i d r a t h e r fr an k ly that at                some
s t a g e y o u r e a l i s e d it w a s n ' t a p i t c h i n v a s io n , bu t        in your
s t a t e m e n t at p a g e 12 y o u s a i d this:

                   "The A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e ( O p e r a t i o n s )
                   Mr. J a c k s o n , j o i n e d me in the C o n t r o l 3o/.
                   a n d as-cad for an a p p r a i s a l of the s i t u a t i o n .
                   I w a s u n a b l e to give an a c c u r a t e a c c o u n t of
                   w h a t the s i t u a t i o n wa s o t h e r than a p o s s i b l e
                   p i t c h i n v a s i o n w h i c h h a d r e s u l t e d in us
                   s t o o p i n g the g a m e . "

 l\ 'o w t hat is a f t e r the m a t c h h a d b e e n a b a n d o n e d , or at
 l e a s t a f t e r the g a me h a d b ee n s t o p p e d .        Y o u s t i l l thought,
 a n d so t o l d y o u r A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e , t h a t it was a
 oossible pitch invasion.                  -    A. In f a ir ne ss , sir, the term
 "'oitch i n v a s i o n ' wa s u s e d to d e s c r i b e a c r o w d c o m i n g o u t of
 th e Q a t e on to the p e r i m e t e r tractc.

 An d it s t i l l h a d not d a w n e d on y o u that they had s p i l l e d
 on to the t r a c k a n d c l i m b e d the f e n c e b e c a u s e of p o s s i b l e
 o v e r c r o w d i n g as a r e s u l t of o p e n i n g the gate.  -   A. It
 wa s a p o s s i b i l i t y sir, b u t at that stage I was w a i t i n g for
 in f o r m a t i o n .

 A n d l a s t l y, can y o u e x p l a i n a m y s t e r i o u s m e s s a g e , of w h i c h
 w e h a v e o n l y h e a r d so far f ro m Mr. C o l l i n s in his o p e n i n g
 s o e e c h , b u t no d o u b t we w i l l h e a r m o r e in d u e c o u r s e , at
 f o u r t e e n m i n u t e s p a st t h r e e the P o l i c e t o l d the Fire
 B r i g a d e t hat f a n s ' h a d b r o k e n d o w n or b ro k en t h r o u g h a gate
 a n d that w as the c a u s e of a m a j o r incident.                    I h a v e to
 s o e a k f r o m m e m o r y but I t h i n k t h o s e are b r o a d l y the words.
        A. Can y o u tell me w h e r e t h at came from?
                                                         1H


                                                                           VI. C.    CRAWFORD



                                    . . r , te c b e ^ n o        ooened       at a b o u t    2.43 w h e n   a
    0.      Suiar          " “ fan's c i n e         through?       - A.     That     is c o r r ec t .


                        v o. P a r t y   to    the
    C.
            Of y o u r o t h e r 0. E. ^ : S ,'e j.i‘eve it w a s an O f f i c e r o n my
            o a r t y to it - I j_GOr^ “              v;hen z w a s s t a n d i n g up near
            Se rial.       Tne ga.e a          ^ ‘r «-e as it o p e n e d m y a t t e n t i o n
B           to T u r n s t i l e A a n c o
            wa s d r a w n to it.       1 r-n, j i ^
                                                    -        er o f f i c e r s f ro m my       _ ^
                                                                         e v e n t u a l l y we c i c _
            s e r ia l to try a n d c l o b e ^         ^          ig b e c a u s e t u n d e r s t a n d
              do.   T h e o n l y r e * s 0 * 0 Ls „ t h e r e          a n d the P o l i c s h o r s e cane
              ther e w a s a P o l - w      > -            ^              t h £ t a s £ i s t e d us q u i ^ e a

              S i r l S       «     e    d       n to C l o s e   the    gate       then.


     o.       c .„ v c u h d p us w i t h
              u                      •■•'<= o n e n e a o n tn&i. otcisiun.                    __
              G a t e C wr.en ^      - s                       p r o b a b l y a c o u p l e o_ c.,s
              i n i t i a l l y in the f P ° ^ o : ; i M t e l y 50, b u t h a v i n g w a t c h e c
                  t f : r S £; i ^ r there-was                  n i g h on 200       easily.

                                      r -*-e C o o e n e d a g a i n a p p r o x i m a t e l y        f ou r or
                  *Ie k n o w t n a t G ^ e ^ C o       Yes>
        Q
                  five a i n u . e s la^e_.
D                                            , ei1p    slaved ooen          fo r soae         tine?    - A . That
         o.       iSd c o ? r s c t !   It°was      about      five*minutes           later.

                  ;iow C l o s e w e r e     you     to G a t e   C when i - . " ^ l & ^ T b e t v e e v .
         Q.
                   ^ S stiit; K t 5 J B S
                   opened.
                                                                                       - — —   _
                                                                                                                  ly
                                               ^   -i*-*? - A. 530, I was n o t in a p o s i t i o n
                   D i d y o u see v;ho_ ° ?G J *a n s ' a r o u n d t h a t a r e a a n d of co ur se
                   T h e r e w a s o n e o^      "       t h a v e n o idea w h o o p e n e d it,
                                              I Z I U        5 \ t —         o r what. I h a v e no

                    idea w h a t s o e v e r .
                                   ofhe*- Police Serials uor’
                                                            .-.ing in the area
            Q.      innediatelv^behind that gate apart * r » your a e n . l 14.
                             I did not see anyone.
                                              any     traffic on the radio about the opening
              0

                     D1d you not hear an instruction that the gates s.oulc be
            0.
                     opened? - &• » " e whatsoever.
                                                       i-n-no t h a t     the g a t e w o u l d be o p e n e d
              n    D i d y o u h a v e an y . ' ^ ^ ^ ^ t n a t               s_? _ ^         K o n o at all.
              v! •
                     and    left o p e n      - O j. tne      _n_iu.
                                              4-’,a'- i 1- w a s          c o i n a to be op ened, w a s t h e re
              Q..     if y o u h a d 1;n°'m "1‘J " v e l'd o n e          b e f o r e it wa s o p e n e d ? - A-
                      anything you w o u                                if V/e h a d b e e n a w a r e it w a s
                      y e l l t h e r e is a p o s -         ^          h         moved further back perhaps
    H                 t o ^ t h e ^ u n n e l ^ a n d diverted^ £St if there is several fans

                                                                                                                       0 /
If t h e p e o p l e ar e                                                J o J S u ^ h i n S ' y o u c o u l d _have
c o m i n g i n touarc-o                        th        u             d i fficult question.              i couo-
                                            probably            have        just       pushed      us    out   or   t n e way.
    1L•      *1   —
                                                     tso^e        oortable             barriers         available       * -0

    Did you        have ^ ; tc ; e , ^ e r ‘ a n y                           there.           I don't recollec.
    y o u ? - A. i c a n
    m y b a r r i e r s there.
                                    i.                r-?ce           any     information or any                   reason
    Did     vou    have           a - -na^            j                         . w'-or c vn t h t h e             neople

                                                          s     ’ M                -           ’   1 -                              “
    aver •

    01d you have

     s r u                                                                                                          s     v
     the o t h e r O r - - c e r ^ - .                                  o u t Q f the w a y by the crowu
       _   , «           / '( i T * C V7 S .!• £     I ' w H O C . w C V~                        _  _ ^   i—!««
     Of the O . u c e . s                        _             people who actually cans                “ _-e
     r u s h i n g in.           A 1 ° ; . ° - ,.e r / ir/ d a n c e r o f b e i n g t r a a p l e c .
     c a t e re 11           °'jef'                             d r a g g e d t h e m clear,       t^in..      i
     T h e O f r i c e r s in                              ‘ lear b e c a u s e obv i o u s l y we naa
      they all              pullee ^
      like a s n o o z e , ball
                                                   ffect th a t w h e n s o m eone tell ove*
                                                   --                                      situation,     so i-
      s on e of us             bemnc                                                   away    cuicl; o t h e r w i s e        we
      was a case               o: w e n - c               .o c*.a<,.
      could       have          had         •••
                         ,* ■     -sn,,1- t h e f i r s t                        tine or           the   second      tine?
      A r e y o u t a l k i n g acou-. ^ e
      -   a. T h e s e c o n d t i n e .

.     , he n that            crowd                had         cone th ro u g h         the    gates      o f ^ » .       «i.r.

-      5 £        very                                                                   s e ^ t        outside.
       Well i               c o n t * n o -‘ ^ ‘; V _ e d i n s i d e              the turnstile.
       At that              tine    we r e ^ . e c _nsiu

                             - , c c a c e to g o                               t o t h e trac!:? - A. l c i c
Q .D i d   y o u n e a r anv - ~ - | e ^ | f                                    the officers with n e .             I
     not personally-          -t                                                            h  0 f f i c e r s w - c wa.,
     d i d n o t h e a r it o n t he                                             ° ^             ^     gQ c n _
        i n n a uyi v S e r i a l sa.
        i                         tu s .
        o e r i a e t e r trac.< •
                             T nnMced                     i-     I aev       just      put    this       to you,     Sergeant,
    Q - ”    u    sa?        at       the       top of          pace's        of       your   statement,

                                            v     . . t e - 3 P.m. t h e r e w a s a radioA'anr.oy
                      i a   e s s a   c e       t h a t all O f f i c e r s w e r e req uires o n
                      the         periaeter                   trac..     •


                 YGS •
     Q . can      you         tell          us       please           first    did      you personally              hear       any
                                                  1 ^ 7




                                                                                    W.C,    CRAWFORD




                                       Cross-Examined        bv MR.     HYTNER:


0 , S e r g e a n t , in t h e c o u r s e of du ti e s, p a r t i c u l a r l y in cr owd
    c o n t r o l and in o t h e r e m e r g e n c i e s y o u a r e a c c u s t o m e d to
    r e c e i v i n g o r d e r s as it w e r e on t h e g r o u n d and o b e y i n g t he m?                -
    A. T h a t is c o r r ec t , sir.

Q,          If at s o m e t h i n g l ik e 2 .4 0 or 2 . 4 5 or 2.50, at a n y of th os e
            ti me s, if y o u had r e c e i v e d a m e s s a g e , " P en s 3 and 4 ar e full.
            P e n s 1, 2 and 5 a r e v i r t u a l l y e mp ty .           Get spectators
            d i v e r t e d " , w h a t w o u l d y o u h a v e d o n e ? - A. I w o u l d h ave a c te d
            on i n s t r u c t i o n s , but I d o n ’t t h i n k t hat is my r e s p o n s i b i l i t y
            inside        t h e gr ou nd .

0           Yh3t              w e l l be. but s u p p o s i n g y o u as a s e r g e a n t w e r e th ere
            an d t h e r e w e r e j us t s t e w a r d s w i t h o u t a c h i e f s t e w a r d t he re an
            you received that order?                     S u p p o s e c o n t r o l had s e n t yo u the
            order         " Pe ns 3 ana 4 a r e full.                It is d a n g e r o u s to h av e any
            m o r e in.         M a k e s u r e th e c r o w d s a r e d i v e r t e d to t he w i n g p e n s ”
            ^ h a t w o u l d y o u a c t u a l l y h a v e d o n e ^ — A. I w o u l d h a v e acted on
            i n s t r u c t i o n s , sir, l i k e I said.

0.              And what would you have done?                 - A.    I would      h a v e t ri ed   to get
                t h e m in t h e p e n s e i t h e r side.

 0              C a n w e s e e it a l i t t l e m o r e p r a c t i c a l l y . In the a re a b e t w e e n
                t h e t u r n s t i l e s and the s t a n d w a l l t h e r e was you, your ser ia l
                a nd s o m e s t e w a r d s ? - A. T h e r e w e r e not a n y s t e w a r d s apart frc
                t h e b o t t o m of the s t a i r s to the W e s t Stand, and of c o u r s e
                t h e r e was o n e s t e w a r d on g a t e C.

 q              I w a s t h i n k i n g of hi m b e c a u s e w e s a w him on the v i d e o . T h e r =
                use at l e a s t him. was not t h e r e ? — A. Yes, and t h e r e was
                s o m e o n e s e l l i n g p r o g r a m m e s e i t h e r side, o n e up at the s i d e o:
                t h e wall, an d o n e b e s i d e g a t e C s e l l i n g p ro gr a mm e s.

                C a n we j u s t e x a m i n e t h i s .      I am s o r r y to t a k e a l it t le time
    G   .
                kyi- it is v e r y i m o o r ta n t.          It m a y w ell be t h a t you a re r ig ht
                a l t h o u g h t h e r e is" s o m e c o n f l i c t of e v id en ce , but it m a y well
                b e y o u ° a r e r i g h t in s a y i n g t h a t the p o s i t i o n of the c r o w d in-
                t h e v a r i o u s p ^ n s was n o t h i n g w h a t e v e r to d o w i t h y o u . Let s
                s u p p o s e t h a t is r i e ht and it was the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y t h e n of
                the stewards.              Is this t h e p o s i t i on , t hat w h e n pens 3 and 4
                ha d b e e n o b s e r v e d to be full f r o m t h e g r o u n d side, b e c a u s e
                 t h a t is o n l y w h e r e t he y c a n be o b s e r v ed , w h a t c o u l d a n y b o d y
                 h a v e d o n e a b o u t it if it w a s n o t y o u r r e s p o n s i b i l i t y and
                 t h e r e w e r e no s t e w a r d s in t h e a r e a ? - A. I n ^ a n s w e r to that
                 q u e s t i o n t h e y c o u l d h a v e b e e n d e v i a t e d or d i v e r t e d to the
                 f l a n k s at t h e r ea r of the W e s t Stand.

                 By w h o m ?   - A.   I suppose the Police Officers                  if t hey w e r e
     u      .
                 there.

                 T h i s is w h a t I am r e a l l y t r y i n g to get at.         S o m e b o dy , a n d it
                 w i l l p r e s u m a b l y be s o m e b o d y in control, s o m e b o d y in c o n t r o l
                 has o b s erved or has b e e n t o l d at 2 .40 or 2 .45 tha t the c entr

                                                                                                             Oi.
                                              1 0   8




                                                                                  W.C.    CRAWFORD


        p en s a r e full, t h e r e f o r e it is n e c e s s a r y to d i v e r t fans to tr.
        w i n s pens.       If it is no t t h e r e s p o n s i b i l i t y of tne P o l i c e to
        do i t and it is not y o u r job, an d t h e r e w e r e no s t e w a rd s
        there, w h a t c o u l d h a v e b e e n d o n e a b o u t it?      A r e you s a y i n g yc
        w o u l d t h e n h a v e had to s t e p i n to th e b r e a c h ? - A. That c o u ld
        h a v e b e e n t he s i t u a t i o n .

0 . So fa r as y o u w e r e c o n c e r n e d it was not y ou r job, and you
    w o u l d h a v e e x p e c t e d s o m e b o d y e l s e to be d o i n g it? - A. Tne
    r e s p o n s i b i l i t y is t h e s t e w a r d s .

0.      And there were none there?                      - A. T h e r e w e r e n o n e on that
        p a r t i c u l a r bit, yes. a p a r t         f r o m t h e p l a c e s w h e r e I have
        indicated.

0.      Now, t h a t is t h a t s i t u a t i o n .      T h a t is s i m p l y a no rm al cr ow d
        s i t u a t i o n w h e r e s o m e pens a r e full a nd s o m e a r e empty.             No w u
        c o m e to a w h o l l y d i f f e r e n t s i t u a t i o n .   S u p p o s e yo u had been
        t o l d at 2 .4 7 , a m e s s e n g e r c o m e s r u n n i n g u p to you b e c a u s e the
        r a d i o s a r e off, he has just c o m e f ro m c ont ro l:                   "Mr.
        D u c k e n f i e l d is g o i n g to o p e n t h e g a t e s b e c a u s e of the cr owd
        outside.            P en s 3 and 4 a r e full.           M a k e s u r e the p e o p l e comini
        in go to t h e w i n g pens.             T h i s is an e m e r g e n c y " .      Now. you kne
        w h a t t h e s i t u a t i o n was.     Y ou k n o w w h o wa s there.            What w o uic
        y o u h a v e d o n e ? - A. The o n l y t h i n g I c o u l d h a v e d on e in those
        c i r c u m s t a n c e s is f or m a l i n e w i t h w h a t s e r i a l I had acr os s tr
        to p to d i v e r t t h e m e i t h e r side.

0        C a n I h e l p y o u a li ttle, b e c a u s e t hi s is n o t a c a s e w h e re
         a n y o n e is t r y i n g to t r a p a n y b o d y i nt o an u n w a r y answer.                 Thir
         b a c k a n d t a k e y o u r time.            W o u l d y o u h a v e s a i d in     a n sw e r to
         that. "If Mr. D u c k e n f i e l d            w a n t s m e to do t h a t he         mu st send
         r e i n f o r c e m e n t s ” , or w o u l d y o u h a v e said, "All right, I c a n dc
         i t" ? - A. T h a t is a d i f f i c u l t q u e s t i o n not k n o w i n g w hat the
         s i t u a t i o n is o u t s i d e .     If t h e y said, " T h e r e ar e s e v e r a l
         thousand outside.                 T h e y a r e g o i n g to b u r s t in or t h ey are
         g o i n g to c o m e t h r o u g h g a t e C if it is open", I d o u b t v e r y muc
          w h a t s o e v e r if 10 m e n c o u l d c o n t a i n s e v e r a l t h o u s a n d people,
          d o u b t v e r y m u c h if I c o u l d h a v e d o n e a n yth in g.

 0       Y o u say, " W h a t is g o i n g to h a p p e n ? " .       " T h e r e are h u ndr ed s
         outside’    , and t h e y h a v e got to be let in t h r o u g h the gate.
         M a k e s u r e t h e y d o n ’t go i nt o p ens 3 and 4 ” . Are you s a y i ng
         y o u r a n s w e r w o u l d h a v e been, p e r f e c t l y r e a s o n ab l y, that it
         w o u l d h a v e been, "I c a n ’t do it w i t h t he s e r i a l at my
         disposal.          H e w il l h a v e to s e n d m e r e i n f o r c e m e n t s " ? - A. I a
         n o t s a y i n g that.       If I was i n s t r u c t e d to do           it       I    probab
         w o u l d h a v e t a k e n my s e r i a l u p an d d o n e it.

    0 . I d o n ’t k n o w w h a t b r i e f i n g y o u had had, b ut di d you k no w tha
        t h e r e w e r e g a t e s at t h e e n t r a n c e to t h e t u n n e l ? - A. T h e r e a
        wooden g a t e s , y e s .

    0     O b v i o u s l y t h e r e are d a n g e r s in c l o s i n g b o th t h o s e g at es
          b e c a u s e t h e y o p e n t o w a r d s t h e t u r n s t i l e s , and if you had shL
          them and then there had been a crowd trying                                to     g et o u t o f t
          t u n n e l f r o m t h e t e r r a c e s y o u m i g h t not h a v e      b ee n a b l e to ope
                                                    I0 9

                                                                                     W .C ■ C R A W F O R D



          them        against      t h e crowd.           Do yo u    follow?     - A.   I th in k      it     is
          the o p p o s i t e w a y .

                      LORD    JUSTICE        TA YL OR :      They open       towards    the pitch.

                      MR.    HYTNER;           I ara sorry, t o w a r d s      t h e pitch.    - A.     I was
Cl.
          going        to    correct         y ou on that, sir.

Q.        That        is    right,    is not        it?    - A.     Yes,   they open    t o w a rd s   the
          pitch.

o            if t h e r e is a c r o w d c o m i n g f r o m t h e p i t c h you c a n 't o p e n
     ‘ t h e m t h e n v e r y e a s i l y ? - A. T h a t is c or re ct , and t he n we h a v e
       a s i t u a t i o n w h i c h c o u l d h a v e b e e n e v e n m o r e s e r i o u s t han the
          one we           had.

          Certainly.            T h e f i r s t t h i n g you c a n w i t h o u t a n y d i f f i c u l t y at
Q.
          -ii 2.3 c l o s e o n e gate, and t ha t i m m e d i a t e l y h a l ve s the area
          v ou h a v e to m o n i t o r w i t h y o u r s er ia l.       T h at is right, is not
           .^■p           j d o u b t v e r y m u c h if t h at w a s g o i n g to be the a n s w er
          It c o u l d h a v e b e e n m o r e d i f f i c u l t a n d it c o u l d h a v e b ee n a
          m o r e d a n g e r o u s s i t u a t i o n if w e h a d c l o s e d t h e gates, but ther
           a g a i n . ..-

 q         No      c l o s i n g o n e gate. - A. T h e r e is o n l y o n e gate.  It                   is a
         ' d o u b l e gate, a w o o d e n g a t e at t h e tunnel.        There again                    tn at l
           for t h e s t e w a r d s .    T h a t is no t for us.

 Q         S e r g e a n t , w h a t w e a r e t r y i n g to f i n d out is w ha t c o uld h av e
           been d o n e          A r e yo u s a y i n g that a p p r e c i a t i n g the s i t u a t i o n at
           th e t i m e y o u r v i e w w o u l d h a v e b e e n t hat yo u w o u l d h a v e been
           u n a b l e w i t h th e s e r i a l and t h e s t e w a r d s in the a re a to s eal
           of f t h e t u n n e l a n d p o i n t t h e fans to the w i n g s w h e r e t n e r e wa
           o l ^ n t y of r o o m ? - A. U n d e r t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s it w o u l d h ave
           b e e n i m p o s s i b l e to d e a l w i t h a c r o w d of t h a t s i z e and do w na t
               y ou   a r e s ay i ng .

     q   . It is p o s s i b l e ?           - A.    It is not        poss ib le .

     Q.        It i s n ’t? - A.          I doubt     v e r y much.

     (j              L O R D J U S T I C E T AY LOR :          You w o u l d not be s t o p p i n g t hem
          ‘ s o i n g i n t o t h e m a t c h at all.              Al l yo u w o u l d be d o i n g is
            saving          "Go r o u n d there.            T h e r e ’s s p a c e t h e r e ” . I q u i t e
            u n d e r s t a n d if y o u w e r e b l o c k i n g t h e i r w a y to get in at all.
            T h e v m i g h t say, "Get ou t of m y way.                       I ’v e paid.      I'm c o m i n g
            in"       b u t w h a t is s u g g e s t e d is s i m p l y t h a t you in dicate,                Ful
            in here.           P l e n t y of r o o m r o u n d t h e r e " ? - A. I c a n a c c e p t tha
            m v Lord'.         W e c o u l d h a v e s t o o d t h e r e an d w e c o u l d h a v e t r i e d
            d i v e r t them.          W h e t h e r t h e y w o u l d h a v e p a id a n y a t t e n t i o n is
                different         st or y.

                         MR  HYTNER:         B u t yo u see, S e r g e a n t , w h a t we a r e lookir
         0 .
                at    is a s e r i o u s situation-, s e r i o u s in t h e s e n s e it d i d happe
                T here w e r e c r o w d s o u t s i de .   P en s 3 an d 4 w e r e full an d yo u =
                b e i n g told, ’’T h e r e a r e h o a r d s c o m i n g in.  T h e y h av e got to t
                stop p e d c o m i n g i nt o th e p e n s ” . If t h a t is r i g h t y ou w o u l d
                                                                            W.C.     CRAWFORD


h a v e k n o w n i m m e d i a t e l y t h a t if yo u fail to k e e p t hem out of
t h e t u n n e l t h e r e w o u l d be or w a s l i k e l y to be a t e r r i b l e
t r a g e d y in p en s 3 and a b e c a u s e of o v e r c r o w d i n g . That w o u l d
be the c o n s e q u e n c e of f a i l i n g to k e e p t h e m out of th e tunnel,
w o u l d n o t it? - A. P o s s i b l y .

Think carefully.                  If y o u had s e r i o u s l y t h o u g h t on r e c e i v i n g
s u c h an o r d e r t h a t y o u w o u l d b e p h y s i c a l l y i n c a p a b l e of
c o m p l y i n g w i t h it yo u w o u l d h a v e s a i d so. and a s k e d for
r e i n f o r c e m e n t s , w o u l d n ot y o u ? Yo u w o u l d h av e a d v i s e d your
c h i e f t h a t w h a t he was a s k i n g w a s a p o l i c i n g i m p o s s i b i l i t y ?
- A. I t h i n k m a t c h c o n t r o l w o u l d h a v e b e e n a w a r e of the
s i t u a t i o n , but t h e r e a g a i n it is a h y p o t h e t i c a l que st io n.
Ye s .

It is h y p o t h e t i c a l o n l y         because    n o b o d y a s k e d you   to do     it?    -
A. T h a t is co rr e ct .

If yo u h a d b e e n f a c e d w i t h s u c h an order, if you had t h o u g h t
it was p o s s i b l e to c o m p l y y o u w o u l d h a v e done, and if you had
t h o u g h t it was i m p o s s i b l y to c o m p l y y o u w o u l d h a ve a d v is e d
y o u r s u p e r i o r O f f i c e r s so t h a t t h e y c o u l d m a k e an a l t e r n a t i v e
s t r a t e g y ? - A. T ha t is p o s s i b l e .

 It is n o t j ust p o s s i b l e , it is t h e o n l v a l te r n a t i v e . - A.
 Well, bu t t h a t w a s no t t h e case, but my c o n c e n t r a t i o n was                      on
 g a t e 'C an d s u d d e n l y b u r s t i n g open.

           L O R D J U S T I C E TA YLOR:     Sergeant, I don't think anybody                             i
 c r i t i c i s i n g y ou b e c a u s e you w e r e n e v e r a s k e d to do it. - A.
 T ha t     is    true.

            MR.    HY TN E R:         You do u n d e r s t a n d ?   - A.   Yes.     I c a n s e e wna
 you      are getting           at.    sir.

 Yo u m u s t not be too d e f e n s i v e if n o b o d y is a t t a c k i n g you.
 G o i n g back. I w a n t to d e a l w i t h this.                At a b o u t 2.30 fans wer
 c o m i n g t h r o u g h t h e t u r n s t i l e s and b e i n g abusiv e, and in de ed
 o b s c e n e in t h e i r l a n g u a g e to you, but w h a t t h e y w e r e
 i n d i c a t i n g w i t h t h e i r o b s c e n i t i e s an d i l l - m a n n e r s was that
 t h e r e wa s a l i k e l i h o o d of s o m e b o d y b e i ng k i l l e d b e c a u s e
 o u t s i d e t h e P o l i c e had not g o t cont ro l.               T ha t wa s w h a t was
 b e i n g c o n v e y e d to you in th is o b s c e n e lang ua ge , was not it? -
 A. Yes, t h a t was t he m e s s ag e .

  q £* c o u r s e , t h e r e is now w s y I a m § o i n £ to a t t e m p t to d e t e n d
  e i t h e r ba d m a n n e r s or o b s c e n i t i e s a i m e d at P o l i c e O f f i c er s ,
  bu t d r u n k or sober, foul m o u t h e d or not, t h e s e p e o p l e
  u n d e r s t o o d at 2 .3 0 or b e l i e v e d at 2.3 0 t hat th e P o l i c e had
  l os t c o n t r o l and t hat f a t a l i t i e s w e r e a p o s s i b i l i t y , and tha-
  wa s w h a t wa s g e t t i n g t he m e x c i t e d ? - A. It wa s a f t er h a l f-
  p as t- 2, sir. w h e n th e a b u s e w a s d i r e c t ed .        Nearer quarter-to

   Nearer         quarter-to.            It wa s    between half-past            and q u a r t e r - t o ?
   A . Yes.

   j u st    one    last    thing.          T h is m a y s e e m a s i l l y q u e s t i o n   but   the
                                            Ill

                                                                              W.C.    CRAWFORD


     ha s o d d l y e n o u g h b ee n a c o n f l i c t of e vi de n ce .     You w e re t h e r e
     Yo u s a w w h a t w a s h a p p e n i n g .      Yo u in f ac t w er e v e r y w o r r i e d anc
     c o n c e r n e d a b o u t t h e s i z e of t h e g a t e s in the p e r i m e t e r fence,
     w e r e not you, w h e n the t r a g e d y ha d a l r e a d y o c c u r r e d ? - A.
     Inside the ground?                I n s i d e t h e a c t u a l tra ck ?

Q.   Yes. - A. Yes,           I did     think      the e x i t   gates     w e r e a bit on         the
     n a r r o w side.

0.   And it w a s y o u r view, b e i n g there, t h a t had they been b i g g er
     it w o u l d h a v e h e l p e d the e v a c u a t i o n of the b od ie s ra th e r than
     h i n d e r e d it? - A. Yes, u p to a poi nt , I w o u l d think, but thers
     a g a i n m o r e p e o p l e c o u l d h a v e t r i e d to get ou t and t h e re c o u ld
     have been a bigger situation.

Q.   A n y w a y, it w o u l d h a v e a s s i s t e d in e v a c u a t i o n ,   the l a r g e r    the
     g a t e s ? ’- A. It c o u l d h a v e d one, yes.

                            Cross-Examined           b v MR.     JACKSON:

0    W o u l d y o u l ook for a m o m e n t, pl ea s e, at the tat b u n d l e of Wes'
     M i d l a n d s p h o t o g r a p h s , No. 18. M a y I e m p h a s is e , Se rgeant,
     again, n o - o n e is a t t a c k i n g you, b ut is not it q u i t e c l e ar fror
     t h a t t ha t by t h e u s e of t h a t p o r t a b l e b a r r i e r and the Officers
     in y o u r s e r i a l t h at t h e r e w a s l i t t l e p r o b l e m for the F o r ce
     t h a t has managed th e m i n e r s ’ s t r i k e to b l o c k that t u n n e l ? - A
     I d i d n ’t r e a l i s e that b a r r i e r w a s there, sir.

                L O R D J U S T I C E T AY LO R:     I d o n ' t k n o w t h e r e is any evidence
      t h a t it was.           It is o n t hi s     p h o t o g r a p h , but I d o n ’t k now
      w h e t h e r it w as at the time.

o              MR. J A C K SO N :        I t h i n k w e c a n s e e from the v i d eo t h e r e
      w e r e l i n e s of t h e s e p o r t a b l e b a r r i e r s just b e h i n d g a t e C.    I
      t h i n k if w e l ook on the l i n e t h e r e I t h i n k w e will see on the
      v i d e o a n u m b e r of p o r t a bl e , or t h e r e was a v a i l a b l e . . . . - A. I
      t h i n k t h o s e b a r r i e r s t h a t w e r e i n s i d e or c l o s e to g a t e C w e r e
      blocking the programme sellers.                          T h e r e w e r e a b o u t 3 or a .
      T h e y w e r e b e i n g u s e d to s t o p t h e f ans g e t t i n g in c l o s e
      p r o x i m i t y to t h e p r o g r a m m e s e l l e r s , and t hat is w h a t t he ir
      purpose w a s .         It w as no t a n y t h i n g else.




                                      /Q.         LORD   JUSTICE      TAYLOR:        You m ea n .. ..
                                                                    W. C. C R A W F O R D


                L O R D J U S T I C E TAYLOR:               You     m e a n p r o g r a m m e - s e 1 1 ers
      n e e d e d to have that kind of p r o t e c t i o n ?                    A.        That is
      c o r r e c t , and this is one of the r e a s o n s I put P.C. Bur t o n
      up b e s i d e one of the p r o g r a m m e - s e l l e r s .             There was a n o ther
      one just up a l o n g s i d e the w al l and that was b e i n g fenced
      off and we had had in p r e v i o u s m a t c h e s there, S e m i - F i n a l s ,
      one or two s n a t c h e s - you know, t a k i n g the m o n e y off the
      p r o g r a m m e - s e l l e r s and d i s a p p e a r i n g into the c r o w d - and
      that is one of the r e a s o n s why P.C. B u r t o n was t here in the
      first pl a c e, s u p e r v i s i n g .

                MR. J A C K S O N :      I make it q u i t e c l e a r , " S e r g e a n t ,
      there is w h e n p o l i c i n g a f o o t b a l l c ro w d a n u m b e r of
      a c t i v i t i e s you have to co m b a t w h i c h w o u l d be o u t s i d e the
      e x p e r i e n c e of m os t p e o p l e t h i n k i n g abo ut a crowd, such
      as s n a t c h i n g p r o g r a m m e s and the p r o c e e d s from the p r o g r a m m e -
      sell er s .         A.       We w e r e t a l k i n g a b o u t the actual m oney
      from the p r o g r a m m e - s e l l e r s .

      S e r g e a n t , if we l o o k e d back at the o r der - you have no need
      to do it y o u r s e l f - w e will find that S er i a l s 14 and Serial
      16 were the two at e i t h e r side of the T u r n s t i l e s A-G.
      A.        Yes , s i r .

      S e r i a l 16 was o u t s i d e it.      You have no need to look unless
      you need to p a r t i c u l a r l y .     S e r i a l 16 was o u t s i d e and
      S e r i a l 14 was inside.          At a b o u t h a l f past two, who was
      your s e n i o r O f f i c e r ?    A.     I n s p e c t o r White.     He was in
      c h a r g e of us.        He was in c h a r g e of two s e r i a l s inside
      the a c t u a l c o n c o u r s e .

       D u r i n g the time of           the    build-up         outside,    did     you    see   tne
       I n s p e c t o r at all?          A.      No.

Q.     Do    you   actually        know       wnere    he   was?      A.       No.

Q.     We know that the S e r g e a n t o u t s i d e ' w a s p r o c e s s i n g a p r i s o n e r
       and you, as it w e r e , w e r e the only n o n - C o n s t a b l e i n s i d e .
       A.  Ther e was S e r g e a n t Burns.      He was on the other side
       of    the   wall.

Q.     The    other      side      of   the    wall?        A.      Yes.

Q      S e r a e a n t , we have h e a r d an a w f u l lot about radios going
       down at the same time.                What we have not hea r d is s u r p r i s e
       that they did.           N o - o n e - not a si n g l e O f f i c e r - has a d de d
       to his e v i d e n c e abo u t ra d io s g o i n g down that he was s u r p r i s e d
       or w o r r i e d .   A.  No.       Well, n o t h i n g s u r p r i s e s me in this
       job t h ese days, sir.

Q       Do I take it that it was e x p e c t e d that the radios w o uld
        go do w n ?        A.       S o m e t i m e s that does happen.        It has
        h a p p e n e d at o t h e r f o o t b a l l m a t c h e s , not just Cup Finals'.
        I r e g u l a r l y p o l i c e the B a r n s l e y football m a t c h e s and it
        has h a q s n e d there.

 Q,     In p a r t i c u l a r ,   you    see,    if   we   have     a c h ain     of   command      that
                                           1 2 2




                                                                    . C. CRA-.'FOP.D


        '^i-h s - ^ i p l   did   you   command         in the 1033 se.-ai-final, i:
        iiot"l-:?~- A.      Serial 15.             I   am s o rr y , S e r i al 1j.

        You tnen had a larger nun sec of man under your contrc 1 ,
        had you? - A. I dad the sane n un ba r of nan.               I hoc tan
        PCs.

Bo.     You had been r es p o n s i b l e fo the D i v i s i o n of Crticer: to
        the s ta ir ca se s goi
                    :ases   2 o i n ?~
                                    _ to tne vario us entrances to tne
        stands? - A. That is correct.
         T „ hSa .            of the e x e c u t i o n of thosa duties in lv.'.l
         hart ' w n Z l i l t i   tk*   M e t that th* tu<m«l had b.ia e l «
               T - i i c a O f f i c e r s at any tine? - A. It was clOoe- i,.
         1 c93 3 ,       T he gates were closed, p r o b a b l y abcu_ twenty
             inutes,
         rT4**
         ill               t w e n t y - f i v a ninutes, b e f o r e Uicu-oc.. tine.
         Y ou had n ot ic ed tnat it had b ea n c l o s e d - ny q uestion was
         "U,, > u r: O ff ic e r s " ?      Or are you s uggesting .na> jus^
         shu" th^ ?ats and want away? - A. Mo.                        It vas a ?cl-.ce_
         OtfieJt          Jio   Had an Instruction     to
                                                       to    close    taa sate in l'.'JJ
         U L L i v-» w L.  ■ iw ♦   ^         ^ - r ,n  T ^ ~   1 ^ 7 }
         and that P olice Or n e a r v/as * >- ^n.j., l~/u.

D                L O lIO J U S T I C E TAYLOR:     He had i ns tr uction fro-;
         -•ion7 - 4i. T h a t I do net know, ay Lord.              I do no. ^no\.
         if it '/as a ver ba l i n s t r u c t i o n or if   it was ai.
         i nstru -tion over the radio.              It is d if cicelt to pinooin.
         ..-here it had cone fron.
                 ••■r . GLASGOW:          It c e r t a i n l y did not cor.a tr:n you?
          - a.. I c an no t r e n e n b e r that, sir. _ It coula aava co.n=
          through the chain of c o n n a n d like it was s u g g e ^ c
          before, but I do not r e c o l l e c t it.
                    did you think he was d oi n g it for?          I naan, ^
          o b v i o u s l y b ec au se ne had bean told to, l accept ^ u u .
          H ow ev er , w ha t was tha o ojact b a . u n d tne J o 3 i ^ o. -
          r unnel in 1933? - A. I prasu ne b e c a u s e tne c e n u a
          w 3 j-^ full.          I p r e s u n e . I do not 'enow.
            an you think of any ot.ier c o n c e i v a b l e reason for^ t ie ^
           .losins of the tunnel before tna sici-Os.f m I j u :. -
           Iona to tny knowledge,
        . if that: had hhaa pjoened
                                 p e n e d in 1938, did it o c c u r #to you in 19S9
          w na n your     e s p o n s i b i l i t--
                   >u r r esjonsibi               i e-s —i n c lu de-d tna rpaintaining
                                                                           . , ......
          order on the t e r r a c e s , _ that those pans aig.it a 1 ; ?




           di^fe'-’nt a t n o s o n e r e . It was a c o m pl et e c o n u ^ s t frou,
           w ha t it was t h a ‘yaar before to what it was t m s year
    H
    '«

*                                            123




                                                               u. c.   c r a : . : “ .:?vO




                i/as there anythins in the changed atnosphura this yaar w 0
                indicate that peas 3 and 4 night not fill up this yaar in
                the way the/ had last year? - A. I cannot answer that one
                         •   •   •



             0 I thought you told us tnera was a completely d ii.l s * . -
                atmosphere this year.  Did you wish to imply by_that...
         B      - A. I ah talking about the ganeral atmosphere ot tne
                supporters.
             0. '.'as that atmosohere, however different, in any wav ^
                c o n d u c i v e - to your belief that the pens v.cula not t .j.1 up
                this year as they her. last year? - A. Last year l oelicve
                 t'"t all the fans '..-are in position by, say, fifteen
                minu tes before kick-off and virtually the fiftcaa minutes
                ^•^"dir,   »~ up to the kick-off in the concourse area there
                ;.;as virtually nobody.           Therefore, compared with this
                year, of course it was a different story.              Last year
                 they ware all in position at that particular time,
                 fifteen minutes cefore the game.

             h T V s year, at a tine when in the previous year you say
                everybody had effectively been in the ground, you had
         D      actually seen sate C, in your words, burst open^and a
                 lar-e number of suoporters run down the tunnel from it?
                You°saw that this year? - A. This year?

             n v,s _                       3.211 ed...
                            \V\an ~.ate C o.           Did I say in av
             '-•* statement that I presumed that that is wh^re they headed
                  towards.
                   You were there, Sergeant, we weren't.     Did you see waera
                   t ,ay ’
                         ./ant or were you not interested? - A. I co not
                   I actually saw where they went to?

             0. Uas it not pretty ooviously, witn re^p^ct? - n. Tna.. .vas
                a difficult question.   we were pulling a lot 0 . the
                people who were being trampled as the gates opened.

              "> Tnay w are running through so fast that people were being
                 knc’
                    -'k^d over? - A. People were being knocked over as they
                 came in gate C .   Therefore, my Officers were pulling
                 them to one side otherwise the injuries would nave Dean a
                 lot greater at gate C .   If you ask me where they went I
                 cannot answer because I did not watch uhere they ..= i,e
                 going.
              0.         L 0 J U S T I C E TAYL0.1: I am just looking at your
                   statement, the oottom of page 4:

                             "Suddenly  g a t e C appeared to burst open again,
                             aoo-oxirnately 2.50 pm to 2.55 pm, a large number of
                             fans ran through into the centre tunnel of the
                             Leppings Lane end."
_ A# Yes, I did say that.     I presume if you look at the
actunl""thin.g, gate C is directly in line with the central
runnel and I presume that is where they v/ere all heading,
but I did not actually see them 3 0 in the tunnel.

               GLASGC'.’:   If I can take it in stages,
      ;eant      ^Did you see  that the first time?     I knov: you
say in y o u riL  statement  that  you saw it the  second time,
Ca . did you       ppr==iate  that  th’ first time  the gate
opened         n there was the burst with people running, t lat
they had ' _   cue  into tne tunnel? - A. Th.it did happen the
l i r s t tim e •

I knov; it sounds pedantic    and. I do not mean tc ee rue2 ,
but did you appreciate3 at    the time that that was '.’''ere
they nac goner>? - A. I did   not because I was at the gate
trying to close the gate,     which I eventually did do, so
did not actually see...       I presume that is v:here they
wen t.
So ba it and I can appreciate it was at a time of great
urgency and difficulty.          However, the gate closes anc
  3 |9rat’ve caln is restored.
  3                                    Did that incident,
^ri ^ ’' 1 tenin - as it must nave been, unique as it certa ini
          did tnat not jog your memory that in the previous
v-ar vou had seen the tunnel closed by an Ctricer? -_A.
do no1 think it crossed my mind at that particular time,




             0. Did it cross your mind
                                                                     R.    MARSHALL


D e a l i n g g e n e r a l l y w i th the 1988 match, were you aware
of the s i t u a t i o n on the W e s t t e r r a c i n g in this sense, that
t h e r e h a v e b ee n s om e c o m p l a i n t s that ther e was c o n s i d e r a b l e
c r o w d i n g , a l t h o u g h n o - o n e was p h y s i c a l l y i n j u r e d ?
p,.       I was not a w a r e of that.

You    were    aware       of   no    complaints          a b out    any    form     of o v e r ­
crowding?             A.        No.

What    a r r a n g e m e n t s w e r e made, as far as you can recall, in
1988    to try to e n s u r e an e ve n d i s t r i b u t i o n of p e o p l e on the
West    terracing?              A.      The s a m e as this year.

This    year     there      were      none,        so   ---     A.         T h ere   were    n o ne
last    year.

None    at     all?        A.         None    at    all .

We h a v e had s o m e e v i d e n c e , as you p r o b a b l y are aware,
that in 1988, t o w a r d s the l a t t e r s t a g e s before the ki c k - o f f ,
t h e r e wa s s o m e sort of a p h y s i c a l b a r r i e r put up at the
c o n c o u r s e en d of the t un n e l , fo r me d I think by p e o p l e rather
than any i n a n i m a t e o b j e c t - a c o m b i n a t i o n of s t e w a r d s and
P o l i c e - to s t o p p e o p l e g o i n g down that m i d d l e tu n ne l but
to go r o u n d the edges.                 A. I was not aware          of that.

 You    have    heard      nothing       of    that      at   all?         A.        No.

 O t h e r than, of c o u r s e , the e v i d e n c e               that has      been     g i v en
 in the c o u r s e of this Inquiry.              A.                  Yes.

 I c a n n o t put to you at what s t a g e it h a p p e n e d but it w o u l o
 app e a r to h a v e been t o w a r d s the la t te r stages, some time
 shortly before kick-off.               A.   As I say, I have no k n o w l e d g
 of    that,    sir.

 So as far as you were           a w a r e the s t r a t e g y was the same in
 1988 and 1989, n a m e l y let the fans find their own lev e l s
 on the West t e r r a c i n g .    A.      Yes, sir.

       L O R D J U S T I C E T A YL O R : Can you just help me a m o m e n t ?
  Have you got the thick b u n d l e of West M i d l a n d s P ol i c e
  photographs?           A.      Yes, my Lord.

  16 and       17.     They show the               entrance     to    the       tunnel,     do   they
  not?         A.      T h a t ' s right.

  And they s h o w a b a r r i e r t h er e - a t e m p o r a r y b a r r i e r - you
  can see in p r o f i l e in 16 and you can see it a g ain in 17.
  P r e s u m a b l y that is there, is it, to ena b l e that e n t r a n c e
  to be shut of f t e m p o r a r i l y , or, if not, what else is it
  there for?            A.  I am not q u i t e sure why t h o se b a r r i e r s
  are    there,       my   Lord.

  The r e is o n l y one there,                I think, the one I am l o o k i n g                    at.
  A.     T h e r e are s o m e m p r e         off to the side on P h o t o g r a p h                 17.
                                                R.    MARSHALL


Against the wall, yes, that is true.             A.      Yes.

But there seems to be one by the tunnel there.    That
could easily be used to shut off the tunnel, could it not?
A.   Yes.
     MR. COLLINS:     Whether or not that particular barrier was
there on the aft ernoon in question, it would not have been
difficult to provide for some form of temporary barriers to
be ava ilab le in order to shut off the tunnel, or restrict
access to the tunnel, should that become necessary.
A.    That's    right.

It is simply that it appears that that man oeuvre was never
thought of.   A.   No, sir.
That is right, is it?      So far as 1988 was concerned, you
say in your sta tement that apart from minor problems of
drunken ne ss, theft, dis charge of a pyrotechnic during the
match, the game passed off without serious incident.
A     It came to my rec olle ct ion after I compiled this
statement there was a stabbing in Hil lsborough Park.

That is outside.          A.   That was outside but it involvec
football fans.
And there was, of course, a pitch invasion, as we know,
at the end of the match.   A.   Well, I have heard that
evidence but I cannot specifically remember it myself.

Well it does not s o u n d as if it was a very serious o n e , by
all accounts.   A. I       think Liverpool had won the S e m i -
Final tie and that w a s the result.
 A bit of ov e r- en t h u s i a s m by a small number of fans.
 A.    Possibly.

 In 1989 you k n e w t h a t y o u were to have the same f i x t u r e
 in the same ground a n d it appears from the evidence w e
 have heard that effective ly the same plan was used.
 A.   Yes .
 The only   modifications      being you switching with Mr. Greenwood
 and some   modifications      of man-powex basically.   A.   That's
 right.
 What I want to ask you about is this: you were responsible
 for the Liv erpool fans, effectively; is that right?
 A.    That's    right.

 And that is responsible, is it, for bringing them from
 wherever they arrived in Sheffield or to covering their
 movements, I should say, from wherever they arrived in
 Shef field to the ground entrance?   A.   We had a dual
 role as well and that was to look after the local population
 and see that traffic moved with the minimum of inconvenience
 and to protect shops,, property, our own local residents, as
 well as looking after the welfare of the fans.
                                                                         ( ,
