                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                               C<-
                                                     fVO^Ai>                 24 M'S ten
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 1106                                            1y ^           ^
Queen Anne's Gate
                                                     Ii*r CN&nsJfi
                                                     W f*ji»
                                                             Q u J fa * 1*


                                                      \S V   Us[G /T r * S

I understand that you have received copies of let^ers^io^ma from the Hillsborough
Family Support Group dated 9 November and from the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire dated 12 November. In the light of that correspondence, I would
be grateful for your confirmation on certain points.

The Family Support Group have asked me to extend the timetable of your scrutiny.
We have previously discussed the timetable, and I said in the House of Commons on
30 June that we hoped that you would be able to produce your report by the end of
the year. I added, however, that that was a judgement which only you could make
in the light of the representations which you received. I should make absolutely
clear, therefore, that the timing of your work is ultimately a matter for you to
decide, and that I would have no objection if you felt that more time w as necessary
to complete the scrutiny.

The Family Support Group also expressed concerns about difficulties which they
have encountered in securing access to documents or other material. They believe
this to be because of deliberate obstruction by the South Yorkshire Police. The
Chief Constable vehemently denies the allegations made by the Family Support
Group. I would be grateful for your advice on the access to material, which has
been afforded by the police to the scrutiny and to others, such as the Family
Support Group, who have an interest.

The Family Support Group have proposed that you should take possession and
control of all the material to safeguard its integrity and make disclosure easier.
I understand that you have chosen to inspect the material in situ, rather than
transport it from Sheffield to London. I would be grateful to know whether you are
satisfied that the integrity of the material held at South Yorkshire Police is properly
protected.

I understand that you may wish to discuss with me questions about the publication
of submissions and other evidence which has been put to you during the course of
the scrutiny. I would be happy for us to meet, and I think that it would be helpful
for that to take place before you complete your report. My office will contact yours
about possible dates.




                                    JACK STRAW
                             From: T h e P r i v a t e S e c r e t a r y




                                                                                H o m e O ffice
                                                                               QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                               LONDON SW1H 9AT


                                                                                2 4 I,    w
Mr Trevor Hicks
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group




y&S ky Kuki /

The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 November about
the Hillsborough Scrutiny. The Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
for his advice on the issues raised in the correspondence, and he will write to you
when he has received the Judge's advice.



                            y   ow l         JV/\ ULTtXjJj^                j




                                      CLARE SUMNER




15654CS
                           F ro m : T h e P r i v a t e S e c r e t a r y




                                                                             H ome O ffice
                                                                            QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                            LONDON SW1H 9AT



Richard Wells Esq QPM MA(Oxon) CIMgt
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY




Thank you for your letter to Jack Straw of 12 November about the Hillsborough
Scrutiny. He has also seen the letter of 9 November from the Hillsborough
Family Support Group.

The Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for his advice on the
issues raised in correspondence. He will write to you when he has received the
Judge's advice.




                                  CLARE SUMNER




15655CS
