APPENDIX 8 - correspondence about amendments to statements



                          THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - UP-DATE II

TO:      Officers of the South Yorkshire Police submitting evidence to the West
         Midlands Police in connection with the Public Inquiry into the disaster at
         Hillsborough Stadium

Hammond Studdards, Solicitors, are acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police in the preparation
and presentation of evidence to be submitted to the Inquiry.

As part of this process the firm initially requested that all officers directly concerned should, as soon
as possible, prepare a note of their recollections, in the form of a statement including matters of
comment and impression, whether or not this amounted to evidence.

These accounts are of immense value to our Counsel.

Subsequently, the South Yorkshire Police were advised by the West Midlands Police that it would be
appreciated if South Yorkshire Police officers, who were at Hillsborough, could effectively prepare
their own factual statements for submission to the Inquiry. This was agreed and the obvious way of
proceeding was to look at the statements which had been initially prepared at our request, on the
basis that if matters of hearsay and comment could be removed, these would be suitable as the factual
statements requested by the West Midlands Police.

Some officers have expressed concern about alterations being made to their original statements prior
to submission to the West Midlands Police.

What must be kept in mind is that the statements for submission to our own Counsel were intended
to have an entirely different purpose to those submitted to the West Midlands Police.

The initial reports submitted contained a mixture of fact, conjecture and opinion. In editing them for
use as a factual statement by the Inquiry it has been necessary for the solicitors to remove conjecture
and opinion and to leave only matters of fact.

All statements which are submitted to the Inquiry may be taken into account in reaching conclusions,
whether or not the officer making the statement is called as a witness. It follows that the statements
must contain only direct factual observations, as opposed to matters of impression.

No amended statement will be submitted to the West Midlands Police until it has been seen,
approved and signed by the officer making it.

Assistant Chief Constable
(Staff Services)

 ** Distribution:

      All Chief Superintendents
      Supt Parker       - HQ Communications & Computers
      PC Middup         - Secretary, Police Federation
      Mr Stothard       - Special Constabulary Commandant
      Mr Richardson     - Civilian Personnel Officer
                                                               TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                                HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                                TOWN HALL
                                                SHEFFIELD
                                                SI 2HH

                                                Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                                Fax       0742-736900

                                                7th June, 1989
J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., Msc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Fumival House,
Fumival Gate,
Sheffield
SI 4QN.




                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

       Thank you for your letter of today’s date, which we have already discussed.

        The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South Yorkshire Police
Officers’ statements is that any expressions of opinion were (as I understand it, on the advice of
Mr Woodward) removed from the final version. As I understand it, Andrew Collins’ view is that
there is absolutely no reason for excluding such expressions of opinion when they touch on matters
relevant to the Public Inquiry and that, in the circumstances, there is no objection in principle to
written statements containing such opinions being submitted to the Inquiry.

         Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be appropriate to use the original statement
for the purposes of the Inquiry when this has been superseded by a subsequent statement. However,
what I understand may have happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is
that the original unamended statement was circulated because of the need to circulate statements to
all parties as much in advance of the calling of the relevant witnesses as possible and because at the
time of circulation of the relevant batch of witness statements the revised, final version of the
statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in total there are three cases where
this has been necessary: P.C.s Best, Huckstepp and Illingworth. However, in such cases only the
final, revised version of the statement was given to the press.

        I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

        I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, but am
naturally happy for you to do so.



                                               D. Brummell
