                                 FROM THE PRIVATE SECRETARY

                                                                                          SELBORNE HOUSE
                                                                                   54-<iO VICTORIA STREET
                                                                                        LONDON SW1E 6QW

                                                                                                  DX 117000
      CHAN

                                                                                          TEL. 0171-210 8562
                                                                                          FAX. 0171-210 8620
GARY STREETER M.P.
Parliamentary Secretary
LORD CHANCELLOR’S DEPARTMENT

Ken Sutton Esq
Principal Private Secretary
       to the Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H9AT
                                                                                       IS’ November 1996




                 J o e B e n t o n M p A n d C o n s t it u e n t s M r & M r s C h u r c h



        I am writing with regard to the attached correspondence from Joe Benton. Given the
protracted history of the case, it might be helpful to let you have a potted version.

        Officials here concluded that there was nothing for us in Mr Benton’s letter of 30 M y,
and we faxed the papers to the Department of National Heritage asking if they would accept a
transfer. They declined and advised that, as DNH did not exist when the matter was under
consideration, the Home Office should answer. We faxed the papers that day to your
ministerial correspondence unit who refused to accept the correspondence on 9 August, saying
it was for DNH.

       We went back to DNH, who were unmoved, and thought that the Home Office still
held the relevant papers. One of our correspondence clerks, David Ruyoka, then contacted
your correspondence unit and asked them to reconsider the matter. I believe the
correspondence was then referred to your Disasters and Inquest Inquiry Group and then to
your Operational Policing Policy Unit for consideration.

        Mr Benton wrote to the Lord Chancellor on 20 September seeking an update. I replied
on 25 September explaining the position, and after several calls to your Operational Policing
Policy Unit, David was informed that Mr Benton had written directly to your Ministerial
Correspondence Unit on 21 October, requesting the same information. I understand that it
was at that stage that your officials decided to liaise directly with DNH to resolve the matter.

       On 31 October, your correspondence unit told David that DNH believed w§ were best
placed to answer, as we had general policy responsibility for steering groups. We have no
                              FROM THE PRIVATE SECRETARY

such responsibility (Cabinet Office do, but they do not hold the sort of information requested
here). DNH therefore concluded that your department should respond, and your Operational
Policing Policy Unit agreed to investigate the matter further. On 5 November OPPU
contacted David reiterating the claim that the issue was for DNH.

         Mr Benton has now requested (in his letter of 11 November) a meeting with the Lord
Chancellor, but, as LCD had no involvement in the Hillsborough Steering Group, I fear their
is little more we can do, and a meeting with the Lord Chancellor or the Parliamentary
Secretary would be inappropriate. I am sorry to have to trouble you with this, but the
Parliamentary Secretary is now concerned about the length of time it is taking to resolve the
disagreement, and as we have done as much as we can here without any success, I wonder if I
can pass this over to you to take forward? If that is acceptable, I will let Mr Benton know.

       I am copying this letter and enclosures to David Fawcett at DNH.


                                feoo       WSL/




                                      Alastair Clegg
                                     Private Secretary
