  RAN International                                                                      Roderick G. Robbie
  Architects & Engineers                                                                 MRAIC.RIBA.MCIP.OAA
                                                                                         Principal
  A Partnership of Corporations                                                          Robbie / Young + Wright
                                                                                         Architects Inc.
                                                                                         Architects
   CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                         C.Michael Allen,P.Eng.
                                                                                         Principal
   April 17, 1989                                                                        Adjeleian Allen Rubeli Limitec
                                                                                         Consulting Engineers
   The Right Honourable                                                                  William J. Neish,B.Arch.,OAA
   Margaret Thatcher                                                                     Principal
   Prime Minister                                                                        NORR Partnership Limited
                                                                                         Architects Engineers
   United Kingdom of
   Great Britain and Northern Ireland
   10 Downing Street
   London, England

   Dear Madam Prime Minister:

   Re: Stadium Design

   As a British Citizen living in Canada may I offer my condolences to the families of those
   who died in the Sheffield Stadium tragedy.

                            ^       g1Tnnmn the world's first retractable roofed football,
   soccer ana Daseoaiistadium, which will be officially opened by the Premier of Ontario on
   June 3, 1989.

   In designing the Toronto SkyDome my partner Michael Allen (structural engineer) and I
   have sought to make SkyDome the best and safest stadium in the world, as well as the
   most innovative.

   In June 1988 I made a presentation of the Toronto SkyDome at Ontario House, London to
   UK sports officials and the London press. Mr. George Hutchinson or Mr. Ray Vaudry of
   Ontario House can furnish your representatives with information on the Toronto SkyDome.

  SkyDome is the result of a unique partnership between government and the private sector.
  Government has guaranteed the project, and especially the cost of the retractable roof,
  while the private sector are providing most of the financing. Hie retractable roof has
  made SkyDome the first stadium in history which is logically responsive to the weather. It
  will open or close in 20 minutes, so games need never be rained out again, or seen indoors
  on a beautiful sunny summer (or winter) day.

  SkyDome is a multi-purpose facility usable for soccer, football, baseball, concerts, track
  and field, exhibitions, trade shows and conventions, as well as a large number of smaller
  events. It is a place for the whole family, and women as well as men. The stadium has a
  350 room hotel with 70 rooms overlooking the field, together with 161 private boxes, a
  club, restaurants, bars, health club, retail space, and a full TV production centre, and the
  largest coloured video board anywhere                                              40 University Avenue
                                                                                         Penthouse Floor
                                                                                         Toronto, Ontario
                                                                                         C anada. M5J 2G3
                                                                                         Fax: 4 1 6 /977-1733

                                                                                         Telephone: 416 / 977-6226




300 ■ 39yd                                   s i D 3i iH D a u   3iaaoa uoad       st?: e i 6 8 ,    i\    add
   RAN International
   Architects & Engineers

   A Partnership of Corporations




    The Right Honourable Margaret Thatcher
    April 17, 1989
    Page 2



    As part of our work in designing and reviewing the construction of SkyDome I, my
    partners and staff have solved numerous other long standing problems in stadium design
    aside from that of basic safety.

    May I offer mine and my partners services to you as architects and engineers for a new
    generation of retractable roof stadia and family sports and entertainment centres for the
    principal UK population centres, which your government might wish to sponsor, and which
    both national and international corporations (as in the case of Toronto) might help to co­
    fund.

    I would be honoured to review my proposals with you in person.

    Yours very truly,




    Roderick Robbie
    Principal
    RAN International*

    RR/jn

    ♦Please direct response to:

             Robbie Architects Inc.
             174 S t George Street
             Toronto, Ontario
             Canada, M5R 2M9

             Telephone: (416) 928-1025
             FAX:          (416) 928-3205




c o o ■ 39y d                               siD3iiHDay    3iaaoa woad        st? = ei s a .   l   \   add
