SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY


17 NOVEMBER 1989
                                                                  17
REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


ACTIONS OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE FOLLOWING THE
PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT


1.    Introduction

1.1   In the wake of the disaster which occurred at Hillsborough Stadium,
       Sheffield, on 15 April 1989, a Public Inquiry was commissioned to enquire
       into the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
       control and safety at sports events.     The Inquiry was chaired by Lord
       Justice Taylor and it sat from 15 May until 14 July 1989.

.1.2 Lord Justice Taylor published his Interim Report on 4 August 1989, in
     which he made 43 interim recommendations.   He emphasised that these were
      designed to prevent overcrowding and crushing on terraced areas in the
      short term, and that long term recommendations fell to be considered in
      his Final Report. A copy of the recommendations is appended.


2.    Implementation of Recommendations

2.1    The recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report
       included many which were already identified as necessary in the light of
       the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.   The South Yorkshire Police
       were therefore well prepared to ensure that they were swiftly implemented
       at the five football league grounds in the County.

2.2    The Chief Constable nominated Mr P Hayes QPM LLB MA, Deputy Chief
        Constable, to liaise personally with the management of each football club
        and with each local authority concerned in respect of future crowd
      . safety.   Mr Hayes met with directors and secretaries of all five South
        Yorkshire   football   league   clubs on 24 August      1989   and   with
        representatives of the four local authorities on 18 September 1989.

2.3   To progress the recommendations of the Taylor. Report the Deputy Chief
      Constable appointed an 'Implementation Team' which included the local
       ground commanders who have a responsibility for policing each of the five
       football league clubs in the County, and officers with specialist
      knowledge in such areas as communications, CCTV and "training.    The team
      has met under the Deputy Chief Constable's chairmanship on seven
      occasions since A August 1989 and each of the recommendations which
      places a responsibility with the police has been implemented at all
       football league grounds.   Those recommendations which were asterisked by
      Lord Justice Taylor,      signifying their immediate need,      were each
      implemented by 18 August - just .two weeks after the publication of the
      Taylor Report and before the start of the current league programme.
      Furthermore,   it is pleasing to be able to report that, with the positive
      co-operation    of   the football clubs, . signed     written   agreements
                                       -   2   -




        between   the clubs and the police,       setting out    their   respective
        responsibilities for crowd safety, have been drawn up.

 2.4 The    South    Yorkshire  Police have also addressed      theremaining
      recommendations for which they are not directly responsible.     A report
     concerning    these matters has been forwarded to each of the local
     authorities who have a responsibility for safety certification at
     football grounds.

 2.5   A copy of each written agreement together with a summary of the action
       taken on all relevant recommendations in relation to that football ground
       is appended.


       The Responsibilities of the Local Authorities for Safety at
       Sports Grounds                    ;                 ~— ---

3.1    Any local authority within whose area there exists a sportsstadium
       designated under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as amended) is
       responsible for the issue of a Safety Certificate in respect of that
       stadium.   Each of the local authorities of Rotherham, Barnsley and
       Doncaster have a responsibility for one football league ground, Sheffield
       has a responsibility for two.

3.2    The certifying authorities are called upon by the Taylor Report      to
       immediately review each Safety Certificate, ensure that the operative
       conditions of the Certificate are complied with, then add or substitute
       any condition shown to be necessary by the findings and recommendations
       of the Taylor Report.

3.3 The centrally directed police 'Implementation Team' has achieved as much
     as it can by independent action.       The local authorities in South
     Yorkshire, which each have a responsibility under the Safety of Sports
     Grounds Act, have been provided with a comprehensive report of what the
     police have so far achieved.     Where it has not been possible    for the
     South   Yorkshire   Police   to fully    implement   any    recommendation
     unilaterally,   proposals are offered to the responsible certifying
     authority of how the recommendation might be progressed.


       Increased Costs for Policing Football Hatches

4.1 Several of the recommendations in the Interim Report of Lord Justice
     Taylor impose additional duties upon the police at football matches. For
     example, (i) the deployment of police officers, to each gate in a
     perimeter fence, authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators
     through a gate to relieve overcrowding;       (ii) the deployment of a
     reserve of police officers to each match who are not committed to any
     specific duty and are therefore able to deal with any unforeseen
     difficulties which arise inside or outside the ground;   and, (iii) the
     deployment of a sufficient number of skilled operators in the police
     control room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
     and answered and to enable all the results of CCTV recording outside and
     inside the ground to be monitored and interpreted.

4.2    It is obvious from the implementation of these three recommendations
       alone that the cost of policing football matches will be greater than
       ever before.
                                                 -   3   -


    r
‘       4.3     Members will be aware that a proportion of policing costs is met by the
                football clubs themselves.     At present the financial contribution is
                determined by reference to a sliding scale of charges agreed annually
                between the Police Authority, the Chief Constable and each of the clubs,
                based upon a prior estimate of crowd size for a particular game.   In t
                two seasons 1987/88 and 1988/89 the total cost of policing the five
                football clubs in South Yorkshire, both inside and outside the^ jroun .
                amounted to some £1.83 million and, of this figure, the clubs contributed
                £398,000 which amounts to 22% of the overall cost.

        4.4     In the light of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations many J o l i c e
                Authorities are now reassessing the charges levied on footba c u s
                special police services.

        4.5     The facility to charge for police officers in these ci^ ““ s^f"ceJhigJ
                provided by Section 15 of the Police Act 1964, which enables the Chief
                Constable, at his discretion, to provide, on request, spec a p
                services at any premises or in any locality in the police ar .
                section further empowers the Police Authority to charg
                services.

         4 6    There is no precise definition of the term special police        services  but
                t£e case of Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club 1986       held that the
                Chief Constable is not, as part of hisnormal pol icing
                obliged to provide officers to react to potential breaches       of the peace
                where the owner of private property creates such a risk on       his property.

         4.7     It would seem, therefore, that officers provided to meet such a risk, as
                 in the case of a football match, are within the ^ a m n g of JP*cial P°liC*
                  services and can be charged for.     Indeed, Pollc\ Autho^ ^       *aV6
                  fiduciary duty to the ratepayers of their area to make such charges.

          4.8 The Harris case, however, does not fully resolve ^h?;^d0“ ^ ethe?afact
              regarded as performing special police services.     It held         ^ * fain
               that officers were deployed on private property was           g
               tending to show their provision amounted to special police            ’
               did not deal with the question of officers deployed to Perf°r“
        *     outside the ground - duties that arise directly from the ^               J;*
        W     occurring inside the ground.   Legal opinion has, there o •
               for clarification as to which duties performed by p o l i c e   ®“ i!*” iCeS '
               football matches can properly be regarded as special pol

          4.9    Notwithstanding    the   question of payment for police
                  football grounds it is submitted that the level of contrition:Ero» the
                  clubs presently falls significantly short of the actual cost of officers
                  inside the ground, and that the shortfall is set to widen in the light o
                  the Taylor recommendations which necessitate an increase in the num
                  police officers deployed at football matches.


          5.     Criminal Investigation of South Yorkshire Police Officers

          5.1     Durl-ng  the  course of the Hillsborough
                  manslaughter by the criminal negligence                             Hvtner   QC.
                  officers was raised by counsel for the bereaved,         Mr Benet   Hytner

          5.2     Because this matter was not dealt with in the Report of the P l i c a t i o n ,
                  Inquiry the Chief Constable, on the morning of the Report s p
                  referred it to the Director of Public Prosecutions, asking for
                                                -   4   -




          Yorkshire°npoiice'!eStitn ^ c ^ i d e r e d 3*511^
          suspend from duty the ool             I
                                                                        f
                                                     appropriate, at that time, to
                                                                                             °f the Sputh
          Superintendent David Duckenfield G e n d i n  JS* Hillsborou8h event, Chief
          deliberations.   „r D u c ^ e l d ^ m a ^ T s ^ ^ d e T ^ °f ^


          hu'^T^^^'the^mat^'^Lul^'V0                           Con^ a b l e setting out
          investigation.   The West Midlands Pnr     Si!      °f & ful1        cri“inal
          work in gathering evidence for t n h t   fe ad already done considerable
          sensible! therefore    £o fnvit^ m     ^ L Tayl°r 'S Inc*uiry-      ^ seemed
          Constable of the Wes      Hid       Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief
          investigation.   His JeporJ    ^              '/      * F°rC6’  t0 under^ *    this
          Director of Public Prosecutions.                   course, will be submitted to the


          Matters of Complaint and Discipline
 6. 1
         th2iri0^ “ siigatioHleftS r Su abJe H ^ , aSked that               1 1 '   duri”8 the c°ur«    of
         matters     Which8^         suggest t L t o l f ^ . ' 011"          °££iCerS       diSC0''"

         Should T e T rZ u sU

         Sis0s                 Hidiands poii“ »
6 -2     TL™ SSSS •££ “i:s; * p"b11:C0Bplf"tat°“‘“•
         incident.                           officers,        arising        from     the   Hillsborough


6 '3     relate ^     U ^ c t i o n s 5^ *7 h been.ralsed b? •     single            complainant.      Tvo

         Captain^E


        matters   The   ^_j      . .                 x'-e * axong with the criminal
        unsupervised bv thf ISl?    ?' ? °£ 1"c i v i U t y a"d i* being investigated,
        Of the South Yorkshire Police? ai"tS A “th0rlty- ^ Superintendent Ashton



"L                    v              s          s               s                    .-=•=■•£::
6.6     A sixth complaint is made by a man who alleges t h a t h*                            •, ^
        police officer whilst attending the football L t c h '    ^                     3SSaulted b* a




        Police.                  y                       Carlisle of the Greater             Manchester
                                          -   5   -




    7.     Coroner's Inquest Regarding the 95 Deaths Which Arose

    7.1    The   gathering of evidence on behalf of HM Coroner,          Dr   Stefan
           Popper LLB BMedSci BM BS MRCGP, in relation to the 95 deaths that
           occurred at Hillsborough, is continuing by the West Midlands Police.

    7.2    The Coroner opened the inquests on 19/20 April 1989, and adjourned them
           to a date to be fixed.      He had set aside three months to hear the
           inquests beginning in January 1990.    I understand, however, that the
           Director of Public Prosecutions has recently written to Dr Popper
           requesting that the inquests be deferred until after the results of the
           on-going criminal investigation are concluded.


    8.     Civil Actions

    8. 1   To date eight writs have been served upon the South      Yorkshire 'Police
           alleging negligence by its officers on 15 April 1989,    leading to loss,
           injury, damage and, in two cases, death.

^   8.2    The writs are to be defended by the Police Authority's insurers,
           Municipal Mutual Insurance Company.  It is understood that three of these
           actions will be representative actions.

    8.3    The presiding Northern Circuit Judge, Mr Justice Rose, has taken personal
           charge of the interlocutory proceedings.      At a Directions Hearing on
           26 October 1989 at the High Court in Manchester Mr Justice Rose set the
           date for commencement of the civil actions for 11 June 1990.     At that
           hearing Mr Justice Rose expressed his satisfaction regarding the work
           done by all parties to the claims to achieve a state of readiness for
           trial.


    9.     The Effects of the Hillsborough Disaster on the Health
           and Welfare of the Force

    9.1    Twenty-three officers reported injuries sustained in the rescue of people •
           from the Leppings Lane terraces. These injuries were, in the main, minor
           strains and bruising to backs and limbs.

    9.2    A total of 58 officers subsequently took sick leave which was directly
           attributable to the disaster inthe weeks which    followed the   event,
           mainly due to the effects of shock and stress. As a result, 356 working
           days were lost.

    9.3    Two officers remain on sick leave, suffering from stress, one of whom may
           well retire from the Force on the grounds of ill-health in the near
           future.

           During week ending 23 April 1989 - the' week immediately following the
           disaster - only 92 officers had taken sick leave, compared with 101 in
           the corresponding week in 1988.       The figurerose to a maximum of 143
           officers taking sick leave during   week ending30 April 1989, compared
           with 107 in 1988.    By week ending 21 May 1989, however, the number of
           officers taking sick leave had fallen to 105 which corresponded,
           identically, with the same period in 1988.

    9.5    Any effects that the Hillsborough disaster had upon the health and
           welfare of the Force appear, largely, to have been short lived. It is
                                       -   6   -




         thought that this is, to a significant extent, due to the efforts of the
         Force Welfare Officer and our Consultant Counsellor who started their
         work at the ground within hours of the tragedy occurring.   The memories
         of the disaster, and the emotions evoked by it, will remain with many
         officers for a long time.  The Force as a whole, however, has adjusted
         well.


10   .   Recommended

i o . : 1 The   Police   Authority note the efforts made       to   implement  the
          recommendations of the Interim Report of Lord Justice Taylor, insofar as
          they relate to the police.

1 0 . 2 The Police Authority accept, in principle, the need to review in detail
        and, if necessary, re-negotiate the basis for recovering the costs of
        providing sp'ecial police services to the football clubs in South
        Yorkshire.

1 0 .3 The Police Authority note that the relevant local authorities are
       responsible for the implementation of any outstanding recommendations,
       and for the enforcement of new or existing conditions of the Safety
       Certificate issued in respect of each football stadium.

     .
1 0 4 The Police Authority note the progress of the on-going         criminal
      investigation, the civil litigation and the Coroner s Inquiry Rising
      from the disaster at Hillsborough. Further reports will be submitted in
         due course.




P Wright
Chief Constable
