                                                                       / \ (b i) UrTo/J
                                                                                               t°n
                                                                                 DRAFT 3
                                                                       18 February 1998 10:13



                       HOME SECRETARY’S STATEMENT ON

                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                           WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998




With permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2      Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The families
and friends of the 96 Liverpool fans who died on 15 April- 1989- have suffered
immeasurably. The whole nation ysas profoundly disturbed by what occurred that day.
Although it is now almost nine years since that fateful day, many of the families and others
felt that new evidence was available which would cast new light on these events. As Home
Secretary, I was determined to do all I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


3      On coming into office in May I gave this question intense^consideration, and on
30 June 1997, I announced to the House that the Attorney General and I had decided to
appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal to conduct
an independent scrutiny of this matter. His terms of reference were:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
       Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


       (a)    to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       (b)    to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the purpose
               of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
           (c)     to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                   disciplinary matters;


                   and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
                   is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
                   the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b)
                   and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by
                   them which may be relevant to their respective duties;           and to advise
                   whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                   interest.


4          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today. ^                                   \Ah< ^jVU


5          His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and detailed examinations of the
evidence in this case. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered
fully the causes of the disaster and made wide-ranging recommendations about crowd
control and safety at sports events. These have had a profound effect on both crowd safety
at football grounds and on the policing of football matches.


6         The deaths which occurred were also the subject of inquests which were conducted
by the Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire in two parts in April and May
1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991. They involved over 80 days of public
hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal or disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking of more than
5000 statements. At a later stage, in November 1993, there was a judicial review of the
                               I
coroner’s proceedings, whkh upheld the inquest verdict of accidental death and the
conduct of those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior
Lord Justice of Appeal.




Statement: hills                                  2
7        The main causes of the disaster have long been clear. They were identified by
Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a
single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main reason for the
disaster was the failure of police control”. /The South Yorkshire police have in turn
accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club and the Local Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.


8        With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of time some
new information may become available. But that does not necessarily mean that the
outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different, lud this iiifumiallon been
available. What is crucial is not just whether the information is new, but also whether it is
of such significance - to use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new
inquiry.


9         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith^considered in great detail all the evidence which has been
put to him. This included all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
         X
inques^ He has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by
individuals and official bodies including those representing the families of those who died,
and others who have^ acted^in support of them.           He has produced a thorough and
comprehensive repor^f His clear conclusion, however, is that there is no basis on which
there should be a further public inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application
to quash the verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the
Director of Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to
re-consider the decisions they have already taken. He concludes that none of the evidence
which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence which was
available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


10        I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report very carefully. We have no reason to believe that his conclusions are wrong. This
will, I know, be deeply disappointing for the families of those who died at Hillsborough
and many who have campaigned on their behalf.




Statement:hills                                3
11       I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough may feel betrayed
by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the
ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulted from the Taylor
Inquiry should mean that such a disaster will never be repeated.


12       But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.
As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


          “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
         to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
         of losing their job”.


13       There are serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system. The Home
Affairs Committee produced a report earlier this year which makes recommendations for
change.      I will be responding fully to that report soon.         But what happened after
Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current arrangements.


14       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after a major
disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a
Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the
role of the coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.


15       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I
think, unnecessary burden on him when the Taylor Report had covered substantially the
same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present
form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind. If no inquest had been
necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have accepted as an excellent report, would then
have remained unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.




Statementhills                                 4
 16       I therefore agree in principle with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s recommendations
that there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into a major
disaster.


17        When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the main
material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging
for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of
the House.


18        All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the families
and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


          “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
          especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
          done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
          dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of
          the evidence which had previously been considered”.


19        I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. I recognise that it will be difficult and
painful for the families of those who died to accept the conclusions of this report. But
having established this rigorous judicial scrutiny I must accept its conclusions.




Statement:hills
                                               5
