          West M idlands Police

          Report For
     DR STEFAN POPPER
           Coroner
South Yorkshire (West District)

 HILLSBOROUGH
DISASTER INQUIRY
        Saturday 15 April 1989

               By
          J M JONES
   Assistant Chief Constable
    West Midlands Police

DECEASED REFERENCE NO: 14

NAME:    CHURCH Gary Christopher
 r                                                                      STATION

NAME:           DAVID GEORGE
                CHURCH

ADDRESS:        I            ____________________


AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 48            15021941

OCCUPATION:     UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 160489                                                          (SIG'IED)



        I am a married man living at the above address with my wife and

        family.     My youngest son GARY CHURCH, 19yrs, 31.12.1969, lives with

        me at the above address.

        At approximately 9.20am on Saturday 15th April 1989, I saw Gary at

        home before he left to travel to Sheffield for the F.A. Cup Semi

        Final football match.

        Gary was in perfect health and his doctors were



        As a result of an incident that occurred, I attended at the Jfedico-

        Legal Centre in Sheffield, where I saw DC Kinsella.

        That Officer showed to me a body of a white male.     I identified that

        body to the Officer as being my son GARY CHURCH.




                                                                                   1
r       CHURCH              u A 'v i D   v ^ tO R G c .




                                                          DAVID CHURCH SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   N KINSELLA DC 699

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                2
 r                                                                           STATION

NAME:           DAVID GEORGE
                CHURCH

ADDRESS:        |             I
                              ____________________


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 48             15021941

OCCUPATION:     UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280489                                                               (SIGNED)



        My name is Mr David George CHURCH.          I am the natural father of Gary

        Christopher CHURCH Gary was b o m on the 31st December 1969 (31121969),

        in Liverpool.       He lived with me at the above address.

        As a child and throughout his teens Gary enjoyed very good health and

        had no serious illness Garys doctors are Doctors,

                                ^              At    the time of his death Gary was

        fit and well and had played football the previous Sunday.         Gary was

        employed as a joiner, for Acorn Joinery, Liverpool.

        Gary was a sports fan and followed Liverpool Football Club.         Work

        permitting he tried to attend as many matches as possible.         Gary was

        a season ticket holder of the Liverpool Football Club, member number

        5828.       These tickets were for the "Spion Kop".

        On the Thursday prior to the match at Hillsborough ground Sheffield

        on the 15th April 1989 (150489) Gary obtained a ground ticket for the

        match frcm a friend Anthony OWEN.      The arrangements were that Gary met

        up with friends at Seaforth Railway Station at 10.20am (1020).         A mini

        bus had been arranged to take the group to the Hillsborough Ground in

        Sheffield.




                                                                                        3
                     r   CHURCH                                               DAVID    GEORGE


                         I last saw Gary alive at 9.20am (0920) that day the 15th April 1989

                         (150489).                                  He was wearing a bottle green jumper with a badge printed on.

                         A pair of stonewashed jeans and a pair of "Reebook" trainers.

                         At 4.30pm (1630) that day I saw pictures of the goal post and area

                         behind the Hillsborough ground.                                    I knew that was the area that Gary

                         liked to stand and I just had a feeling he wouldn't be coming hane.

                         As the evening went on Gary's friends began to return but he didn't.

                         At 02.30am (0230) in the morning of Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) I

                         was informed by the local police that my son Gary was dead.

                         At about 1pm (1300) on Sunday 16th April 1989 (160489) I identified

                         the body of my son Gary Christopher CHURCH to DC KINSKI .TA at the

                         medico-legal Centre, Sheffield.

                         I would describe Gary as white 5'6" Stocky build Fair/Blonde hair

                         short with slight spiked hair and clean shaven.




                                                                                                           DAVID CHURCH SIGNED

               STATEMENT TAKEN
                         PLACE:

                               TIME:                                       DATE:

               WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

               OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                                                                    4

WSRtnWI...........       am ...... . - _ ........................                  .            — .   —
r
NAME:           ANTHONY
                CWEN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17             07071971

OCCUPATION:     STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting o f 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in itanything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150489                                                   A F OWEN (SIGNED)



        About 11.20am (1120) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went with

        a group of friends to the Sheffield Wednesday football ground for the

        semi-final.       Amongst this group was Gary CHURCH, 19 years, b o m

        31.12.69 (31121969) of                                    ||           ~

        We arrived at the ground about 2.25pm (1425) and almost immediately

        we entered, the crowd was so big that the group became seperated and

        I was pushed to the front of the terracing.       The pressure on me

        increased as the time of the kick off neared, because more and more

        people were pushing in to the crowd.

        Shortly after       kick off, the pressure      became so intense thatIwas

        being crushed       & I was in real pain. People all around me were

        screaming & several were simply unable to move at all.         Fortunately I

        was only a few yards from a gate on to the pitch & when this was

        opened by a Policeman, I scambled through & onto the pitch.           The

        pitch was simply littered with people who had got through the gates &

        I could see that many were badly injured.

        I remained in the ground after the game had been abandoned & I

        rejoined my friends, that is except for Gary.       We searched for him




                                                                                       5
r       OWEN                 ANTHONY


        with no success at all & because I had became aware chat a large

        number of people had been killed, I was really worried for him.

        Eventually we made our way to Hanmerton Rd Police Station £ron where

        we were directed to the sports hall at the Wednesday ground.

        There I identified Gary's body to PC1630 LINDOP.



                                                           ANIHONY CWEN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
r                                                                              ;t a t k j n

NAME:             ANTHONY   FRANCIS
                  CWEN

ADDRESS:


AGE /' DATE OF BIRTH: 17              07071971

OCCUPATION:       STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 230589                                                       A F Owen (SIGNED)



           My name is Anthony Francis OWEN and I live at the above address with

           my family.

           At about 9.42 am (0942) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I left

           hcine to attend the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Semi-Final

           football match at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.

           I travelled to the match with my friends; f     '    '        ■(

                        , Formby, I had arranged to meet my friend Gary CHURCH

           (Body no. 14) at              Liverpool.   I met him shortly after 10 am

           ( 1000).

           We travelled to the match in a private hire van one of the group had

           arranged.    There were twelve in the mini-bus but I don't know them

           all.   We went straight to Sheffield after leaving Liverpool around

           11.20 am (1120).

           We were stopped twice by the Police and checked on our way into

           Sheffield.    They asked if we had tickets and made sure there was no

           drink in the van.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 2.10 pm (1410).     We parked outside a

           pub called the "Railway" just down the road from the Hillsborough
OWEN                   ANTHONY   FRANC lb


Ground.    It took about ten minutes to walk to the ground.    On the way

we met up with other lads that had come to the match who we had seen

at other matches.    I know one of these lads as James THOMAS {'.

           [ West Formby, Merseyside).

I had a standing ticket for the Leppings Lane end and so did Gary,

because I had fetched them.      James THOMAS also had a standing ticket

for Leppings Lane.    The others in our van had standing and seating

tickets.

We arrived at the ground at about 2.25 pm (1425) I went to one of

the shops opposite the ground for a can of pop.      Gary decided to go

and stand in the queue.    There was a large crowd outside the ground.

I could see no stewards and only one policeman on a horse, but he

wasn't doing much with the crowd.      I was getting crushed by the crowd

and people were getting crushed against the wall and gate.      We were

all pushed to turnstile 'C', which was set apart, by the crowd.

Gary entered first and waited for me.       I handed my ticket in at the

turnstile and went in.     I met up with Gary, James THOMAS and same

other mates.    There was quite a large space this side of the

turnstile and you could walk around freely.       I did not see any signs

telling fans which way to go, but I have been to Hillsborough before

and knew where the tunnel entrance was.

Gary and I and seme of the others made our way to the tunnel.       The

tunnel was packed but people were alright making their way into the

standing area.     When we got through the tunnel I went into Pen 3 as

more and more people came in I decided to move over to my right away

from the tunnel.     I turned to Gary who was beside me and asked if he

was coming with roe. He said "Yes" and followed roe. We managed to

move over quite well.     Everyone seemed happy although packed tightly

as in most matches.
        OWEN                     ANTHONY   FPANCIs                                 3


        There was then another surge and I was pushed to the front of Pen 3

        quite close to the gate.       Shortly after the kick off the pressure

        became so intense that I was being crashed, and I was in real pain.

        People were screaming behind me and were unable to move.

        There were Policanen standing the other side of the fence on the pitch

        side.     I think one of them opened the perimeter fence gate and seme

        people managed to get out but then the gate was closed.      By this time I

       was pushed right up against the fence and couldn't move my arms or

        body or even my head.

        The gate onto the pitch was opened again and I managed to get through

       onto the pitch.

        I had lost all trace of Gary (Gary CHURCH Body 14) the last time I

        had seen him he was in Pen 3 behind me.

        I did not see him alive again.      I identified Gary's body to PC1638

        LINDOP in the sports hall at the Hillsborough Football Ground,

        Sheffield.

                                                                   A Owen SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:                DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNAOTRE:      ]

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
NAME:          ANTHONY    FRANCIS
               OWEN

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18             07071971

OCCUPATION:     STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 210689                                                  A CWEN (SIGNED)



         States:-



         Further to my two previous statanents, I have now completed a list of

         the people who travelled with me in the Mini bus to the Hillsborough

         Football Ground on 15th April 1989 (150489), where I know the address

■- - •     i have included it on the list, the addresses I do not know I have

           left blank. I have also included on the same list, the names and

           addresses of people I met outside the ground after I had got to

           Sheffield.

           The third group of people included on the list are people who I know.

           were friends of Gary CHURCH, who I saw in pen No 3, I don't know

           where any of these four live.

           One of the people I met outside the ground was Simon BELL, we got in

           at about the same time, and went down the tunnel together, he was in

           pen three with our group, but as I described in one of my other

           statements, after the big surge I was pushed right down onto the front

           fences and I lost all contact with the other members of my group.

           The last time I saw Gar^y CHURCH and Simon BELL they were standing
rWE^j                 ANTHONY   “- . - S t   .                         ^




with me about two thirds of the way •’
                                     Jcv.n ;:en *• just no the iett of tne

small gate at the front.

The name C DEVONS IDE on the list is 'Jhr:s r.ET.TDNSiDE who also died at

the match, which I did meet up with h m outside tne -ground, and I

think he went in at about the same time, i did not have any further

contact with him.



People who travelled in Minibus




 Gary CHURCH



 People who we met up with outside Ground




  J THOMAS

  C DEVONSIDE

  S BELL

  People who we saw inside Ground




                                                                             I
                                                                             i.
 r      CWEN              ANTHONY   FRANC


        ]




        ANTHONY OJEN



                                            SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

            TIME:       DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
r
NAME:          JAMES
               THOMAS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18             25011971

OCCUPATION:     ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by ne, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                 J THOMAS (SIOED)



           I am a single man living at the above address and I am currently

           employed as an Engineer locally.

           At about 9.00am (0900) on Saturday, 15th April, 1989 (150489) I left

           my hone to go to BOOTLE to get a private coach belonging to Amberline

           Coaches to travel to Sheffield to see the football match between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Stadium.     I

           was with Giles HITCT and

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 1.30pm (1330) later and then waited

           after looking for a public house, but they were all closed.   We had a

           bite to eat and on the way to the ground I saw Jason KENWORTHY and

           Christopher DEVONSIDE.

           At about 2.30pm (1430) later we arrived at the Leppings Lane End of

           the ground where we saw the large disorderly crowd of supporters

           outside the turnstiles, all trying to get into the ground.    The queue

           was going down slowly and we got in through a turnstile pretty

           quickly. I saw a mounted police officer directly outside the turnstile,

           but he didn't appear to be doing very much, the crcv«d was so vast.       I

           went to the toilet first and then we all walked down through the
THOMAS                 JAMES


tunnel, and into the area oenxnd the goal mouth.    We went into PEN ?

on the right hand side and stood about half way down with my back up

against an internal Pressure Barrier.    r
                                         We stood there, but

Christopher DEVONSIDE and Simon BELL, went further down the terrace

towards the front.    The pressure from the over crowding was worse

this time than on any other occasion I can remember.    As the time went

on and just before the players came onto the pitch I felt the surge

of force which forced all of us in the area close by, forward.       The

pressure was so great we went two or three yards (2 or 3 yds) down and

up against another internal Pressure Barrier which was across the

lower part of my chest.    Pressure was again building up on us against

this new barrier.    It was all ccming fran the rear.   I was standina

next to Gary CHURCH who was saying he couldn't breathe.        He asked me

to help him, but I couldn't move.

At about 3.00pm (1500) later or just after more pressure was applied

from the rear on to us, and the Pressure Barrier gave way and broke.

I was then propelled forward in the air with my feet about 12 inches

 (12") off the ground.    I found myself about 3 feet (3') in from the

front Perimeter Fence Gate.    I felt my stomach being crushed and was

 finding difficulty in breathing.    I looked around for Gary CHURCH,

but the last time I saw him was just before Igot propenea forward,

and he went under the crcwd of spectators.     Inever saw   him again.

Whilst I was at the front near the perimeter gate, I put one of my

 arms out straight in the direction of the gate, shouting to be pulled

 out.    I then felt scmeone grasp hold of my hand and start to pull me

 forward and over the spectators in front.    I then put my other arm

 out which was also took hold of and I was forcibly pulled clear and

 onto the pitch behind the Liverpool goal area.    When I got there I

 was physically dazed and tired from exhaustion in the fight to climb




                                                                             14
 r      THOMAS                 JAMES


        clear of the pressure.       Whilst I was sat down a police officer came

        and told me to lie still and recover.

        After a few minutes I got up and went to look for anyone I might know

        who had been pulled frcm the crowd and was on the playing area and

        also left in the West Stand Terraces, but after a little while I found

        Giles HUIT and                     both alright on the field.    I still

        remained there looking for any others who I knew when I saw

                   who was lying on the pitch.    He later recovered.   I saw

        numerous people lying on the pitch with clothing over their faces, but

        none I recognised.

        At about 5.00pm (1700) later I left the ground and returned to the

        coach that brought us and we then returned to Liverpool.




                                                                  J THOMAS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
 r                                                                             STATION

NAME:           JAMES
                THOMAS

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18            25011971

OCCUPATION:     ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060789                                                       j THOMAS (SIGNED)



          Further to my statement dated 4th May 1989 (040589), I have the

          following to add.

          After arriving in Sheffield at about 1.30 pn (1330) we walked (Giles

          HUTT and                  along Halifax Road and at the traffic island

          at the junction of Penis tone Road near to a supermarket at about 2.00

          (1400) to 2.15 pn (1415) we saw a white transit type minibus driving

          along Leppings Lane frcm the direction of the football ground.          Inside

          were Gary CHURCH                                 and                 who are

          all friends of mine.

          I cannot name the driver as it was somebody I don't know.          Anyway as

          they drove past they made a gesture suggesting that they would join us

          after parking the van.   We walked by the supermarket for between 5 and

          10 minutes after which they joined us.         Meanwhile Giles,

          and I had all consumed a can or two of lager which we purchased from

          the supermarket which I think was a Gateway supermarket.          We had all

          been seated on the grass bank outside while we drank them.

          Once Gary and the others arrived we sat in the sun talking for about a

          few minutes after which time we were told by a mounted Police Officer




                                              sascsasj
THOMAS                  JAMES


to make our way to the ground.     The time would have been about 2.25

pm (1425).    I should mention that prior to meeting Gary CHURCH we had

also met Christopher DEVONS IDE who was with his father Barry DEVONS IDE

and a youth Jason KENTORTHY.     We met them at the Gateway Supermarket

at about 1.45 pn (1345).    After seeing than walking up Leppings Lane

from the direction of the football ground.     They remained with us and

also purchased a few cans of guinness from Gateway.      Barry was the

one drinking guiness.    Chris would usually drink lager and I think

Jason drunk Newcastle brown.    They walked with us to the ground where

we arrived at about 2.30 pn (1430).                [
                                                   and            had

tickets for the North Stand and they left us so I assume they went

through the correct turnstiles.     Barry DEVONSIDE had a ticket for the

West Stand and I assume he also entered     through the correct

turnstile.    Whilst I was outside the turnstiles in a queue which

appeared relatively orderly I met another lad I know Simon BELL.        He

was in the same queue as I was.

The two turnstiles B nearest Gate B at this time still had relatively

orderley queues.    It took about 10 minutes to get through the

turnstiles I handed my ticket in retaining the stub and once inside

the ground I waited and met up with the others who had all entered

through the turnstiles with tickets for the terraces.     By the time we

had all met up it was about 2.45 pm (1445).     I had seen a number of

people climb over the turnstile area into the ground but they were led

away by Police.    I did not see any gates open other than the

turnstiles.    I used the toilet before going along the tunnel.

After using the toilet I rejoined the others and we all walked along

the tunnel into the terraces.     I was unaware that access could be

gained to the terraces from other directions.      There was a letter B

above the tunnel entrance and as my ticket had a letter B on it I
THOMAS                     JAMES


assumed that was the way to go.         I did the same last year at tne same

fixture.    The people with me at the time were Gary CHURCH, Christopher

DEVONSIDE, Simon BELL, Giles HUTT,                        Anthony CWEN and

                  We all had free passage along the tunnel and at the

entrance to the terraces we all went right into Pen 3 we all made our

way across the Pen to the right (marked position C on the plan).         (Ex

No         ) (Ref JT/2).     The time was between 2.50 pn (1450) and 2.55 pn

(1455) and I was aware that the terraces were more crowded than I have

experienced in the past which caused me concern.         We all stood

together for a couple of minutes after which time there was a surge

from behind the cause of which I did not know.         This forced me down

the terrace towards the field and I ended up with my back on a crush

barrier about half way down the terraces,         (marked position 1 on plan).

The surge had caused us to split up and I was left standing with just

Christopher and Simon.

I had hold of the barrier behind me but Christopher and Simon were

carried away and that was the last I saw of there.

I cannot recall the time but I do recall that the players and the

referee were on the field.         The game had not kicked off.   I had hold

of the barrier for a few minutes by which time the game had kicked

off.

Soon after about 3-4 minutes into the game BEARDSLEY hit the ball over

the bar and there was a further surge forward which was a lot worse

than the first.

As a result I was forced away towards the field to a point where my

chest was pinned against the crush barier nearest to the pitch.          I was

having difficulty breathing I was positioned as you look at the pitch

on the left hand third of the barrier and it was at this time that I

saw Gary CHURCH standing up against the centre section of the same




                                                                                 18
THOMAS


barrier about 5 or 6 reet away tran :ne.    Gary was shouting ter neip

saying he couldn't breath but r could not help.     At about J .04 on

11504} I felt the crush barrier bending I could net move and rt?v feet

were not on the ground.    Within seconds I felt the barrier give way

and I was immediately carried forward to a point approx 3 feet away

from the perimeter fence gate.     I looked around I could not see the

barrier and did not know how many sections of the barrier had broken

other than the outer section.     I could not see Gary but could see that

same people not many had fallen.     They were positioned behind me to

the right.    The last time I saw Gary was just as the barrier gave way.

As I was sideways on when I was propelled forward I saw him go under

the crowd of spectators.

As Gary was positioned against the centre section of the barrier I

assume that section also gave way.     I didn't see Gary again that

afternoon.    On that day I was wearing a black T shirt, with the words

Guns and Roses written in yellow lettering on the front.     I was

wearing blue jeans and white training shoes.     I did initially have a

brown roll neck jumper (cotton) tied around my waist but I lost this.

I will add to clarify a point in my previous statement that after I

was pulled through the gate by a Police officer he sat me on the pitch

just to the right of the goal.     I sat there for about 5 minutes, I

actually laid down, after which time I went looking for the others.         I

 found both Giles and           (walking around the field and both were

alright.     The three of us then went looking for the others.    It took

us sane time to find!         who was sat in front of the South

Stand with his back to an advertising board.     He was seated with ___

                                 canplained of difficulty breathing and

 pains in his legs so we all carried him over to the area of the field

 in front of the Spion Kop.             Giles and myself then went back
        THOMAS                JAMES


        to the Leppings Lane end o£ the £ieid where        rurther assisted hv

        providing water for those who were injured.      At about 5 pro •l"Q01

        there was an announcement requesting us to leave the grcunc orderiv.

        We did this and had met up with                  and         We did not

        know that Gary, Simon and Christopher had died until later.

        I have seen myself on match of the day at about 10.30 pm (2230) which

        shows me carrying           across the field on the advertising board.



        J THOMAS

                                                                 J THOMAS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:      060789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
NAME:           JAMES
                THOMAS

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18            25011971

OCCUPATION:     ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080889                                                    J THOMAS (SIGNED)



        Today at Crosby Police Station, I was shown video tape and photographs

        by PC 1996 Watson and WPC             of the West Midlands Police.

        On video tape ref MAP 1, at time reference 14.53.10.23, I recognise

        Gary Church he is in the upper right of the picture, directly below

        the no 14 of the time code on the picture.        He is above and slightly

        right of a lad in a red and white hat.        At 14.53.14.20 he is centre

           left of the screen there is a side profile of him he is still slightly

        above and right of the youth mentioned earlier.

        At 14.56.31.05 he is in the bottom centre right of the picture, facing

           the camera he is to the left and slightly below the youth in the red

           and white hat, all the pictures of Gary are in Pen 3.

           I have been unable to recognise him in any of the photographs although

           I have seen myself on several occasions, I am wearing a black (Guns

           and Roses) T shirt.

           I have also today completed a plan of Pen 3 and 4 marked JT1 (            )

           (        ) on this I have marked the last place that I saw Gary Church

           alive.
        THOMAS              JAMES




                                               J THOMAS SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:          DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     R WATSON POL PC 1996
NAME:           DENIS
                WEBSTER

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POL PC2378



           I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police, at present

           stationed at Deepcar.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I was on duty in connection with

           the FA Cup Semi Final game between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

        which was being held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,

           Hillsborough.

        My duties were those of a mobile patrol in a personnel carrier in

           company with Police Sergeant 681 HILL, Police Constable 583 DAVIES

           (driver), 2628 CHURMS, 844 REES and 300 HAYS.

        Our area of patrol was the Deepcar/Oughtibridge area, paying

        particular attention to- licensed premises and generally maintaining

        public order.

        At approximately 11.00am (1100) we took tip our patrol area.     At this

        time I noticed that there were numerous people waiting about outside

           licensed premises, many of them wearing Liverpool colours.   Throughout

        the day until just before 3.00pm (1500) frequent checks were made of

        licensed premises.

        Checks at public houses showed that some had few customers, whereas

        others in particular, the Silver Fox, Manchester Road, Stocksbridge,

        and the Blue Ball, Whamcliffe Side, were heavily patronised by

        Liverpool supporters.      Both these public houses in particular were

        very full from mid-day (1200) onwards and it was obvious that a lot of

        alcohol was being consumed.     MDst people's conduct throughout this
WEBSTER               DENIS


period was good humoured and there were no public order incidents.

Whilst making one of the checks at the Silver Fox Public House,

Manchester Road, Stocks bridge, I saw a Mercedes Mini bus parked in the

car park of that public house.        All the occupants were inside the

public house, including young children aged 8 to 19 years, these were

asked to leave and the adults advised to make their way to the ground.

At 1.35pm (1335) I had occasion to search a Ford Transit van,

registered number             This vehicle had contained Liverpool

supporters who had stopped and entered the Blue Ball public house,

Main Rd, Whameliffe Side.         In the vehicle was 6 cans of Heldenbrau

lager, 7 full bottles of Baveria beer, 11 empty bottles of Baveria

beer, 1 can of Hoffmeister lager, full.        The driver was reported for

the offence. He was advised to make his way to the ground.

The area in which we were patrolling was normally 20 to 30 minutes

front the ground. Hbwsver, the traffic that day was understandably very

heavy and we were advising people that it would take about 1 hour and

that they would have difficulty parking.

At 2.20pm (1420) we had occasion to stop a Mercedes mini bus at

Deepcar, this was the same bus we had seen earlier in the Silver Fox

car park. The vehcle was displaying a vehicle excise licence that was

expired in October 1988 (001088), a fixed penalty notice was issued to

driver                        (

We made our way to the ground and as we did so, we advised several

people in the public houses which were still quite full, to make their

way to the ground.   About 2.45pm (1445) we were travelling along

the main road towards the ground when I saw the Ford transit van that

had been in the Blue Ball at Whamcliffe Side.        This vehicle was in

the process of being parked on the grass verge at the junction with

Stockarth Lane.   This point is about one and a half miles from the
WEBSTER                DENIS


ground which at a brisk walk I would estimate would take 15 tc 20

minutes.   As we approached the ground I turned my radio to the match

channel and I could hear a broken message frcm which I formed the

opinion that there was crowd control problans at the Leppings Lane end

of the ground at the turnstiles.

Police Sergeant HILL asked if our Tango mobile was to be directed to

any particular area.   He was informed by the match control to stay on

patrol around the ground.

Shortly after 3.00pm (1500) we were in the Penistone Road North area

when I heard radio messages saying that there was serious crowd

problems inside the ground, at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.      A

further message was passed frcm ground control requesting all Officers

onto the pitch inside the ground.   We went imnediately to the

Penistone Road entrance to the ground and gained access to the pitch

via the gate between the North Stand and the Spion Kop.

My first impression on looking towards the Leppings Lane end of the

ground was that a pitch invasion was taking place, I could see that

there was a large number of Officers on the pitch and several fans,

more fans were climbing the fence onto the track.    I still thought

that a pitch invasion was taking place and together with the rest of

m y unit I made my way towards that end.   I did not hear any messages

frcm the control at this time.

As I neared the penalty area I could see that Officers were beginning

to help fans over the fence, I then looked at the fence and saw that

the fans at the front of the terrace were being crushed by the people

frcm behind.   I saw that there were people in great distress and that

some in fact looked lifeless.    I could see that the small gates onto

the track were open and Officers were trying to get fans through them.

I went to the gate at the rear of the goal and saw seme fans trying to
WEBSTER                DENIS


rip off the wire fence, it had begun to ccme loose and I -went to it

and was kickin in the fence as the fans pulled, the fence came away

for about 1 metre but then the welds -would not give anymore.   1 went

to a gate nearby and could see that there were people trapped in the

gates and were lying on top of each other, sane appeared to be dead,

other fans were climbing on than in an effort to get over the fence.

I stood on the fence and climbed up and I could see that there was a

gap at the rear of the terrace and I shouted for the fans at the rear

to turn round but they just kept pushing forwards, there were other

Officers at the gate, one of whcm I knew as Sgt SWIFT frcm B Division,

we were attempting to get the fans in the gate free but could not move

them, when a Liverpool fan who I describe as mid twenties 5'5 and very

fat, he put his feet against the gate and his hands and pressed back,

by doing this he held back the fans and we were able to clear the

gate.    Once the gate was clear many fans were able to get onto the

pitch.    After a while I was aware that there were Police Officers on

the terrace and bodies and unconscious fans were being passed through

the gate.

As this was taking place Superintendent GREENWOOD came to the gate and

through his megaphone organised the passing of bodies through the gate

and a line of Officers to carry them away.

I stayed at the gate passing bodies through until a young man aged

about 18/20 years was passed through.    He had a red football jersey

on, he was not quite the same pallor as the others that had cone

through and I grabbed him and carried him to a space on the pitch.       I

put him on the ground and almost immediately a Liverpool fan gave him

mouth to mouth whilst I pressed his chest, after a short time the lad

began to breathe on his own although his breaths were laboured.    He

was placed on a billboard and carried to the rear of the north stand.
WEBSTER                 DENIS


I stayed with him until a doctor saw him and said he could be left.

I returned to the pitch and I could see that a line of Police Officers

had been formed across the pitch.     I saw Police Sergeant HILL amongst

these and I went to him.     After a short time I saw that the managers

of the teams, Mr CLOUGH and DALGLISH were on the pitch near to the

players tunnel.     I could see that the fans were gathering round them

and sane were very angry and were making threats towards Mr CLOUGH.

I pointed this out to Sergeant HILL and together with him and other

Officers we went to them and tryed to keep the fans away from them.

We got them back to the players tunnel and we remained there stopping

fans frcm entering the tunnel and gaining access to the Officers and

changing roams.

Several fans kept trying to gain access, a lot of whcm were drunk and

very abusive towards all Officers present and the TV men who were

there.     One youth who was very drunk was spoken to by PS HILL.   He was

turned away from the tunnel, he staggered and fell flat on his face,

he was removed by other supporters.

At 4.30pm (1630) all mobile officers were ordered back to their

vehicles, together with PS HILL, PC844 REES and 3628 CHURMS we made

our way back to the vehicle where we saw PC583 DAVIES who was our

driver.    We resumed patrol without PC300 HAYS who had become seperated

from us.

We made our way to our normal after match duties which was monitoring

and assisting the traffic flow along the A6102 and A616 out of

Sheffield.

We were called to one incident involving fans returning to Liverpool

when a group entered the Presto Supermarket on Manchester Road,

Stocksbridge, and attempted to distract the cashout girl on the till,

they were ushered from the shop by staff and drove off in a vehicle




                                                                             Z1
WEBSTER              DENIS


for which we made a search and circulated.   The vehicle was stopped

and checked in Glossop, Derbyshire.

At 6.00pm (1800) we returned to the ground where we had a break.

At 7.00pm (1900) we were ordered to standby at the Niagara Sports

Club/ Ground.

I retired frcm duty at 2.00am (0200).
NAME:           DENIS
                WEBSTER

ADDRESS:        DEEPCAR P STN,
                SOOTH YORKSHIRE POL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: OVER21

OCCUPATION:     POL PC2378


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 121089                                          D WEBSTER PC 2378 (SIGNED)



           Today at Snighill Headquarters, I was shown video and photographs by

           PC 1996 WATSON of the West Midlands Police Force on a film ref No

           Map/1 at ref times 15.25.50 to 15.25.57.00 I am on the screen, in my

           arms is a young lad dressed in green top.    I have carried him frart the

           gate in pen three.    Following viewing photographs of clothing and of

           the deceased, I believe this to be Gary CHURCH Body "14.   I am seen

           to place this boy on the pitch.     I did heart massage on this lad but

           there was no response, I knew he was dead, I went to try and help

           someone else.     I handled a number of other deceased or injured but I

           have been unable to recognise them on the film I have been shown.

           I have marked on two plans the place I was handed the body of

           CHURCH and the place I left him.    These plans are Ref No EW/1 EW/2.
        WEBSTER             DENIS


                                             D WEBSTER PC 2378 SIOIED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:     121089

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   R WATSON PC 1996

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                           STATION

NAME:
                HAIGH

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:     POL PC893



           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER   15/4/89 (150489)



        At     9.am (0900) on 15th April 1989 (1504989), I reported to

           Ecclesfield Police Station for duty and was transported by bus to

        Hillsborough Football Ground for briefing at 10 am (1000).       I was

        detailed to serial 48 under Sgt MILLER.       We were to patrol the Wads ley

        and Middlewood areas.

        While patrolling we paid particular attention to pubs in the area and

        noticed early on at perhaps about 12 o'clock (1200) that the

        Middlewood Tavern was busy mainly with Liverpool supporters. However

- - ■   we became more concerned with other pubs due to the numbers gathering

        outside.    We saw large numbers outside The Horse & Jockey on Wads ley

        Lane and another pub on Worrall Road.     We toured the area several

        times noting particularly that the crowd outside the Horse and Jockey

        become particularly large with 300-400 people gathered on its

        forecourt and sitting or lying on grass verges and private garden

        walls in the area.    Although the crowd was noisy and boisterous, they

        did not appear openly aggressive.     I remember three or four youths who

        were lying in the road in Wads ley Lane, apparently oblivious to their

        surroundings and to the danger to themselves from passing cars.

        We continued touring the area and at one point came accross a senior

        officer to whan Sgt MILLER explained the situation outside the Horse

        and Jockey.     I cannot say who this officer was with any certainty




                                                                                       a
HAIuri


because my view of him from the rear of the van was obscured by my

colleagues.    He did however tell us to monitor the situation outside

the Horse & Jockey but not to tackle any unruliness among such a large

crowd without assistance.

We returned to take up a position in the van opposite the Horse &

Jockey.    The crowd had apparently become noisier and were singing and

chanting more as kick off time approached.     It was approximately

1.45pm (1345).     I recall that about this stage Sgt MILLER and another

PC got out of the van to remonstrate with a group of youths who were

chanting obscenities whilst sitting on a garden wall to the rear and

left of the run.

Frcm speaking to some of the fans who approached the van we learned

that the pub had run out of draught beer and it was because of this

that fans were drinking frcm cans and sane frcm wine bottles. Many of

these emptied containers were rolling about on the road some caning to

rest under car wheels. One fan though was attempting to clear sane of

them up.   We noticed one particular youth in a white shirt who was

having difficulty standing, apparently drunk.    He was being supported

by friends who also seemed unsteady on their feet.

As we looked at the pub there was a 5' 6'' high stone wall separating

the pub forecourt frcm a private garden.     In this garden behind the

wall were large bushes, about 6-10 youths started climbing on to this

wall where they jumped up and down singing and chanting.    They

repeatedly fell off the wall into the bushes and re-appeared fron the

ground to climb the wall again.     I also saw bottles and cans fly frcm

the crowd into the garden with seeming disregard for the property or

anyone who might have been in it.    This said, the bulk of the people

in the area were noisy but still not openly aggressive.

Concern grew amongst my colleagues by 2.20pm (1420) that few had moved
HATGH


towards the ground which was perhaps 10—15 minutes walk away. 'Other

police vehicles arrived at 2.25-2.30 (1425-1430) and we were able to

get out of the van and move the crowd on.     I remanber that at this

stage a chant of "You may have took the miners but you'll never take

the reds" come from one section of the crowd.However, the vast

majority of the crowd moved off towards the ground.

We reboarded our vehicle and also headed towards the ground.    At the

lower end of Wads ley Lane a fan was arrested and placed in a police

van in front of us.   Another knocked on the window of our van asking

where the other was going so he could get the ticket off the fan who

had been arrested.

At about 2.50pm (1450) our vehicle was parked on the river bridge in

Leppings Lane opposite and overlooking the turnstile area for the

Leppings Lane end.

There was a crowd of several thousand people outside the turnstiles

which stretched back onto the road.   I saw a steady stream of people

being assisted over the turnstile wall by police officers.     I looked

on frcm the van trying to see colleagues who I knew were detailed to

be working in that area, but could not see any among the crowd.

I heard messages concerning the crowd problems on the vans radio

including questions as to why the kick off could not be delayed and

several confused messages about opening gates to relieve pressure

outside.   The gate to the right of the turnstiles opened and the crowd

went through.   We then left the van and I was instructed to turn

away non-ticket holders from the perimeter gates.

I had been in this position for only a minute or so when a sergeant

called all police officers into the ground.    I entered the ground and

came out onto the pitch from the Nottingham supporters stand near the

Leppings Lane end terrace.
 HAIGH


 I had no idea what had happened at that stage, I saw three or four

 people lying on the pitch and several more wandering about looking

dazed.   The players v>ere still on the pitch at that stage.

 I heard a colleague directing those who could move to the side of the

pitch.   This seemed to be of little use as the number of people on the

pitch was growing rapidly.    I noticed people being lifted from the

terracing onto the stands above.     One man, struggling for breath said

to me "Its worse than Belgium in there".     I gathered that there was

some sort of crush situation on the terracing.    I remember screams

caning from the crowd, many who came onto the pitch had vomit and

blood on their clothing.

I remember finding three people lying in close proximity to each

other, one of whose breathing was very laboured, another man would do

no more than open his eyes when I spoke to him and a woman who was

groaning and crying but could not move.    All had strong pulses but

there seemed to be no way at that stage of getting them proper mpdi<~qi

assistance.   I made them as comfortable as possible and a nurse made

herself known to me.    I asked her to keep an eye particularly on the

man who was struggling to breathe.    As I stood up I saw a PC heading

towards me with a youth of about 16 yrs in his arms.    The youths face

was purple.   I and the other constable started to attempt

resuscitation on the youth, the other PC performing the chest

compressions while I gave the kiss of life.    We were joined by WPC

CROCKS who assisted with chest compressions. After 4-5 minutes a

doctor made himself known and advised us to finish and find someone we

could be more use to.   Two friends of the youth broke down and

shortly helped to carry him away on an advertising hoarding.

I saw at this point an ambulance had arrived behind the goal and that

a first aid station appeared to have been set up in the far corner of
HAIGH


the pitch. Fans, firemen and police used boardings to carry the

injured and dead that way.

There was then a rush of Liverpool fans to the Nottingham Forest end.

I went with many other officers to the other end to try and prevent

any clashes of rival fans.    It was at that end that I heard the first

direct order given since before the disaster occurred, that was to

form two lines and shepherd the fans back.

The rest of my time in the line facing angry and distressed Liverpool

fans.    I remember one in particular saying to us in a particularly

aggressive way "There's people fucking dying in there and all you can

do is stand there. You dont give a fucking toss. Your fucking shite

you.    We've been carrying them out what have you done"   There were

sporadic shouts from the crowd to start the game. This brought

aggressive reactions from fans on the pitch and officers took away

those who had shouted to prevent any violence.

As things calmed a little, opinions as to what had happened were

exchanged among fans and police.   Most believed a barrier collapse had

occurred on the Leppings Lane terrace.

I noticed that my serial members were now a few yards away.     I joined

them and after the crowd had started leaving the ground we

returned to our van. We continued patrolling and eventually finished

duties at 8.30pm (2030)
                                                                       STATION

NAME:           ROGER   GRAHAM
                HAIGH

ADDRESS:        ECCLESFIELD POL STN
                F2 SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31           26061958

OCCUPATION:     POL PC893


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010989                                                R HAIGH (SIGNED)



        Further to my statement dated 29th June 1989 (290689) today I have

        been shown various video tapes and photographs relating to the

        Hillsborough disaster.

        On the video reference number MAPI 15.25.52.13 - 15.25.54.9 I can be

        seen dealing with the deceased Gary CHURCH (14) I am unable to

        identify the other officers involved.   This is the same person whan I

        refer to in my original statement as a 16 yr old youth whcm had tin-rvaH

        a purple colour on his face.

        I have also narked by means of a dot on a plan reference number RGH 1

        the place where I first cane into contact with Gary CHURCH.

        I am also able to identify myself on a photograph reference number

        MAPI 15.25.53.02 in which I can be seen again dealing with Gary CHURCH.
        HAIGH            ROGER


                                 R HAIGH POL PC393 SIG'-fE

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
NAME:           ROBERT   KEITH
                LINDOP

ADDRESS:        BARNSLEY POLICE STATION     CHURCH FIELDS
                BARNSLEY

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:     POL PC1638 BARNSLEY PSTN


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 110589                                                    R LINDOP (SIQJED)



           States:-

           I am Police Constable 1638 Robert Keith LINDOP of the South Yorkshire

           Police presently stationed at Barnsley Police Station, Barnsley.

        At 3.35 pn (1535) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) as the result of

           information I attended the Hillsborough Football ground,

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.     I was directed to the gym situated at the

           rear of the North Stand.    On entering the gym I was directed to take

           charge of one of the bodies laying on the floor.

           I then took charge of a body which was laying on the floor in the top

           left hand comer.      I do not know how this body came to be in the gym.

        The body was of a white male, 5'8/9, clean shaven, slim build, with

           short ginger/blond hair.    He was wearing jeans, a blue Liverpool

        cannon shirt and white Reebok trainers with a blue strip on.        At 3.53

        pn (1553) that day the body who I later identified as that of

        Gary CHURCH (Body No 14) was pronounced dead by Dr BULL.

           I then searched the body and completed the sudden death forms.

        At 10.55 pn (2255) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) the body of

        Gary CHURCH was identified to me by his friend and travelling
        companion of that day, Anthony CWEN.

        At 1130 pm (2330) the same day I accompanied the body of Gary ::KURCr;

        (Body No 14) to the mortuary at the Medico-Legal Centre Sheffield,

        there handed the property and body to a Detective Constable I do not

        know who the Detective Constable was.

        I also had dealings with another body who I believed to be James

        ASP INAL.   This body was laying next to mine in the gym and I do not

        know how it came to be there.    I was present with this body at 3.45

        pm (1545) when Dr BULL pronounced him dead.

        This body was of a white male approximately 20 years.

        I had no more dealings with this body, James ASPINAL which was taken

        charge of by PC 233 GRANT of B2 Cudworth Station.



                                                                R Lindop SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                        .-TAT ION

NAME:          MATTHEW   JAMES
                BULL

ADDRESS:       TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY
                FORWARD HSE, 1 FORWARD RD, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31

OCCUPATION:     SENIOR REGISTRAR RADIOLOGY


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                           MATTHEW J BULL (SIGNED)



           I am a Batchelor of Medicine and a Batchelor of Surgery I am a Fellow

        of the Royal College of Radiologist.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended Sheffield Wednesday

        Football Ground, Hillsborough to watch the semi final between

        Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.     I arrived with friends at about 2.40

        pm (1440) and went into the Spion Kop End of the ground.     I cannot be

        exact in relation to the times involved in this incident but I can

        remember the game starting and am aware that the game was stopped at

        3.06 pm (1506).

        I can remember people beginning to cane onto the pitch fran the West

        Stand at the opposite end and could see people limping but I didn't

        realise the gravity of the situation until I saw someone begin giving

        treatment for cardiac arrest.

        I made my way onto the pitch and after identifying myself to a senior

        Police officer, was directed to the Leppings Lane end of the ground

        where the bodies were lying around the goalmouth.    I examined about a

        dozen bodies in this area and attempted resuscitation on about five or

        six who I thought would be best to try.    All twelve were males and I




                                                                                    40
BULL                  MATTHEW    JAMES


can only remember one actually where resuscative techniques

successful, he was taken away by someone in uniform be it Police,

ambulance or St Johns.

I was aware that Doctor PURCELL, the football clubs Doctor vv-as there

working on other bodies and also two nurses, one male and female one

frcm Broadgreen Hospital. We continued for about twenty minutes with

these bodies I was informed that there were more bodies at the Kop end

and after checking round the Leppings Lane end as best I could I went

with Dr PURCELL and the two nurses to the Kop end where I saw more

bodies and after examination I attempted resuscitation on I think four

bodies with the female nurse whilst Dr PURCELL and the male nurse

attempted others.   All my four were unsucessful.   It was by this time

somewhere around 3.45 pm (1545) and I was approached by a Senior

Police Officer, I don't knew whan but he was wearing a white shirt.        I

was then asked if would go to the gymnasium at the ground to examine

and certify death on the bodies situated there.

At the gymnasium I met Dr REDGRAVE, a General Practioner.     Inside the

bodies were layed out in four or five rows and Dr REDGRAVE and myself

then decided to examine a row of bodies each and work back to ensure

none were missed.

We were accompanied by a Police Officer who made a note of every body

I examined and a Police Officer was allocated to each body and the

officer acccnpanying us made a note of their names and numbers.     I

have also made notes about the incident after the event but

none at the time.   I performed a normal examination on each body and

pronounced life extinct in turn.

This was also noted by the accompanying officer.    I was asked to wait

for a short time afterwards and as other Sheffield Doctors came to the

ground I was allowed to leave.
BULL                    MATTHEW     JAMES


To the best of my knowledge and belief listed below are the names

the bodies I pronounced life extinct, between times of

approximately 3.50 pm and 4 .15 pm (1550

B61 Colin Andrew SEFTON           22 yrs

B40 Peter McDONNELL               22 yrs

B14 Gary CHURCH                   19 yrs

B9     James Gary ASPINALL        18 yrs

B39 Peter TOOTLE                  21 yrs

B42 Paul Anthony HEWITSON         26 yrs

B2     Inga SHAH                  39 yrs

B1     Thomas Anthony HCWARD      14 yrs

Bll Peter Andrew HARRISON         15 yrs

B31 Henry Thomas BURKE            46 yrs

B49 Patrick John THOMPSON         35 yrs

B28 Steven Joseph ROBINSON        17 yrs

B33 James Phillip DELANEY         19 yrs

B67 Raymond CHAPMAN               45 yrs

B20 Marion Hazel MCCABE           21 yrs

B52 Simon BELL                    17 yrs

B8     David HAWLEY               39 yrs

B41 Eric HUGHES                   43 yrs

B50 Andrew BROOKES                26 yrs

B64 Sarah Louise HICKS            19 yrs




                                                                    ±2
        bULL              MATTHEW   .JAMES                           4


                                             Matthew J Bull SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                         i3
                                                                        STATION

NAME:           MATTHEW    JAMES-
                BULL

ADDRESS:
                        SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31             10081957

OCCUPATION:     SENIOR REGISTRAR RADIOLOGY



           For the attention of Sergeant



           Lord Chief Justice TAYLOR'S Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry,

           Fumival House,

           Fumival Gate,

           Sheffield.




        From:



        Dr. Matthew James-BULL, M.B., CH.B., F.R.C.R.,




        Sheffield.




        Tel



        Department of Radiology,

        Royal Hallamshixe Hospital,

        Sheffield.

        S10 2TN
BULL                    MATTHEW    TAMES


Tel



PERSONAL RECORD OF EVENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND- ON 15TH

APRIL, 1989. (150489)




I am a Senior Registrar in Diagnostic Radiology in Sheffield.           On the

15th April, 1989 (150489), I attended the Sheffield Wednesday Football

Ground at Hillsborough.     I was at the edge of the Kop, in the

Nottingham Forest end.

When the match was stopped and spectators frcm the Leppings Lane end

came onto the pitch, all I saw initially were people who were

limping.     At this time I did not see anybody lying on the ground.

However, after what must have been probably 10 minutes, I realised

that the situation was obviously more serious and made my way down

onto the pitch.

At approximately 3.15 p.m. (1515) I went to the Leppings Lane end of

the pitch.     There were many bodies round the goal with a large number

of spectators and p»lice.     Only a small number of these bodies were

being administered to at this time.        Having already contacted a

senior p»lice officer on the pitch I set about examining as many of

the bodies that I could.     I was then accompanied by a female

psychiatric nurse from Liverpool, whose name I do not know.

I examined probably up to 20 people.        In my opinion the majority of

these were already dead.     Together with the nurse and several other

spectators I administered and organised basic resuscative measures to

approximately 6 or 7 people.      This comprised of mouth to mouth

resuscitation and external cardiac massage.       There was no available

oxygen equipment, airways or any means of suction.       Several of the
 BULL                  MATTHEW   .:AMEP


people whctn I saw had vomit within their mouths and throats and would

clearly have benefited frcm suction.

On only one patient did I feel that external cardiac massaae ana other

resuscitative techniques had been successful.    This patient was

subsequently transferred to an ambulance and taken to the hospital.

The other people whcm I dealt with could not be resuscitated.

There were a great many people standing around, seme of whcm were

extremely agitated.    This somewhat hampered the ability to assess any

patients who would have benefited from immediate resuscitation.     The

overall situation was obviously very confused at this point.     The only

physician that I was aware of at this time was Dr. PURCELL, the

Sheffield Wednesday Club doctor.    After approximately 20-30 minutes

when it had become apparent that the remaining people at the Leppings

Lane end were already dead and those which had been resuscitated had

been sent to hospital, I went down to the other end of the football

pitch (the Kop end).    I was accompanied by Dr. PURCELL and two nurses

from Liverpool.    Between the four of us we then attempted

resuscitation on 4 more people on the pitch.    None of these attenpts

were successful.   By this time a great many people were being carried

on advertising hoardings off the pitch.    Several patients to my

knowledge had been transferred by ambulance to the local hospitals.

There was still no oxygen available or any other aids for

resuscitation, as far as I was aware.

When it became apparent that there were no further people for

resuscitation at the Kop end, a police officer then requested that we

go into the Sheffield Wednesday gymnasium which had been converted

into a temporary mortuary.

In the mortuary there were lines of people lying on the floor.

Together with a local G.P., Dr. REDGRAVE, I then examined as many of
 BULL                   MATTHEW   JAMES


these people as I could.     All the people that I examined within the

gymnasium were in nry opinion already dead.    I examined approximateiy

20 people within the gymnasium.     No resuscitative attempts were made

within the gymnasium.    In each case I certified the person to be dead

and notified the attending policeman that in my opinion the patient

was dead and gave the policonan my name.

When we were satisfied that we had examined all the people on the

floor I waited for further instructions frcm the police.     No further

duties were required of me and at approximately 5.45 p.m. (1745) I

left the Sheffield Wednesday Football ground.

The points which I feel are important are as follows:

1.   There were no calls via the public address system for medical and

nursing staff to help.     It was only after 10 minutes that Irealised

from the other end of the ground that the situation was so grave.

2.   As far as I was aware, there were no aids for resuscitation, such

as oxygen, airways, or suction device to clear vomit from the nouth.

3.   Assessment of patients on the field, some of whom m y have been

able to be resuscitated was hampered by a large number of people, many

of them very agitated.

I hope this is of seme value.     If further information is required I

shall of course be willing to provide it.




Matthew J. BULL




Matthew James BULL, M.B., Ch.B.

Fellow of the Royal College of Radiologists
MATTHEW
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           SIIVDN
                WEIQQLD

ADDRESS         SOOTH YORKSHIRE POL
                WEST BARR, CID, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31

OCCUPATION:     POL DC638


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                S WEIGOLD (SIGNED)



          I am Detective Constable 638, Simon Weigold of the South Yorkshire

          Police.   During the evening of Saturday the 15 April 1989 (150489),

          continuing into Sunday the 16 April 1989 (160489), I was on duty at

          the Medico Legal Centre acting in the capacity of receiving officer.

          During this time PC 1638 Lindop identified to me the body of Gary

          Christopher Church labelled Body No 14.



          I later identified the body of Gary Christopher Church to the

          pathologist Dr Slater.



                                                         S WEIGOLD DC638 SIOJED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

            TIME             DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                        STATION

NAME:           NICHOLAS
                KINSELLA

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: OVER 21

OCCUPATION:     POL DC699


Who states:- This statement consisting of 001 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270689                                                          (SIQJED)



        On Sunday 16th April 1989, I was on duty at the Msdico Legal Centre,

        Watery Street, Sheffield.

           Sanetime during the course of the day I accompanied Mr David CHURCH to

        a viewing area within the Medico Legal Centre where he identified to

        me Body No 14 as being that of his son, Gary CHURCH bn 31.12.69.




                                                            N. KINSELIA SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

            TIME:             DATE:   270689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:       DC 2392 THATCHER

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
NAME:             DAVID N.
                  SLATER

ADDRESS:          ROTHERHAM DISTRICT GENERAL HOSPITAL
                  ROTHERHAM S60 2UD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:       PATHOLOGIST DOCTOR



           SOUTH YORKSHIRE (WEST DISTRICT)



           HM CORONER    DR. S. POPPER



           REPORT OF AUTOPSY

           DR. D.N. SLATER,

           CONSULTANT HISTOPATHOLOGIST

           ROTHERHAM DISTRICT GENERAL HOSPITAL

           ROTHERHAM    S60 2UD



           TEL: ROTHERHAM 820000       EXT.



           HILLSBOROUGH

           IDENTIFICATION NO. 14



           NAME OF DECEASED                   Gary Church



           SEX                                Male




           AGE:                               19 years



           IDENTIFICATION BY:                 Dt. Ins. Timms
PLACE PERFORMED:       Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street,

                       Sheffield



DATE OF EXAMINATION:   16th April 1983 a.m. ,160489)



OBSERVERS PRESENT:



CLOTHING REMOVED:      Nil



SPECIMENS TAKEN:

                       Handed to



EXTERNAL EXAMINATION
SLATER                 DAVID   N-




INTERNAL EXAMINATION
SLATER   Dm v i u   N.




                         I>4
    SLATER            DAVID   N-




]




CONCLUSIONS.



Fran the history available to me I am informed that Gary Church died

in the 'Hillsborough incident'.
2LATER   DAV
SLATER


GREEN.



Death in my opinion was not due to natural causes and there is no

contraindication to cremation.



CAUSE OF DEATH.



1 a)     Traumatic asphyxia.




(signed)      David Slater




D. N. SLATER      B. Med. Sci., M. B. Ch. B., M. R. C. Path, Consultant

Histopathologist.



Police Photograph Index



CHURCH
NAME:           MICHAEL
                LAYTON

ADDRESS:        NECHELLS GREEN PSTN, FCWLER ST
                NECHELLS, BIRMINGHAM, W.MIDLANDS, B7 5DA

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:     POL INS9364   VIDEO SECTION


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070190                                                 M LAYTON (SIGNED)



           I am a Police Inspector with the West Midlands Police and since 19

        April 1989 (190489) I have been engaged in the identification of

        persons who died in the disaster at Hillsborough Football Stadium on

        Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).

        My specific duty has been to supervise a team of Police Officers

        looking at all video and photographic evidence provided to the

        inquiry.

        With regard to the deceased I have attempted to identify each persons

        position in the ground before and after their deaths using video and

        photographic material, obtained from a variety of sources.

        In sane instances it has been necessary to confirm the identification

        of the deceased by reference to the clothing worn by them.

        On 7th January 1990 (070190) I viewed material in relation to Gary

        Christopher CHURCH B o m 31.12.1969 (31121969) of I

                    Liverpool

        Having viewed this material I prepared a schedule showing reference

        numbers and the nature of any identification.

        I produce this schedule together with the relevant video/photographic
        LAYTON            MICHAEL


        footage.



                                    M LAYTON INSP 9363 SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                hi)
                                                          6*k.




CrTfVi                         “W                  ''S'f'!-      ''N \ V ^ C t > >


?V\   .    V - ^ vnA^' OV \    •On     ( \ y ^ ^


          iZ-r-ev— 02^   cj £> ,    fAi4 ^"-   |^ ^
(Vy .                 X3^\.


                    (
                    ^ 0 (
                        K A
                          viT
                            U [
                              \*>o-



|nAME   GtAiC<^ 0rwn6^fp|jJlve<- CfcWAdV | (>H-^       1i
                                                   1   *“
{
      0;                  3W,7,-^,u                                              Ui4 *     f   ^   i ( j £ ^   .




  U/ £                 ^ 3 - . V C . J 1'li^AS-       t , U i t,   i;...,^ ,
                                                                            :r ^'[-cj^cc t-,(it..f 3 oVj                     A^/r i j j
  (rti ?ci.;h'„n                                                     1
                                                                   ^>, ^
                                                                                 tiV-cc

               v.      >
                                                  !c ,^ --7 ^ ^            tl u , t^   tlliJ-i. ,.,/i,-,,          ?„   J.
                /- ,Mt
      t> l l s r K ,      c-jh / ^    ^ '
                                     "J ‘^ W
                                            ^  t" ^
                                              L _,-v >,••<u/ ,
                                                                           -;a*^-V/                            '   :

’■—                ^ t~

                          1 ,r K     l

■c v




 NAME T a/mfcj T tl» 1-Mti
I
I




    14 • St:S,r. 05
IS   Z h   : S3.   OZ
      West Midlands Police
   Evidence Continuity Chart
                     For
        DR STEFAN POPPER
                   Coroner
South Yorkshire (West D istrict)
           HILLSBOROUGH
        DISASTER INQUIRY
    Saturday 15 A p ril 1989
                     By
                J M JONES
   A s s is t a n t Chief Constable
      West Midlands Police


 Deceased Reference No 14
 Name    ChUPCH Garv Christ*:
                                                                                              L
                                                                                              abe
                                                                                                l lay
                                                                                                    out




                                                                                        T
                                                                                        ime




    S e v e r a l o th e r w i t n e s s e s are Included in th e f ile r e la t in g
  to Gary CHURCH .T h ese w i t n e s s e s do not a s s i s t w ith fu r th e r
in form ation fo r c o n tin u ity p u r p o se s and h a v e aot been included
                                       on th is c h a r t.                                      I
                                                                                                n f
                                                                                                  o r
                                                                                                    m a
                                                                                                      tio
                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                       V itness iiarne

                                                                                                                Time




                                                                                              Loss of continuity
  15 APRIL 1989




0920                                     1000                                        1 1 15




          I last saw my son Gary                At 10.00am ,Saturday 15.4.89                      I hired a mini bus which I
       CHURCH at home a t 9.20am                 I m et my friend Gary CHURCH                 d ro v e to Sheffield in company
        on the 1 5 .4 .8 9 ,before he           at Seaforth,Liverpool we w ere                 with a group o f other people
        left home to go to the F A               travelling to the F.A Cup semi                 including Gary CHURCH who
       cup semi final in Sheffield.             final in a p riv ate hire van with               I picked up in School Lane,
                                                        a group o f others.                    Litherland at about 11.1 5arn
                    D.G CHURCH                                   A.F.OWEN

       S 158A    1 5 .4 .8 9 1 0 9 2 0           S 160A     15 .4 .89 1 1000                   S 3343     15 4 891 1115
                                1400   1410                                       1415                                           1430




c
'i/e left Liverpool a t about
1120am and v e n t straight
                                                 Ve w e re stopped twice by ^
                                                 the police on our way into
                                                Sheffield .They checked th at
                                                                                            I w as in Sheffield to attend
                                                                                           the F.A cup semi final. I met
                                                                                             up with a group of friends
         to Sheffield.                          we had tick ets and no drink,
                                                                                          including Gary CHURCH .Ve all
                                                 V e a rriv e d in Sheffield at
                                                                                          s a t talking for a while on the
                                               about 2.10pm arid parked ju st
                                                                                            g ra s s near a superm arket
                                              down the road from the ground
                                                                                            before going to the ground
              A.F.OVEN                                        A.F.OVEN
S 160 A   15.4.89    1 120                     S160A      1 5.4.89    1410                 S 494 A     15.4.89



                                               S 3 3 9 8 | 1 5.4.89 | 1410               [ s 2523      15.4 8 9 |            J
                                                                                             I m et up with a group of
                                                                                           friends outside a Gateway
                                                                                           s to re ,th e s e included Gary
                                                                                           CHURCH.Some of us had >
                                                                                           couple of cans of lager ami
                                                                                           moved off to the ground if
                                                                                                    about 2 15pm
                                                                                                        •J L KENVORTHV

                                                                                           >1 18 0 A      .4.89
                                        1442                                                     1448                            14153 10




  V/e walked to the ground and^                                       ................... >
  on the way v e m et up with                       There v a s a large crowd                           Gary arid I,along v i t h other
    other lads we had m et at                     outside the tu rn stiles and v e                      made our way into Hi..- tunn-l
 o th er m atches.V e a rriv e d at                  w e re getting crushed,V e                         v/e made our v a y into Pen 5,
 the ground at about 2.25pm .                    w e re pushed to w ard s turnstile                     It v/as packed and r.ttu-r; v/t.i t-
  1w ent to the shops and Gary                    'C'.Gary v e n t in fir s t and he                     corning in behind us V* made
 stood in the queue with them.                         waited for me inside.                            our way r i g h t , j „ ay ft on, the
                                                                                                                     tunnel
                                                                     A.F OVEN
                                                         !                                                                A F OY/C.N
  S 160 A 1 5 .4 .8 9      J 1425   ^                S 160 A 1 5 .4 .8 9 |

              J.L KENVORTHY
                                               l        T        J.L. KENWORTHY
                                                                          'ORTHY 1
                                                                                                         S   U   >GA   15 4 . 8 9


                                                                                                                       J 1. KENV0R1H',
                                                                                                                                             J
LS 1180A 1 5 . 4 . 8 9 I 1 4 3 0               I^ S 118Q A       1 5 .4 . 8 9   14 3 5 a p p J               1180A 15 4.89
                 G.V/.HUTT                      ^■      I1 v aa ss n a group which
                                                                             tfhich
                                                                                 ”^
                                                  included Gary CHLJ RCH,we                                                0 ¥      HUTT
kS 2 5 2 0   1 5 .4 .8 9    1430
                                                 w e re togi?ther in tl le crowd                        S 2520         15.4.89      1 4 4 8 app
                                                outside th< turnstiU ■s , it was
                                                packed anc uncomfo rtable.We
                                                 got throu gh the tur nstile at
                                                  about 2 .‘12pm and m et the
                                                         otf » r s insid e.

                                                                     Q.W.HUTT
                                                     S 2520     15.4.89         1442      A
                                               Kiel< o f f




1456.31                                   1459.30                                              1503




            Video s tills show Gary
          CHURCH in Pen 3 between
          1 4 5 3 .1 0 h rs and 1456.31                                                               Photographs F'RI /S A , 9 A and
                        hours                                                                          10A showing Gary CHURCH
          Positive identification by                                                                    apparently in difficulty in
          J a m e s THOMAS (friend)                                                                               Pen 3
                (S 494 B re f e r s )
                     VIDEO STfLLS
                                                                                                                   PHOTOGRAPHS
          MAP 1      15.4.89 1456.31


                                                    There w as another surge and
                                                    I was pushed to the front near
                                                                                                                   P h o to gra ph - =h<■ v.- Gary
                                                      the gate.Shortly a f te r kick
                                                                                                                    L Hi IRCH ,app it ent ly in
                                                       o ff the p re s su re became                                   d i f f i c u l t y m Pen !■
                                                        intense and people w ere
                                                        being crushed.I had lost
                                                              sight o f G ary .
                                                                   A.F.OVEN                                                     PHOTOGRAPHS

                                                    S 160 A                                                            -t J 15 4 H9
                                                                1 5 .4 .9 9 11 4 5 9 .3 0 -^                            /9                           J
B
ear
  d s
    leyhtsc
          ros
            sba
              r




 1504 52




           r When BEARDSLEY hit the b a r A
             th ere w as a strong surge . I 1
             w as forced fo rw ard against 1       I felt the b a r rie r bend and
            the front b a rrie r.l was having 1   give way ,as this happened I
           difficulty breathing ! saw Gary 1      saw Gary CHURCH go under
             against the cen tre section o f 1     the crowd o f sp ec ta to rs.
               the sam e barrier.He was       1
           scream ing for help and couldn't!
                        breathe.              |                 J.THOM AS

                            J . THOMAS        1   S 494 A    1 5.4 .89
            S 494 A     15.4.891              1
                                                  Plan shoving w here Jam es
                                                    THOMAS la s t saw Gary
            When BEARDSLEY hit the bar                    CHURCH.
               I think that Christopher
            DEVONS IDE, Simon BELL and                            PLAN
            Gary CHURCH w e re all to my
                                                   JT1      15 .4 .8 9
             right.I w as pushed forw ard
            between the crush b arie rs.

                        J.L.KENVORTHY

            S 1180A 1 5.4.89
                                          J
                                                                      I




15 25.23

             On video still MAPI timed at
                 1 5 2 5 :53 I can be seen
            carrying a person I now know
               to be Gary CHURCH from
              Gate 3 onto the pitch. I did
            h ea rt massage on this lad but
                th ere was no response.                                              I took charge of a body in
                                              The youth was c a rried frorn       the gymnasium at Hillsborough
                       PC2378 WEBSTER                                               football-ground.I now know
                                              the pitch by o th e rs,a ssiste d
                                                  by two friends ( ? ).             him to be Gary CHURCH At
             S2485A     15.4 .89
                                                                                   3.55pm he 'was examined by
                                                                                    Doctor BULL who certified
               I saw a police constable
                                                                                            life extinct
              carry in g a youth , I went
            and assisted him we sta rte d                  P.C 8 9 3 HAIGH                   P.C 1638 I. INDOf
            resuscitation ..after about 5
                                              S 2 9 I4 A   15.4.89
             minutes a doctor told us to
            stop.I have since identified
               him as Gary CHURCH .
                       P.C 8 9 3 HAIGH                                             I examined a per ron known
                                                                                    as body 14 and certified
           S 2914A                                                                        life extinct

           Brians DV1 and DW2 showing
              w here PC WEBSTER was
              handed the body o f Gary                                                        Doctor BUI I
           CHURCH and w here he placed
                  him -lift the pitch.                                             S 69?    15 4 89
            Plan PGH1 shows where PC                                                        NMMwmwaMrthiiuI
             HAIGH carrie in t o contact
                w i t h Gary CHURCH.

                             PLAN(S)
2255




        I had joined up with the r e s t
       o f our group and we searched                 At 1 130pm I accompanied the
        fo r but couldn't find Gary . I              body of Gary CHURCH to the
       later attended the gymnasium                  Medico Legal Centre where I
          and identified the body o f               identified him to the M o r t u a r y
       Gary CHURCH to P C LINDOP.                                staff.

                       A.F .OVEN

                                                      S 583         15.4.89          2330
                                                      " ---------------- ^
                                                    AMBULANCE LOG |
        At 10.55pm Body 14 w as
        identified to me as being
       Gary CHURCH by his friend
                                           D 854   1 5 . 4 .8 9 1 2 3 1 5   J
             Anthony OVEN.
                                                                 ie tw e e n 1 5 . 4 . 8 9 and 16 4
                                                                   I w a s a c ting a s r e ^ e iv iih j
                                                                 officer at the Medico Legal
                   P C. 1638 LINDOP                             Centre .During this p e r i d Hir
        S 583                                                    body of ijsry Cfu is tuplit-i
                  15.4 .8 9   2255
                                                                CHURCH if; 1 4) w.as l<-r. t m~ d
                                                                 to roe b y p f: J 6 3 8 I INI •fi|-
                                                                                [ ■ i"   h ' i d   v;'Cll.I'll I .


                                                                 c 1280N 1S 4 ;:•<
1
6AP
  RIL1
     989




                                                                          I3
                                                                           00




       I later Identified the body o f                                          A t .about 1 p m .B un -Ja y                   1 6 4 >39
                                         I later c a rrie d out a post
       Gary CHURCH ( B 1 4 ) to the                                             I i d e n t i f i e d t h e b o d y of" m y           son
                                          mortem examination on
       pathologist Doctor SLATER ,                                              G s r y C h r i s t o p h e r C H U R C H *.
                                           Gary CHURCH ( B 14 ).
                                                                                 I> C I IN S El t A at                        Hedu      <•

                                                                                     I eyal                    i- S h e f f i e l d


                  D C 6 3 8 VEIGOLD                 Doctor SLATER                                     f    h    i.' i) c h u k i i

       31280N     16.4.89                2763      16.4.891      AM                    ■c! rt
                                                                  xxtmr
                                                                  U


                                                                                On S u n d a y        I        4   % ':> J   Ir [ ■ , , id
                                                                                1 Hi II- 1 H i d e n t i f i e d t o rrit- th e
                                                                                b;»dy -.f hi.-:           -o n G a r y s H I If -! . I
                                                                                 ;• r t h , • ! k~ 1ii o | r y i ) f f t i l t i
                                                                                                   I  .•




                                                                                                  I • I- <•'* * I: I N ' .( 11 A


                                                                                                  I   k        1 : iv
