                                                    1
From; Sir Clive Whitmore
      7 July 1989                           cc   Lord Ferrers
                                                 Mr Chilcot
                                                 Mr Moriarty
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Turney
                                                 H1C1FS    '
                                                    'Mower
                                                  r Goddard
                                                 Mr"iatts
                                                 Mr Lidington

Secretary of State


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


I spoke to Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Whalley on 4 July about
progress on the Inquiry.

How that the hearings have temporarily ended - they reconvene on
14 July to hear Counsels1 closing submissions - Lord Justice
Taylor has been able to take a more considered view of how long
it might take him to complete his interim report. As a result
he is more cautious than  was originally reported to me. He
declined to mention a specific date.  He told me that he hoped
to complete the interim report this month but that it was
possible that it might not be ready until early August.   I think
it unlikely that we will receive the report until after
Parliament rises for the recess.

I do not think this matters greatly.  Lord Justice Taylor
confirmed that the interim report will not say anything of
relevance to the arguments for or against identity cards for
football supporters.  He is also fairly certain that none of his

physical work at grounds
season.  Rather he expects his interim findings to deal with
matters such as crowd control and the content of safety
certificates. Thus I see no pressing need for a statement to
the House; on the contrary there may be advantage in a low key
reception involving simply a press statement.   Lord Justice
Taylor did warn me that the interim report is likely to be
critical of .South Yorkshire police and to a lesser extent the
football club.   We will need to consider carefully what we
should say on this aspect once we have the text of the report.




                                         MM
