.R.                        r^vns

  180N/BN/MT




  Note of a meeting held on 25 Mav to discuss Hillsborough; r.osi- nf
  investigations bv West Midlands Police

  Present:     Lord Ferrers            Cllr Ablett - Chairman
               Mr Addison              Cllr Carless - Vice-Chairman
               Mr Nagler               Cllr Sir Neville Bosworth
               Ms Ransford             Mr W E Jarvis
               Miss Nicholson          Mr Dear - Chief Constable
                                       Mr Barnfield - Solicitor
                                       Mr Williams - Treasurer
                                       Mr Tomlinson - Assistant Clerk


  Having thanked Lord Ferrers for the meeting Cllr Ablett explained
  that the reason for seeking the meeting was to try and resolve the
  quandary his Authority was in over the financial implications of
  the investigations into the Hillsborough disaster. This matter he
  had to be sorted out and it had to be made clear, at the earliest
  opportunity, where the costs involved should fall. If the
  ratepayers of West Midlands were liable it had been estimated that
  the loss of interest in capital would be about £400K. His view
  though was that as the investigation had been initiated by the
  Home Office (Sir Richard Barrett having contacted Mr Dear) the
  costs should fall to the Home Office. Mr Ablett then handed the
  meeting over to Mr Dear so that he could give an account of the
  events which led the West Midlands Police Authority being involved.

  2. Mr Dear explained that on the Sunday following the tragedy he
  had been contacted by Sir Richard Barrett by 'phone and had been
  asked whether he would agree to being the assessor or the chief
  constable leading the investigation - or both (it had transpired
  later that he could not be the assessor). Mr Dear subsequently
  contacted Peter Wright (Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police)
  that afternoon to confirm the situation. Mr Dear mentioned that
  he had asked Mr Wright specifically whether he had understood that
  he was reporting to the enquiry to which Mr Wright replied that he
  did. Mr Dear added that it was his hope that in reporting
  directly to Lord Justice Taylor any suggestion of a police cover
  up could be countered. He then referred to telephone calls which
  he had made to the Home Office in the light of the statement which
  the Home Secretary was making to the House on Monday 17 April. He



                                           /said that he had
* E.R

    said that he had not been happy with the text of the draft
    statement and had made it clear at that time that he would not
    work to 2 masters but only to Lord Justice Taylor. He said that
    the draft had been amended, not exactly as he would have wished,
    but enough to have satisfied him. Because of his concern about
    this matter he had sought a meeting with Lord Justice Taylor at
    which it had been confirmed that there was only one enquiry. As
    regards the enquiry itself Mr Dear refered to the various
    investigtions which were taking place, eg, into the construction
    of the ground and who paid the stewards simply because
    Lord Justice Taylor wanted a thorough investigation. Given these
    circumstances Mr Dear said that he was absolutely certain that he
    was working for Lord Justice Taylor; that he was under his control
    completely and that therefore mutual aid could not be a matter for
    consideration.

     3.    Lord Ferrers said that he fully appreciated the concerns which
   4fcad been expressed but that as he understood it, the decision to
   ^wequest the assistance of the West Midland's was because Mr Wright
     believed that South Yorkshire were too close to the incident and
     that another force should be called in. This had led to
     Mr Wright's contacting Sir Richard who then contacted Mr Dear. In
     response to this Mr Dear said that South Yorkshire's involvement
     in the decision had not been mentioned by Sir Richard. Mr Addison
    was able to advise Mr Dear that there was nothing unusual in
     this: the Inspectorate often liaised between forces in this way
    when they were asked to advise on the possiblity that an
     investigation should be conducted by an outside force.

    5. Mr Addison referred to his recent meeting with officers of the
    South Yorkshire Authority, who, he said had accepted that the
    initiative had come from their Chief Constable. It was not
    surprising therefore that there should be some confusion although
    having heard what Mr Dear had to say he wholeheartedly accepted
    his account of his part in the events. The matter was clearly
    open to interpretation and it was quite possible that the Chief
    Constable of South Yorkshire had a different recollection. Mr
    Dear referred to the immense pressure which had been placed upon
    Mr Wright at the time and which had led him to contact
    Sir Richard. Noting Mr Dear's comments Mr Addison said that it
    was quite understandable that the invitation may have appeared to
    have come from the Home Office, but this was not the case. As far
    as the Home Office were concerned the distinction between the Lord
    Justice Taylor enquiry and the South Yorkshire investigation had
    always been recognised.

    6. Lord Ferrers referred to the Home Secretary's letter to Roger
    King MP (copy attached) in which it was made clear that additional
    -eosts would not be met by the West Midlands. It also had to be
    remembered, he said, that in practice, with the Home Office paying



                                             /51% generally through...
                                    -   2-
* E.R

        sioDor?e?r«i? fc^ ou9h police specific grant, taken with the Rate
        7 $k      I h     & Government would in effect be paying roughly
               V i ® the costs of the enquiry. Mr Ablett, while
        t Sh !    91119      existence of the communication referred to by
        guarantee?^ S      that the Authoritr ha* received no di?ect *

      r ™ ” r -Ablftfc referred to the bills which the Authority were now
     etc     He9said     that since
                                 ^ ings section
                                          as accommodation and telecommunications
     etc. He     said that                       14 of the Police Art
     apply the Authority (remaining of the view that ?hey had no? h ^ n
     ^ n ^ by.SOUth YorJcs^ re toconduct the investigation^ Sad no
                       ?a£uthe bllls* Moreover there was, in their view
             abouJ whether they could have lawfully paid for items such
     this sit^atioi°hveZhn -Un?er ?ection 14• TheY had been advised of
     i-hlt  situation by their legal adviser Mr Barnfield who confirmed
     that tins was indeed his understanding. Asked by Lord Ferrers
   rf^AhiJtt          k?d _c°£sulted with South Yorkshire about this aspect
                  replied that they had not. This he said was simply
    not in an° request had been made by South Yorkshire and this was
    not in any event covered by section 14 which dealt only with
    gave notice9tha?                "source grounds. As matters stood Mr Ablett
    that h i s A n t W i V h a v i n g no authority to pay, the result might be
          u     Authority would be forced to no longer retain building
    I ^ r £ e ei:5 "Sed for the Purposes of the L^es?igation                  9
    Invited by Lord Ferrers to comment Mr Addison said that the
    assistance given did not in his view fall strictly under
    Section 14, but that it was analogous. Moreover it was not
                °J °"e police £orce to invite              another to conduct an
           tigation on         its behalf. The most obvious example was in the
    others CHoSever ^ a”d aiscjPline.enquiries but there had been
    Home Office legal advisers.         P° lntS 181863 C°Uld be S0Ught £r0"'

    ?nV^ - Wi^ iamS <Treasurer> estimated that the cost of the
    investigation so far was c £2 million per month. This accounted
    £200°000 of6tha? accomm°aatjon - the accommodation coming to about
    £200,000 of that sum. if the Authority were not reimbursed on a
    month         h6 had calculated that the interest charges per
    month would be somewhere in the region of £50 K.

    it L?hatFi£rw «                  State o£ play as he understood
    force             ?    Yorkshire who had recommended that another
    torce conduct the investigation and that therefore it had alwav<?
    h^t£ accpeted by the Home Office reimbursement would be a matter
    between forces in the first instance, as was the case in nStJ.1
    iito the no?-5“    £ understood that the investigation was to look
    into the policing of South Yorkshire. Lord Justice Taylor's
    enquiry although in some ways connected was a separate matter.
    Having said this though Lord Ferrers said that he accepted that



                                                   /West Midlands had,

                                         -   3-
* E.R

        West Midlands had drawn quite a different conclusion. He referred
        again to the Home Secretary's letter to Mr King in which assurance
        was given that the West Midlands would not be expected to meet
        additional costs.

        10. In drawing the meeting to a close Lord Ferrers undertook to
        consider at the earliest and to write to the Authority advising
        them of what action they should take with regard to bills. He
        also promised to consider the cash-flow difficulties, to get clear
        what had transpired when asking the West Midlands Police to become
        involved and the extent to which the work was being undertaken by
        West Midlands was not specific to the South Yorkshire policing
        enquiry.




                                              BARBARA NICHOLSON
                                         Assistant Private Secretary



        30 May 1989

        Private Office, QAG.



        cc   Mr Walters
             Mr Yates
             Mr Chilcot
             HMCIC
             Mr Woodcock
             Mr Brownlow
             Mr Boys Smith
             Mr Malone-Lee
             Ms                   T.AR
             I’lL A u u i s o n
             Mr   Sandifb.
             nr   Nagier
             Mr   Whalley
             Ms   Ransford
             Mr   Lidington
   ^   J«*fn

                                              QUEEN ANNE’S CATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                            27 April 1989




          We have spoken in the House about the costs incurred by the West
Midlands police in their inquiries following the Hillsborough disaster.      You
and other West Midlands MPs are understandably anxious that these should not
fall on the West Midlands police authority.


          It   seems   to me quite clear that, wherever the costs fall, they
should not and do not fall to the West Midlands.    The Chief Constable of the
West Midlands was initially invited by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
to review all aspects of the police operation.       And subsequently it was
agreed that the results of these inquiries should be made available to the
public inquiry which I announced on 2A April to be conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor.


         It will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of how the
West Midlands police should be reimbursed.    But I can guarantee now that at
the end of the day no additional costs will be borne by the West Midlands.




                                    \         O
                                                                 /




Soger King, Esq., MP
