                                                                                                      §
                                                                         FO5 SPORTS
 The Sports Council                                                      t l i COUNCIL
                                                                       16 Upper Woburn Place
                                                                       London WC1H0QP
21 December 1989                                                       Tel: 01-3881277
                                                                       Fax:01-3835740
                                                                       Telex: 27830SP0RTC6
R M Wally                                                              Chairman: Peter 6. Yarranton
Room 662                                                               Vice Chairman:
The Home Office                                                        Professor J Allan Patmore B.Litt MA
                                                                       Director General: David Pickup
50 Queen A n n e 1s Gate
London
SW1
                                              *TUc.                          ln«vv<. JcM *

             /Mr U/aM^                    ^                          lLj?OV<S.   +-                 *xb>

                                                                            J?ov-J VvSUw^.
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ENQUIRY         A:v-e/v<
Thank you for your telephone call early this week when we discussed two main
issues in relation to which I have recorded below further information.

New Stadia                                                                                            i
We discussed the comments contained in paragraph 10 of the Council's
submission to the Enquiry in which we referred to the location of stadia. We
believe there is merit in clubs considering the extent to which they could
sell city centre sites and with the capital raised reinvest in new stadia on
peripheral cit.y sites particularly where there are good transport connections.

Examples of this type of development are as follows;

1.   Scunthorpe Football Club
2.   St Johnstone Football Club (Perth)
3.   Wycombe Wanderers Football Club
4.   Weymouth Football Club
5    Kingstonians Football Club
6.   Utrecht (Netherlands)

In addition we know of others which              currently   are   investigating         the
possibility of moving. These include:

1.    Southend Football Club - currently trying to resolve planning permission
2.    Birmingham City - possibly involving the National Exhibition Centre.
3.    Wimbledon Football Club
4.    Watford Football Club
5.    Luton Football Club
6.    Millwall Football Club
7.    Colchester Football Club
8.    Gillingham Football Club

Our difficulty lies in not having details at present of the financial
inplications of such moves or possible re-locations. If required we would be
happy to try to obtain the information.
                                                                                 2


Technical Advice from the Sports Council

We discussed the extent to which the Sports Council can and does provide
technical advice on the construction and management of different sports
facilities   including   stadia. Through the Councils' various units and
particularly its Facilities Unit and Technical Unit for Sport (TUS) we provide
an extensive range of advice and information on all aspects of facility
development including planning, location, design, management and economics. I
have enclosed a range of publications which illustrate the type of written
advice available to complement the Council's personal consultancy service. In
our discussions you mentioned your discussions with CONI and the parallel with
that organisation is very close - the Sports Council being recognised as the
source of objective information and advice on a range of relevant issues -by
local authorities, voluntary and professional clubs and by          commercial
consultancies.

If you thought it of value I would be more than happy to arrange a meeting
with my colleagues in TUS and Facilities to discuss any matters which may be
of value, for Lord Justice Taylor's final report.

Best. Wishes




               NATIONAL SERVICB5


Enc
