                                          /

       40-7. AI

       From:       R P Rhodes                 cc   Ms Spencc
                   F8 Division                     Mr Boys Smith ioy/r)
                   Ext 2367                        Miss Goo,)se
                   2 August 1990                   Mr Grant
                                                   Mr Goddard (o/r)
                                                   Mr Simmonds

       1.      Miss Nicholson
       2.      Mr Storr


       FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS: ISSUE OF CIRCULAR

       1.      The exclusion order scheme introduced in 1987 empowers
       the courts to impose orders on convicted football hooligans
       which make it an offence for them to at4end at matches in
       England and Wales. Since the Goverrment decided against
       proceeding with the national football membership scheme,
       exclusion orders remain the primary mechanism for keeping
       convicted hooligans out of football grounds in this country.

       2.   As the new football season is about to start it seems
       timely to remind those concerned of the existing provisions.
       A draft HO Circular is attached which is directed at both the
       police and the courts and which would also be circulated by
       the Crown Prosecution Service to Chief Crown Prosecutors under
       cover of a reminder of the need to apply for exclusion orders
       in appropriate cases.   The circular also reminds those
       involved of the courts' powers to impose attendance centre
       orders on 17-20 year olds.


       3.      I am conscious that we have been asked by the Home
       Secretary to give further thought to a scheme to enforce
       exclusions orders and in that respect the circular may seem to
       be premature. However aside from the further consultations
       which will be required it would take time to put any new
       scheme in place; primary legislation would be'required. Since
       that is so I think a case probably remains for issuing the




% 90
circular to ensure exclusion orders are used, particularly
since we have been told by the police that in certain areas
exclusion orders are not used at all.


4.   If the Horae Secretary agrees we would propose to issue
the attached draft circular on 20 August. We will submit
further advice on an enforcement scheme later.




                                        R P RHODES
48-6.JS                                                     D R A F T




To The Chief Officer of Police (England and Wales)
   The Chief Clerk to the Crown court
   The Clerk to the Justices
     (with a copy for the Chairman of the Bench for the
     information of the Justices)
   The Clerk to the Police Authority
   The Circuit Administrator
   The Clerk to the Magistrates Courts Committee
   The Courts Administrator

                                                       prffAugust   1990




Dear Sir



HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO       69/1990
FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS AND
ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS



This Circular reminds those concerned of the provisions of Part IV
of the Public Order Act 1986 which came into force on 1 August
1987 under which the courts have power to make exclusion orders,
prohibiting those convicted of football hooliganism offences from
attending prescribed football matches in England and Wales.        It
also reminds recipients of the courts' powers to make attendance
centre orders for people between 10 and 20 provided in the
Criminal Justice Act 1982.


FOOTBALL EXCLUSION ORDERS


2.      It had been intended that the exclusion order provisions
should cease to have effect after the introduction of the national
football membership scheme proposed by the Football Spectators Act
1989.     Following the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's final
report on the Hillsborough stadium disaster, the Government has
decided not to proceed with the scheme. Consequently the exclusion
order provisions remain in force, as a complementary measure to
the restriction order provisions introduced in the Football
Spectators Act 1989: exclusion orders prohibit attendance at
prescribed matches in England and Wales; restriction orders to
prevent attendance at key matches outside England and Wales.


3.   Home Office Circular No.39/1987 explains fully the provisions
of the exclusion order scheme.   A court may make an order where a
person is convicted of the type of offence set out in section 31
of the 1986 Act and when the court is satisfied that an order
would help to prevent violence or disorder at or in connection
with prescribed football matches.    Home Office Circular 31/1990
explains the provisions of the restriction order scheme under
Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989.


Duration of Exclusion Orders


4.   An exclusion order must last for a minimum of three months.
There is no maximum time limit set; this is at the discretion of
the courts.    In determining the duration of the order, courts will
have regard to the nature of the offence that gave rise to the
order, the age of the offender and what is known of his general
background, character and past record;    when making orders of a
short duration the courts will also wish to bear in mind the
football "close season" which lasts generally from late May to
late July and the likelihood that short-term orders made to
incorporate all or part of that period might have little practical
effect.


Enforcement


5.   Home Office Circular 39/1987 advised police forces on the
procedures to obtain photographs of those on whom exclusion orders
are imposed.   To increase the effectiveness with which exclusion
orders can be enforced, and the likelihood of detecting those who
enter a football ground in breach of an order, forces should
forward details of all exclusion orders made (and terminated),
including a photograph of the offender, to the National Football
Intelligence Unit.     These details will be compiled to form a
national index for issue to and use by football intelligence and
liaison officers in local police forces.       Whilst it will not be
possible for the police to check every person entering a football
ground, experienced closed circuit television operators who are
aware of likely trouble spots in grounds will be able check
photographs of those subject to orders when scanning the crowd
during the game.     Checks against those photographs should also be
made when viewing videos of any disorder after the event.


ATTENDANCE CENTRE ORDERS


6.   An exclusion order cannot be free-standing.       It must be
coupled with the sentence, probation order or order for absolute
or conditional discharge imposed for the offence.       An attendance
centre order may sometimes be the appropriate sentence to
accompany an exclusion order.    Attendance centre orders are
available for young people aged 10 to 20 (inclusive) who have been
convicted of imprisonable offences.     They require the young people
to attend the centre for 2-3 hours, normally on alternate
Saturdays, up to a maximum of 24 hours for those under 17 and 36
hours for those aged 17 to 20.     Programmes include physical
training and instruction in activities making constructive use of
leisure time.   Junior centres, for those under 17, are available
in most parts of the country.     Senior centres, for those aged 17
to 20, are available in the main centres of population.


7.   Any enquiries about this circular should be addressed to
Sue Jago (071-273 2850).


                            Yours faithfully



                              J L GODDARD
                              F8 Division
