18 February 1998                                                0171 273 4610

      HOME SECRETARY PUBLISHES HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

Home Secretary Jack Straw today published the report of the Hillsborough
Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

The report concludes that there is no basis for reconsidering previous
criminal, disciplinary, public inquiry or inquest decisions regarding the
disaster.

Mr Straw announced the findings, and the Government’s acceptance of them,
in an oral statement to Parliament today.

He also had a meeting with the Hillsborough families to explain his response
and give them copies of the Scrutiny report.

The main conclusions of the report are that:

       •   the conclusions of the Taylor report are still valid and there is
           therefore no basis for a further public inquiry;

       • there is no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
         the inquest;

       •   nor is there any material which Director of Public Prosecutions or the
           disciplinary authorities which might cause them to reconsider the
           decisions they have already taken; and

       •   none of the evidence which the Scrutiny was asked to consider
           added anything significant to the evidence which was available to
           Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.

Emphasising his feelings for the plight of the families, Mr Straw said:

       “No-one could have anything but most profound sympathy with all the
       families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. W e can scarcely
       begin to comprehend what they have suffered, and I know that my
       announcement today will leave them deeply angry and disappointed.

       “I fully understand why those who lost loved ones should feel betrayed
       by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and
       for the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
       changes which resulted from the Taylor Inquiry should mean that such a
       disaster will never be repeated.”

Mr Straw said that the Scrutiny was the latest in a series of lengthy and
detailed examinations of evidence in this case, and that the main reason for
the disaster - the failure of police control - had been identified by Lord Taylor
in his report.

He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report was thorough and
comprehensive. He said:

       “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
       which has been put to him. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
       information presented to him, whether that information came from
       individuals or official bodies.

       “I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered his report very
       carefully and we have decided to accept its conclusions.”

        “With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time
       some new information may become available which was not known at
       the relevant time.

       “There were many thousands of people present at Hillsborough on that
       awful day and millions more watched it on their television screens.
       There will always be some new shred of information which might be
       gleaned.

       “But that does not always mean that the previous outcomes would
       have been any different. W e must be satisfied that any re-opening of
       previous proceedings would be merited, and that any new information
       is not simply new, but also material to those proceedings.

Adding that the report highlighted the shortcomings of the police disciplinary
system, Mr Straw said:

       “There is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough
       families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,

              “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
              personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
              disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their jo b”.

       “W hat happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we
       have to improve the current police discipline arrangements, and I will
       be responding fully to the recent recommendations of the Home Affairs
       Select Committee shortly.”
Mr Straw also agreed with the Scrutiny’s finding that there should rarely be
the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into major disaster. He said:

       “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally
       difficult task which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest.

       “I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present form
       is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind.

       “If no inquest had been necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have
       accepted as an excellent report, would then have remained ,
       unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.”

Mr Straw concluded:

       “I recognise that it will be difficult and painful for the families of those
       who died to accept the conclusions of this report. I am only too aware
       of their feelings of grief and betrayal. But the implementation of Lord
       taylor’s recommendations brought about a sea change in the way
       football matches are run and policed. This, together with the proposed
       changes to the inquest and police discipline system, should mean that
       no other families will have to go through the same terrible experiences
       ever again.”

N OTES TO EDITO RS

1. The Home Secretary announced the Scrutiny on 30 June 1997.

2. It was carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. His terms of reference
were:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

       (a)   to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

       (b)   to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for
              the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
              responsibilities; or

       (c)   to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
              disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
              evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
              justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
              Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
              (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
             considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
             duties;

             and to advise whether there is any other action which should be
             taken in the public interest.

3. A summary of the report is attached. Media copies of the Home Secretary’s
statement and the Scutiny report are available from Home Office Press Office
on 0171 273 4610. Non media copies of the report can be obtained from
HMSO, ISBN no...................... , price...
