From: Jim Bradley
      Police Resources Unit
      Room 614, QAG
      S : 273 2996

        February 1999                                        cc Mr Howarth
                                                                Permanent Secretary
                                                                John Lyon
                                                                Paul Pugh
                                                                Peter Edmundson
                                                                Rosemary Davies, LAB
                                                                Lucy King,CD
                                                                Justin Russell
                                                                Ed Owen

1. Mr Boateng

2. Home Secretary

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL
PROCEEDINGS: LETTER FROM CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH
YORKSHIRE

Issue

A reply to the letter of 16 February (at Annex A) from the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire seeking a special payment of HO grant to help meet legal costs in a judicial
review.

Timing

2. Urgent.

Summary

3. The Chief Constable has applied for judicial review of his Police Authority’s
decision that it has no powers to fund the legal costs of the two retired police officers
who are facing criminal proceedings as a result of a private prosecution brought by
families of the victims of the Hillsborough disaster, the Hillsborough Families
Support Group (HFSG). As the matter is of national importance to the police service,
the Chief Constable has asked for the Home Office to provide financial assistance
with the legal costs of the judicial review, which could amount to £50,000 each for the
force and for the authority.

4. The decision that the police authority had no powers to pay the defence costs of the
former officers involved in these proceedings was taken locally by the authority itself.
Equally the decision to apply for the judicial review was one taken by the chief
constable. These were properly matters for local decision. The Home Office was not


My documents: syorks4
involved. The Home Office has given general advice to police authorities on the
matter of financial assistance to officers in legal proceedings (Home Office Circular
4/1988) but we have not expressed a view on this case. Given this background, there
are no grounds for providing financial assistance in this case.

4. In practical terms, there is no separate pot of police grant available from which we
could provide assistance even if Ministers wanted to. In any event, South Yorkshire
Police Authority have recently told us that they had set aside £500,000 for legal costs
in this case. The Authority have also estimated that they will have unearmarked
reserves (general balances) of £6 million as at March 1999.


Recommendation

5. That the Home Office should not provide financial assistance to South Yorkshire
Police for this purpose and that you (Home Secretary) reply to the Chief Constable as
in the draft at Annex B.

Consideration

6. The background to this case is set out in Annex C. South Yorkshire Police
authority had previously agreed to fund the defence costs of the 2 former officers. It
appears that they were relying on Home Office Circular 4/1998 - Annex D - as
authority for payment of costs in this case.

7. The circular was issued last year after full consultation with ACPO, APA,
Superintendents Association, and the Police Federation. It was approved by Mr
Michael. It clearly states that the powers in sections 88(4) and (5) of the Police Act
1996 enabling police authorities to provide financial assistance to officers in legal
proceedings apply to civil proceedings only. (The provisions in the 1996 Act simply
re-enact the original provisions in the Police Act 1964). The circular goes on to say at
paragraph 5 that “section 88(4) does not apply to criminal proceedings , but police
authorities may wish to consult their legal advisers as to whether they have any other
power to provide such assistance.”

8. The circular goes on to refer to section 111 of the Local Government Act 1972
which enables police authorities to do anything “which is calculated to facilitate, or is
conducive or incidental to, the discharge of any of their functions”. The circular does
not proffer advice on whether this provision provides authority for payment of
financial assistance to officers in criminal proceedings. It states that this is a matter for
the police authority to decide on the basis of legal advice.

9. The circular did not conclude that police authorities have power to offer financial
assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings. Following my earlier submission
of 3 February, the Home Secretary agreed that officials should reply to the Police
Authority’s solicitors’ letter seeking clarification of the HO Circular 4/1998. A copy
of my reply of 4 February, which was cleared with Legal Advisers Branch is at Annex
E. On the following day the police authority reversed its previous decision.


 My documents: syorks4
10. Against the background of full consultation with ACPO and the other staff
associations before the issue of HOC 4/1998, it is rather surprising to see that the
letter from John Newing , ACPO President which is attached to the Chief Constable’s
letter, describes the police authority’s decision not to provide financial assistance as
being “clearly contrary to current practice and understanding”.

11. The Chief Constable’s letter goes on to say that, if the High Court rules that the
Police authority is correct in its interpretation of the law, the 3 police staff
associations will seek an urgent amendment to legislation to give police authorities
power to provide financial assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings.


Handling/Presentational Issues

11. Mr Howarth has seen the Chief Constable’s letter. He feels strongly that the
Home office should not provide any financial assistance for this purpose. To do so
would be wholly out of keeping with the position Ministers had previously taken and
would re-open some of the wounds which were exposed following the Stuart- Smith
review of evidence.




Jim Bradley




My documents: syorks4
                                                       ANNEX C


Background
Former Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard
Murray of the South Yorkshire Police were the two most senior officers on duty at the
Hillsborough disaster in April 1989. Although no criminal proceedings were brought
against them following the inquiry into the disaster, it was recommended that both
officers face disciplinary action. Duckenfield retired from the force on medical
grounds before disciplinary proceedings could be brought and it was not possible to
continue against Murray on what amounted to a joint charge.

2. The Hillsborough Family Support Group has brought a private prosecution against
both men. They face charges of manslaughter in respect of two of those who died at
Hillsborough. They also face an alternative charge of wilfully neglecting to perform a
public duty (otherwise known as ‘misconduct in a public office’) based on the same
circumstances as the main allegations. Duckenfield is also charged with ‘perverting
the course of justice’ in that he lied about the circumstances in which gate C at the
ground was opened.

3. South Yorkshire Police Authority had originally decided to fund the defence costs
of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Dean-Murray. Maria Eagle MP tabled a number of
Questions on this issue in the last month. She has a particular interest in this subject as
it is her constituents who are pursuing the private prosecutions of 2 officers involved.
Ms Eagle asked, among other things, whether the guidance in Home Office Circular
4/1998 applied in this case. Helen Jackson MP for Sheffield, Hillsborough also raised
the issue at Oral Questions on 15 February - Hansard extract attached.

4. The circular, copy attached, provides updated guidance to police authorities on
financial assistance to police officers in legal proceedings, and distinguishes between
officers involved in civil proceedings, criminal proceedings and other types of legal
proceedings. The background to this was a request from ACPO and other police staff
organisations that a previous HO circular issued in 1987 should be amended to
include retired, as well as serving, officers. From this it emerged that the 1987
guidance had been misleading in that there is no express statutory provision enabling
police authorities to give financial assistance to officers facing criminal charges. The
law enables financial assistance to be given only to officers involved in civil
proceedings.

5. HOC 4/1998 explains the statutory vicarious liability under s88 of the Police Act
1996 for officers involved in civil proceedings, and that this does not apply to
criminal proceedings. It suggests that police authorities may wish to consult their legal
advisers as to whether they have any other power to provide such assistance, but that
it is for police authorities to decide in the particular circumstances of a case, and on
the basis of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance available to officers in
criminal proceedings.




My documents: syorks4
6. The Circular does not offer any guidance as to whether it should apply to any
particular circumstances or type of case, but states the underlying principle that it is
important for police officers to be able to carry out their duties in the confidence that
their police authority will support them , if they act in good faith and exercise their
judgement reasonably.

7. We had been informed that the police authority had set aside around £500,000 to
meet legal costs arising from the Hillsborough disaster and the outcome of the Mr
Justice Stewart-Smith report. This funding was to be made available to meet the
defence costs of Duckenfield and Murray. On 5 February the police authority
reversed its earlier decision and decided that it had no powers to provide financial
assistance to officers facing criminal proceedings.

8. Solicitors for Bernard Murray wrote to Home Office on 1 February (letter passed to
PRU on 19 February) essentially saying that it was wrong to that Mr Murray should
be left to fund his own defence costs or rely on legal aid. The HO official reply of 19
February simply referred to the application for judicial review and said that we had
nothing to add to the advice in the Circular.




 My documents: syorks4
                                                       ANNEX B

DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY HOME SECRETARY

M 11 Hedges QPM LLB
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



JUDICIAL REVIEW OF POLICE AUTHORITY DECISION REGARDING
FUNDING THE DEFENCE COSTS OF POLICE OFFICERS FACING
PRIVATE PROSECUTION

Thank you for your letter of 16 February.

I fully recognise the sensitivities of this case and I am grateful to you for drawing the
present issues to my attention. I have noted your decision to apply for leave to
challenge the police authority’s decision that it has no powers to fund the legal costs
of the two former officers.

Home Office Circular 4/1998 on financial assistance to police officers involved in
legal proceedings was issued after full consultation with ACPO, the Police
Superintendents’ Association, the Police Federation, and with the APA. If ACPO,
the other staff associations, or the APA believe that the legislation needs to be
changed or the guidance needs to be reviewed, I would of course consider any points
which they might wish me to address. For the present, I have nothing further to add to
the advice in HO Circular 4/1998 and I am afraid that I cannot find grounds to justify
providing financial assistance to help meet the legal costs of the judicial review
which you and the police authority will incur. It was entirely a local decision to seek
judicial review. It seems reasonable that the costs should be borne locally.




My documents: syorks4
