                                                     26            itou
                                                                          nee
o to                                                                            " Ms S Ja.se   (o/r




   Pr^biTION DAY DEBATE ON TAYLOR REPORT: HOKE SECRETARY1S
   PEECK

  . aznacn a :irs; crarr of a Police Department contribution no
  -He riorns bS-CZT6:r.c-irv s   sosscr.   i.r. urns C c b s .t£                  30
   anuarv ,


        1          have assumed that the speech's opening sassage will
 cover safety issues.             My contribution could slot in after
 "*c -■ m s     opening paragraphs cover poJ.icing for crowd control
 and safety.        Later paragraphs cover policing hooliganism and
 nhe general strategy for hooliganism.


 o.          ~ne parag_apn on new specific offences * have included
 nne last sentence in an attempt to block any DoE =-u +-<=t.t^4-
 commit the Home Office in detail, as Mr Moynihan clearly
wished to do yesterday.


 4.     I have not attempted a peroration on the gxounds that
your overview of the material may make it easier for you to do
this.


5.      Background material and some defensive lines to take are
being assembled and can be provided on Monday 29 January.




                                             J L GODDARD
                                             FS Division



2 6 Januarv 19:
5 3 - 1 . JS



I turn now to the role of the police in ensuring safety and
effective crowd control at sports events.      A key issue here is
the liaison between the club and the police.      There must be no
opportunity for each to stand aside thinking that the other       s
dealing with the matter.   I am particulary grateful therefore
for the thoughtful discussion in the Report [206-214] of which
functions should be discharged by the police and which by the
club's stewards.   I agree with Lord Justice Taylor that the
question is one of balance [209].


If the balance tips towards heavier police ^involvement, there
would be substantial resource implications with which chief
    .                                  7

officers, police authorities and I, as Home Secretary, would
have to be concerned.


 If the balance tipped too far the other way stewards might
 find themselves expected to deal with matters which call for
 the authority and experience of the police.     Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendation (broadly repeated from his interim
 report) for a written statement of the respective functions of
 club and police for crowd safety and control will, I believe,
 enable the right balance for each ground to be struck in the
 light of local circumstances.    I endorse this recommendation
 [and I welcome particularly the clarification that the written
 document should be seen as a statement of intent and not as a
 legally enforceable contract].


 The proper balance between police and stewards depends very
 much upon the quality of the stewards.     I am sure that Lord
 Justice Taylor is right to look to the clubs for an
 improvement in this quality.    I welcome his recommendation
 [R.42] for clubs to recruit and train sufficient fit, active
 and robust stewards.                                       *




                                  1
increasing the capacity of the stewards would reduce the^
clubs'   call for special police services.        Such a reduction
would release police officers for duties outside the ground,
not necessarily connected with football: a benefit to the
public generally.

For these reasons,     and because it is right in principle, I
support the Report's recommendation [R.53] that police
authorities should ensure that charges made to clubs for
policing inside grounds are realistic.         I shall encourage
consistency of police authority practice with regard to
charging,    subject to the need, recognised in the report,        for
local discretion.


The Report also makes recommendations about the training of
 police commanders [ R . 5 2 ]   and of police officers whose duties
 require them to recognise crowd densities and to understand
 crowd dynamics     [R.12,   16].   I endorse these and the other
 recommendations dealing with police planning.         I have no doubt
 that chief officers will respond to these recommendations in
 the same positive way that they did to those in the interim
 report.




                                        2
Lord Justice Taylor has some wise things to say in his report
about hooliganism.      Like many before him, he has concluded
that there is no single measure which will defeat football
hooliganism and even a package of measures will take time to
have effect.   [425.]


In recent years the Government has been attacking the hooligan
problem on many fronts: we have taken action against alcohol
abuse in the Sporting Events     (Control of Alcohol etc) Act
19 85; we have introduced in section 5 of the Public Order Act
1936 a new offence of disorderly behaviour;      the police have
developed their tactics by making effective use of closed
circuit television (CCTV) at grounds and by increasing the
gathering and use of intelligence on hard-core hooligans.
At the
     ,
       end of 1989 we established the National Football
                                          i


Intelligence Unit (NFIU).      It has already made a good start in
compiling and collating centrally intelligence on the most
serious and persistent football hooligans.


Turning to hooliganism abroad,     at our initiative there has
been set up, under the TREVI arrangements for cooperation
within the European Community, a n .Information network of
permanent football correspondents.      We have developed
guidelines on the policing of international matches which we
have put before our TREVI partners and which have been warmly
welcomed.   We are cooperating fully with the Italian
authorities in providing advice and assistance for their
policing of British supporters attending the World Cup.



Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 has been welcomed
by Lord Justice Taylor.      Under Part II of the Act courts may
impose restriction orders on those convicted of football-
related offences as defined in the Act.       Those subject to
restriction orders will be prevented from travelling to key
matches abroad.   I believe its provisions will have a salutary
effect on those hooligans whose disgraceful behaviour abroad
has so blackened the reputation of football.            We plan to
implement Part II as soon as the practical arrangements and
the remaining Parliamentary procedures have been completed.
[This is expected to be in early May.]


Following bilateral agreements with other countries our courts
will be able to impose restriction orders on offenders
convicted abroad of corresponding football-related ofrences.
We are giving priority to concluding an agreement with the
Italian authorities.      We aim to have these arrangements m
place before the World Cup.           I expect the provisions of Part
II to have a useful deterrent effect on the behaviour of
football spectators abroad.


Taken together these measures against hooliganism which I have
 described are having an effect.             Lord Justice Taylor notes the
 small rise in attendance at matches in each of the last 3
 years.     His evidence suggests that measures taken in the last
 couple of years have reduced violent misbehaviour inside
 grounds.

 He expresses,    therefore,    cautious optimism about the situation
 inside grounds.     [280]     But we cannot be satisfied with this
 position.     Even less can we be satisfied about misbehaviour
 outside grounds and on journeys to and from matches.


 I am determined that we shall p u r s u e vigorously our strategy
 against hooliganism.        We shall encourage the enhancement of
 CCTV systems and the training of their operators.             There is
 great potential here: good o p t i c a l e v i d e n c e identifies the
 culprit securely and may prevent him wasting the court s time
 by contesting the charge.           We shall also develop to the full
 the potential of the        NFIU.     [A computer system is being
 procured as a matter of urgency and is expected to be fully
  operational shortly.]        Lord Justice Taylor sees the work of
  the unit as an important element in the future strategy for
  reducing hooliganism,        I agree with him.       The NFIU will


                                         4
increase local forces' effectiveness by enabling them to
target their resources on the ringleaders and organisers of
violence.


Lord Justice Taylor recommends the creation of some new
offences specific to behaviour in football grounds.         He also
recommends consideration of applying attendance centre orders
and electronic tagging to convicted football hooligans.             I
shall consider these matters sympathetically against the
background of the existing provisions of the criminal law.
But it would be wrong for me to give an instant commitment to
propose to Parliament changes which require careful
consideration and consultation with the police and other
interested bodies.                              >


In discussing strategy for combatting 'football hooliganism I
have considered first the policing of football and the
provisions of the criminal justice system.       But football
hooliganism has taken root and flourished in the particular
circumstances in which football is played and watched.          It is
right,    therefore,   for a part of our response to hooliganism to
be to look to change those circumstances.           [The national
Membership Scheme,      if it had proved workable, would have
changed the atmosphere at matches by excluding the hooligan
element.]     There is a great responsibility here which rests on
the clubs and the football authorities.       [I have already dealt
with the onus on them to Improve facilities and I have dealt
with our approach to all-seater stadia.]       I have in mind
particularly their responsibility for deciding who shall be
admitted to their grounds.       Membership schemes of various
sorts are discussed in chapter 10 of the Report.          Lord Justice
Taylor recognises the practical difficulties and limitations
of such schemes.       Although he stops short of making a formal
recommendation for the introduction of an away members only
scheme he urges its. further consideration.         I hope that the
football authorities and individual clubs will take his             %
advice.
