 *

                                                                       ASG/89/12

                    THE INSTITUTION OF STRUCTURAL ENGINEERS




                            APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS

                                           5th draft




     This draft has been prepared as a result of the discussion on the 4th draft (ASG/89/3)
     at the meeting on 9 May 1989 and written comments sent in by members thereafter.

     This draft will be discussed at a meeting of the Committee on Thursday, 14 September
     1989 when it is expected that the interim report by Lord Justice Taylor will be available




JULY 1989
 AD HOC COMMITTEE ON APPRAISAL OF SPORTS GROUNDS

 co N S T m m o N


 M G T Dickson BA MS CEng MIStructE (Chairman)
  (Buro Happold)
 B K Bardhan-Roy BE CEng FIStructE FICE
   (Jan Bobrowski 3c Partners)
 Professor D V Canter PhD FBPsS FBIM
   (University of Surrey)
 J F Dickie BSc PhD CEng MIStructE
   (University of Manchester)
 M G Green BEng CEng MIStructE MICE
  (Buro Happold)
*A J M Heselden FIFireE
   (Fire Research Station)
 D Kaye CEng FIStructE
   (Ove Arup 3c Partners)
 J R Partington CEng MIStructE
   (Lancashire County Council)
y B B Pigott BA BAI(Dublin) CEng MICE
    (Fire Research Station)
 A F K Shaw BSc(Hons) CEng MIStructE MICE
   (Leeds City Council)
 R J C Stanton CEng MICE MIHT
   (G Maunsell 3c Partners)
 B Stickley CEng FIStructE
   (Home Office)
 S Thorbum FEng FIStructE FICE FASCE FIHT FGS
   (Thorbum Associates)
 O L Turner OBE ARIBA
   (Department of the Environment)
 R J W Milne BSc (Secretary)
   (The Institution of Structural Engineers)


 Special contributions have also been provided by:
 Professor A Bolton MScTech PhD FEng FIStructE FICE
   (previously with Heriot-Watt University)
 N J Cook DSc(Eng) PhD CEng MIStructE
   (Building Research Station)
 T V Lawson PhD BSc DIC CEng FRAeS
   (University of Bristol)
 Jake Pauls
   (Life Safety Specialist, Hughes Associates Inc., USA)


* Until retirem ent in mid-1988
y From May 1989
K


        CONTENTS

        FOREWORD

        1   SCOPE

        2   PLANNING MATTERS2 WHAT MANAGEMENT SHOULD KNOW
             2.1 Regulations and safety
             2.2 Management considerations
                 2.2.1   Planning life safety requirements
                 2.2.2   Preparation of drawings of sports grounds
                 2.2.3   Access for emergency vehicles
                 2.2.4   Considerations affecting capacity
                 2.2.5 Division of ground
                 2.2.6 Signposting
                 2.2.7 Exit gates
            2.3  Refurbishment and reconstruction without disruption to dub activities
                 2.3.1   General
                 2.3.2 Preplanning
                 2.3.3 Control of unruly behaviour
                 2.3.4 Spectator comfort
    3       DESIGN MATTERS
            3.1   Ground aspects of design and safety
            3.2  Other aspects
            3.3  Usage
                 3.3.1    Place in the community
                 3.3.2    Managing grounds safely
                 3.3.3    Additional facilities beneath stands
                 3.3.4    Comfort
                 3.3.5    Viewing and sightlines
                 3.3.6    Circulatory space
            3.4  Safety of spectators
                 3.4.1 Home Office guide
                 3.4.2 Deviations
                 3.4.3 Information transmission
            3.5  Structural safety
                 3.5.1   Appraisal and Codes
            3.6  Loading
                 3.6.1   Permanent loads and load combination
                 3.6.2   Vertical imposed floor loads
                 3.6.3   Imposed roof loads
                 3.6.4    Wind loads
                 3.6.5   Imposed horizontal surge loads
                 3.6.6    Dynamic loads
                 3.6.7    Handrail loads
                 3.6.8   Crush-barrier loadings
            3.7  Structural safety in fire
                 3.7.1    Fire resistance
                 3.7.2    Smoke venting

    4       FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
            4.1   Fire safety appraisal strategy
                  4.1.1    Allocation of stands to two categories
                  4.1.2    Category 1: stands
                  4.1.3    Category 2: stands
                  4.1.4    Circulation areas


                                         I
4.2    Guidance for assessing minimum standard of construction and planning
       4.2.1 General
       4.2.2 Compartmentation/protection of tiers
       4.2.3   Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
       4.2.4   Measures to prevent or retard early fire growth
       4.2.5   Fire resistance of structure and supplementary stands
       4.2.6 Fire resistance appraisal
4.3   Guidance far assessming minimum standard for management activities
      and related action fire precautions
      4.3.1 Quality assurance for larger facilities
      4.3.2 Emergency procedures and staff training
      4.3.3 Public-address system
      4.3.4 Fire detection (fire alarm systems)
      4.3.5 Fire loading
      4.3.6 Contents
      4.3.7 Litter
      4.3.8 Provision of fire-fighting equipment
      4.3.9 Measures to restrict the extent of fire spread in later stages
4.4   Fire and smoke assessment
      4.4.1 Smoke assessment
      4.4.2 Smoke control measures
      4.4.3 Restriction of flame travel under roofs
4.5   Provision of additional fire precautions to extend means of escape
      time
4.6   Covered grounds
4.7   New stands and covered grounds

CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT
5.1 General
5.2 Passageway (dockages
5.3 Flow rates
5.4 Sequence of calculation
5.5 Control of crowd flow in emergency
    5.5.1   Entry control
    5.5.2   Exit control
5.6 Crush barriers

STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL
6.1  General approach
6.2  Existing survey drawings
6.3 Survey of condition and record of findings
6.4 Potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard fabric
     6.4.1    Drawings
     6.4.2    Inspection
     6.4.3    Recording of results of condition
6.5  Potentially combustible materials and building fabric
6.6 Testing of materials and elements
6.7 Testing of crush barriers/handrails
6.8 Appraisal of effects of wind
     6.8.1    Wind tunnel tests
     6.8.2    Analysis of the effects of dynamic loading
     6.8.3    Resonant wind loading
     6.8.4    Spectator loading
     6.8.5    Regular inspection of slender structures
    6.9    Appraisal of structures against disproportionate
    6.10   Replacement or strengthening of doubtful elements

7   TEMPORARY STANDS, FLOODLIGHT PYLONS, ETC.
    7.1 Temporary stands
    7.2 Other structures

8   ELECTRICAL LAYOUTS

APPENDIX A1        DAY-TO-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX A2        DRAFT RULES FOR INSTRUCTION OF REWARDS ON EVENT
                   DAYS
APPENDIX B         GROUND FLOW RATES
APPENDIX C         PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS
APPENDIX D         TSTTNG OF CRUSH BARRIERS
APPENDIX E         SIGHTLINES AND VIEW DISTANCES
APPENDIX F         SPECIMEN DRAWINGS REQUIRED FOR APPRAISAL
APPENDIX G         SPECIMEN LICENCE CERTIFICATE
APPENDIX H         BIBLIOGRAPHY
ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT
FOREWORD


In July 1986, the Institution of Structural Engineers initiated an ad hoc committee
to bring together all current technical knowledge relevant to the appraisal of sports
grounds and their individual elements. The Committee's task was to establish a
fully referenced body of knowledge within three years which would be complementary
to the Guide to safety of sports grounds (HMSO 1976). This Guide, first published
in 1975, had itself been reissued as a result of discussions by a technical panel chaired
by Mr Martin Killoran. This panel had been set up to advise Mr Justice Popplewell
in his inquiry following the tragedies at Birmingham, Bradford and Hysel.

It is hoped that this report will help engineers and other professionals undertake
the difficult task of appraising the many existing sports grounds in the UK and
elsewhere. The task is to provide uniform and acceptable levels of safety to the
public users of these grounds under aU operating conditions. However, the location,
age, size, condition and acceptable spectator capacity of individual grounds and
their stands vary widely.

The establishment of satisfactory and consistent overall performance of such facilities
throughout the country and for all conditions requires reliable engineering 'methods'
based on accepted scientific criteria. To effect appraisal satisfactorily, there has
to be a thorough understanding of how the ground will be managed and operated
and how orderly entry, containment and egress of spectators will be planned for
and managed, even in an emergency. This requires appraisal which addresses the
interrelated parameters dealt with in the separate sections of this report as a
complete system.

Knowledge of some of these parameters does not particularly fall within the
professional experience of members of the Institution of Structural Engineers, whose
task it often is to adjudge the condition and maximum allowable capacity of sports
grounds. Membership of this committee therefore consisted of members of the
Institution with a wide range of relevant professional experience, and members from
other allied technical professions whose primary skills extended the range of the
committee's discussions.

Inevitably in its careful deliberations the committee has encountered some areas
where current knowledge in the public domain appears inadequate. It is intended
that some of these areas are addressed in the appendices to this report. Regrettably
too, there has been the further tragedy at Hillsborough. So further consideration
of aspects of this report may be necessary following the publication of Mr Justice
Taylor's Inquiry expected later this year.

Nevertheless, it has been our aim to provide a properly referenced document which
is as complete as possible in technical m atters. This report will then be able to
form a base for broadening the discussion to the sports authorities, ground managers,
police and other professional bodies concerned with the operation, appraisal and
design of sports grounds. There is an urgent need both to eliminate risk of further
failure and to increase the chance of success and appeal of such facilities.




                                                                        M G T DICKSON
                                                                              Chairman
                                                                     ad hoc Committee
July 1989                                                   Appraisal of Sports Grounds
'1     SCOPE
      Broadly, the recommendations of this report can be applied
      to all grounds and structures of assembly use that provide
      permanent (or temporary) seating or standing facilities
      for the public. Generically, in this report, such places
      are referred to as sports grounds. The range of sporting
      and leisure events, including occasional events is wide,
      but includes soccer, rugby, cricket, tennis, greyhound
      and horseracing, certain athletics, swimming and other
      spectacular events.

      It is intended that the report be complementary to the
      Guide to safety a t sports grounds to improve the knowledge
      of and communication between different categories of
      person concerned in the operation of sports grounds.

       It is aimed primarily at advising on life safety in existing
       sports grounds. As such, it attem pts to take account
       of the constraints and difficulties that are present within
      these grounds. It is important to distinguish between
      life safety and danger from unruly crowd elements.
      Although it is not a design brief for new construction
      work or total reconstruction a t sports grounds, the principles
      may well still be applicable. Such work should not be
      to a standard lower than that set out here, and the scope
      offered by new design work should lead to better standards
      than can be achieved at grounds already built with regard
      to reliable standards of life safety.

     In particular, this publication aims at providing methods
     and reference material to help establish an even level
     of safe spectator capacity, ingress and egress in respect
     of the arrangement, size and condition of all elements
     of that ground, and of its level of management.

     It is to act as a reference source to the multi-faceted
     problem of refurbishing, appraising, or designing sports
     grounds and of establishing the maximum approved capacity
     of each section of the ground in relation to its layout,
     construction materials and condition. It also aims at
     developing an overall engineering methodology and body
     of scientific knowledge to enable competent and
     professionally qualified personnel to carry out reliable
     and complete appraisal of existing sports grounds.

     As such, this publication provides a companion to Appraisal        Appraisal of existing
     of existing structures first published by the Institution          structures, Institution of
     of Structural Engineers in July 1980. In conjunction with          Structural Engineers,
     the Guide to safety at sports grounds, it emphasises the           July 1980
     need to ’secure reasonable safety at the stadium’ by seeing
     that obvious defects such as trip hazards, weak handrails,
     obstructed exit routes or impaired or inappropriate
     structural elements are rectified, and that exit routes
     are properly signed and available at all times.

     One particular such risk in many existing stands is the
     existence of unprotected combustible construction. This
     report has therefore developed a method whereby the
     maximum permissible time for evacuation to an area
     of safety can be assessed against the likely fire hazards,
     compartmentation     available,  standards    of   egress,
     construction, etc. and the level of effective organization
     and management.

                                            5*
                                                                >




Assessment on this bases for fire safety is given in
Section 4.

Above all, the report is aimed at achieving structural
adequacy under all the relevant loadings and conditions,
both of the overall construction and its individual elements,
and the elimination by methodical appraisal of potential
hazards that result from the presence of dense crowds,
their behaviour and their movements. Section 3, 5 and
6 (and for temporary events Section 7) deal with this aspect
of appraisal.

Safety of crowds cannot reasonably be achieved without
carefully considered action, and organized management
techniques applied both to the day-to-day running and
dunng public occupation. This is therefore addressed
as an important factor in Section 2 in some detail.

Since the process of appraisal for safety in such situations
is an interactive process, this document is addressed to
all the following persons:

   directors and managers of sports clubs who must run
   clubs to a budget and provide a service to the customer
   that can be afforded and which is satisfying, safe and
   controllable

   engineers, architects and other professional consultants
   engaged by the clubs' managers to appraise, design
   the refurbishment and organize any necessary
   maintenance

   public officers responsible for approving measures
   for refurbishment and maintenance, and for licencing
   sports grounds for their various uses.




                                      &
2   SHOULD*KNOlfATTERS                *    WHAT      MANAGEMENT

    2.1       REGULATIONS AND SAFETY

              The Safety at sports grounds Act 1987 imposes a
              licensing system on sports grounds* with a capacity
              of more than 10 000 and individual stands having
              a capacity of 500 or more. The implications of
              the Act for club managements are far reaching.
              In future managements will need to be aware not
              only of the regulations and associated documents
              but also of what measures will need to be implemented
              (see Appendix G for specimen licence certificate).

              Building Regulations are also relevant and would
              apply to new stands and to certain alterations to
              existing stands. The main regulations ares

              The Building Regulations 1985 (for England & Wales)
              The Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1977
              (for Scotland)                       ----------
              The Building Regulations (Northern Ireland) 1977
                (for Northern Ireland)       “

          For England and Wales approved document B2/3/4
          Fire spread gives guidance on the fire safety provisions
          of the regulations. For Scotland requirements are
          set out in Parts D and E of the Regulations and
          for Northern Ireland in Part E.

          It is the responsibility of club management to appraise
          themselves of the necessary measures to prevent
          risk to their clubs and the public by employing
          professionally competent personnel to advise them
          on any repairing, refurbishment, and requirements
          that will be necessary before their sports ground
          can be used to its full potential or to an agreed
          capacity.

          Management will be responsible for overall safety
          of the public. This means, inter alia:

          •     provide for stewarding of the right quality that
                is properly briefed for the particular event and
                present in sufficient numbers to manage the
                event adequately

          .     having available drawings of the overall facility
                (1 : 1000 city plan; 1 : 200 ground plan and section
                showing principal means of ingress and egress,
                compartmentation with capacity of each clearly
                indicated, and other facilities such as location
                of stewards and public-address system




          * Sports grounds are widely defined in the Act to
          include not only soccer, rugby, cricket, tennis, etc.
          but also horse and greyhound racing, athletics, etc.
          grounds


                                            7
    being able to identify and redress where necessary
        potentially combustible materials and building
        fabric
        potentially dangerous, degraded or substandard
        fabric

        potentially dangerous areas of overcrowding,
        whether on ingress or egress routes and spectator
        viewing areas.

    establishing the principles for good manageable
    access and egress

    providing good information transmission systems
    both inside and outside the ground

    keeping the conditions of seated stands, terraces,
    viewing slopes, stairways, etc. in good condition

    establishing the need for appraisal, testing and
    refurbishment (usually without disruption to
    the sports programme and club facilities) to
    bring the ground to the required standard

    establishing a planned preventative maintenance
    routine

.   establishing a strategy for means of escape in
    emergencies

    maintaining reasonable first-aid provisions

Management will need to estim ate the necessary
work and prepare a financial operating plan (probably
on a quarterly basis) so that the aims can be achieved.
A list of many of the day-to-day routine
responsibilities is given in Appendix A.


MANAGEMENT CONSIDERATIONS

2.2.1   Planning life safety requirements
        Planning for large numbers of people entering,
        staying within and leaving sports grounds
        requires skills beyond those needed for planning
        a system for inanimate objects. People come
        in many different shapes and sizes with varying
        capabilities and handicaps. They may well
        have varying reasons for coming to the sports
        ground and so expect different things of it.

        Furthermore, although in general most people
        behave sensibly and appropriately most of
        the tim e, relatively small problems when
        experienced alone can be magnified to
        disastrous proportions in a large crowd. Broadly
        there are two ways in which crowd safety
        can be jeopardized.
    One is by an unexpected incident or disturbance
    or pattern of crowd movement, as when a
    barrier collapses or someone slips within
    a crowd moving down a flight of steps. Because
    people may not know what is happening or
    be confused by its unexpectedness, pressures
    can build up in the crowd far beyond those
    normally experienced.

    A second route to disaster is when some
    individual or group in the crowd sets out
    to cause damage or injury. Either by eliciting
    reciprocal responses from others or by other
    forms of aggravation of their actions, a few
    people may in this way, have an effect far
    beyond their numbers.

   The only way to avoid both kinds of potentially
   dangerous incidents and minimize their
   consequences, should they occur, is by careful
   planning, design, management, maintenance
   and adherence to conditions of the certificate.
   An illustration of the American approach
   to life safety in auditorium management,
   also applicable to sports grounds, is given
   in Appendix B.

•2 Preparation of drawings of sports ground
   The impact of a new sports ground on the
   local     infrastructure     requires      careful
   consideration from the aspects of road safety,
   traffic congestion, environmental changes
   and the effect on the lives of the local residents
   during match days.

   The convergence of large numbers of people
   on a locus within an urban neighbourhood
   can create both traffic congestion and the
   potential for road accidents. The construction
   of a major sports ground within a community
   can also create social and physical stress.

   An open-plan sports ground, free from boundary
   fences and having freedom of access from
   most points of the compass is the ideal and
   affords the best solution to smooth safe crowd
   flow. However, in regard to the social
   behaviour of the spectators converging on
   the sports ground, where confrontation of
   supporters is to be avoided separate access
   points to the respective parts of the sports
   grounds will be necessary.

   Such effects may be judged from a plan of
   the sports ground and surroundings at a scale
   of about 1:1000. Further larger scale (1:200)
   drawings of the ground and its constituent
   parts will be required, sufficient to show
   clearly all spectator viewing areas, exit and
   entry   routes,   barriers,  capacities,  and
            demonstrate by calculation, appraisal or
            testing that the constructional and structural
            elements will provide adequate levels of
            life safety.

            Both plan and section drawings are required
            at this larger scale so as to illustrate the
            3-dimensional arrangement of each particular
            zone.

    2.2.3 Access for emergency vehicles
            Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such
            as fire appliances and ambulances should
            be provided and maintained, so that speedy
            and direct access can be obtained to all
            buildings within the ground. Emergency routes
            should be defined (in consultation with the
            licensing authorities) and marked on the plan.

            Where necessary, roads in the vicinity of
            the ground should have restricted parking
            so that at all times there are no delays or
            obstructions to the access of emergency
            vehicles. This restriction may extend to
            a distance in excess of 0.5 km. When
            practicable, such roads should be kept entirely
            free of parked vehicles.

    2.2.4   Considerations affecting capacity
             In many instances, the need to attain the        Guide to safety at sports
             required safety standard will relate to the      grounds, HMSO, London
             maximum number of spectators who are liable      1986 (Section 16)
            to be admitted to the ground (or a particular
            part of it). For example, a football ground
            with a potential maximum spectator capacity
            is liable to pose significant crowd pressure
            risks. To accommodate safely a maximum
            crowd at such a ground might entail substantial
            remedial    upgrading work;      alternatively,
            consideration might be given to accepting
            a much smaller number of spectators who,
            properly dispersed, could be accommodated
            safely without having to incur costly repairs
            or alterations. The first step, therefore,
            is to assess how many people can be safely
            accommodated in the different sections of
            ground given the existing condition of the
            ground, i.e. to determine a safe spectator
            capacity. A range of increased capacities
            can then be prepared based on various
            improvements/remedial works.
            Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to
            reduce some risks to an acceptable level,
            remedial work is likely to be necessary to
            overcome others. Obvious defects such as
            trip hazards (especially at the head of stairs
            or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs,
            and obstructed sections of exit or ingress
            routes, should be rectified as part of the



i                                   10
     general care and maintenance of a ground.
      Structures should be sound and inspected
     by suitably qualified persons. Design, layout
     and signposting of entrances and exits and
     routes require particular attention so that
     they can safely cope with the number of
     spectators who will use them before and
     after an event or in an emergency. Similarly,
     the condition of terraces or viewing slopes
     and presence or otherwise of crush barriers,
     correctly sited and meeting the described
     strength tests are important factors.

     Broken, uneven terracing causes stumbling.
     Barriers not only serve to break up crowd
     pressures but also assist in controlling
     movement onto and off the terraces by
     directing and restricting the rate of arrival
     to suit the capacity, and         encouraging
     the formation of queues so that spectators
     arrive in an orderly fashion.

     It follows that in general in a ground where
    it is proposed to retain a high spectator
    capacity, the measures needed to be taken
    to accommodate safely such large crowds
    are potentially more extensive. In this respect
    the calculation of the spectator capacity
    of a terrace or that through a given route(s)
    depends on the configuration and condition
    of all the elements associated with calculation.
    It is recommended that physical means of
    directing crowd flows in and out are
    incorporated.

2.5 Division of ground
    Where migration of spectators could prove
    hazardous, a ground should be divided into
    sections. Each section of a ground has its
    own limit of safe capacity, and a major
    migration can cause dangerous overcrowding.
    Each section of the ground (e.g. each end
    or side) should be self-contained with its
    own entrances, exits and toilet and refreshment
    facilities. For football grounds in particular
    there should be controlled access from one
    such major section to another. At other
    sporting events, such as greyhound racing,
    spectators may need to move freely between
    different parts of the ground, and this should
    be borne in mind when considering access
    to and from the sections of the ground.
    Automatic counting procedures may be
    necessary to ensure that the approved capacity
    of any particular zone is not exceeded.
2.6 Signposting
    A comprehensive system of signposting that
    clearly indicates routes to the various parts
    of the ground, and the the exits from the
    ground, should be provided. Signs relating
        to fire safety and other safety signs (e.g.
        first-aid facilities) should also be provided.
        Exit gates themselves should be clearly
        signposted, preferably using illuminated signs.
        Directional signs should be provided to
        encourage crowds in any particular section
        to flow in one direction when leaving the
        ground.

2.2.7   Exit gates
        Locked exit gates should be manned by a
        steward a t all times when the public are
        in the ground, so that they can be opened
        immediately from inside by anyone in an
        emergency. The use of a common pass key
        for all exits should be considered, as should
        one-way exits to cope with normal conditions.

        All gates should open outwards with the
        direction of the required flow. Inward opening
        and sliding gates are not suitable unless kept
        open while the public are present.

        All gangways and exit routes must be
        unobstructed and capable of being used to
        their full capacity at all times when the public
        are in the ground. Every part of an exit route
        should be able to accommodate the required
        flow from the terrace or stand exit in
        accordance with the approved flow rates
        and exit times.

REFURBISHMENT     AND      RECONSTRUCTION
WITHOUT DISRUPTION TO CLUB ACTIVITIES
2.3.1   General
        Changes in legislation and the need to make
        significant improvements in the provisions
        for spectators have presented football clubs
        with a serious challenge to their existence.
        Clubs of different standing and for different
        principal sporting uses are confronted by
        major expenditure on their existing grounds
        in order to meet future standards of comfort,
        safety and competition.

        Functional and financial considerations often
        necessitate redevelopment work being carried
        out in phases, and management of projects
        of this kind requires special technical and
        practical skills especially in the case of
        large-span structures. Whether the aim is
        to construct a single stand within an existing
        ground or to create a completely new complex,
        the project requires technical, managerial
        and financial skills of a high calibre.

        Safety provisions should comply with the
        requirements of the Guide to safety at sports
        grounds. Conformity with fire regulations
        is of paramount importance.
       Ingenuity of design, construction and the
       creation of new provisions should influence
       the health and welfare of sports facilities.
       Good design linked to technology is sufficiently
       advanced to permit reliable construction
       of new concepts in sports grounds and help
       establish their commercial viability.
2.3.2 Preplanning
      There are many important m atters to be
      considered in the refurbishment or creation
      of sports grounds, and preplanning and project
      management are       essential elements of
      reconstruction.

      Preplanning commences with a definition
      of the overall concept of the proposal for
      development, by identifying and researching
      the potential market for the facilities and
      by making arrangements for financing the
      reconstruction work.
2.3.3 Control of unruly behaviour
      2.3.3.1   Benefits of seating. Although seating
                all spectators can never entirely
                remove unruly behaviour, malicious
                individuals are easier to identify
                and control in seated facilities.
                It is also much easier for those who
                wish     to     perpetrate   clandestine
                mischief to do so in terracing.
                Furthermore, seating is more likely
                to a ttra c t those who wish to watch
                the sport in comfort for itself
                compared with those few who may
                be attracted to the miscreant
                possibilities     of    the    terraces.
                Disturbances      in   densely packed
                standing terraces are difficult to
                control unless access is maintained.

  2.3.3.2        Access and surveillance. To optimize
                crowd control, easy access to groups
                of spectators is important and an
                adequate system of passageways
                as illustrated in clauses 96-100 of
                the Guide to safety at sports grounds
                facilitates crowd control. The use
                of both fixed and roving CCTV and
                video cameras can help to identify
                miscreants and also act as a deterrent
                to unruly behaviour.

                Because large quantities of alcohol
                can encourage        unruly behaviour
                in some people, the taking of alcohol
                into public areas of sports grounds
                in the UK has been restricted by
                the 1987 Act, as have all forms
                of hard container that could be
                used as projectiles.


                                13
2.3.3.3   Open planning. The             provision
          of a high security fence between
          the spectators and the playing field
          prevents both the exercising of
          control over crowd misbehaviour
          and the egress of spectators at a
          time of panic or disaster. The use
          of fences to restrict crowd movement
          in a cage environment may not be
          the best solution. Safety may well
          be better served by an open-plan
          concept for grounds where spectators
          are placed within specific areas
          to which access and egress are rapid
          and simple. Provided that sightlines
          are also open, the general feeling
          of spaciousness can enhance the
          overall attractiveness of the facility.

          Where such fences have to be
          provided,    emergency    gates  of
          sufficient    width and proximity,
          adequately linking with all areas
          of the terrace and capable of being
          opened     without  danger towards
          the pitch should be provided. These
          must be manned a t all times the
          public are present.

2.3.3.4 Open approaches to stands. The
        latter-day concept of high walls
        and fences around grounds within
        which paykiosks are located is no
        longer tenable, and new grounds
        should eliminate      the   restrictive
        strips of land between the boundary
        fences and the spectator stands.
        The positioning and number of pay
        kiosks, or turnstiles, should be
        carefully    considered.     Sufficient
        capacity of controlled ingress points
        need to be provided to each spectator
        zone to provide for orderly controlled
        access to the event and prevent
        excessive queuing.       The location
        of such provision should be such
        as to avoid restriction to crowd
        flow on egress.

          Reliable counting systems should
          be provided to enable management
          to have immediate knowledge of
          the number of spectators in each
          zone.

          The removal of the barriers to free
          movement      outside    the    stands
          eliminates the feeling of being within
          a stockade and may well promote
          better    crowd     behaviour.     The
          occasional misdemeanours by some
          spectators is readily handled within
          an    open-plan   system.    Incidents

                          14
           within strips of land between boundary
           fences and stands are difficult to
           handle and control, and the ease
           of access provided by the removal
           of boundary fences facilitates crowd
           handling by police, and operations
           by fire and ambulance services.

 2.3.3.5 Barriers of sufficient strength for
          guarding stairs, ramps and other
          spectator    areas. Stairs   providing
          access and egress to stands should
          be well designed to obviate dangerous
         jostling by spectators and dangerous
          forward movements to groups of
         spectators. Collapse of a         mass
         of individuals can cause severe
         crushing of persons caught in the
         zones of maximum thrust, resulting
         in injuries and confusion. Therefore,
         barriers must be sited and designed
         to withstand crowd pressures and
         to prevent collapse and to control
         movement and divert flow (see Section
         5).

2.3.3.6   Readily      accessible  exits. Rapid
          exit of spectators in emergency
          situations is important. Exits should
          be readily accessible and should
          be fully allowed for in appraisal
          of stand capacities. If necessary
          extra emergency routes/exits should
          be provided.

2.3.3.7   Fire safety. The materials used
          in the construction of new grounds
          should inhibit combustion and the
          spread of fire,        thus providing
          spectators with an opportunity for
          escape and survival.          Section 4
          considers this aspect of life safety.

          Where     practicable   materials   in
          existing structures should be treated
          to improve resistance to fire.
Spectator comfort
Comfort is a relative description in the context
of open-air grounds since climatic conditions
largely control the amount of comfort
experienced by spectators.

Seating should be clean and comfortable,
and the manoeuvrable spaces between the
seats should be adequate for all sizes of
persons. Seating decks should be free of
columns to permit a clear view of the playing
surface by all spectators. Spectators should
be as close as possible to the playing surface,
commensurate with public safety in respect
of the activity in question.
Quite      apart from safety considerations,
enjoyment will be enhanced by good lighting,
clear audible public address systems. The
use of fittings and fixtures that are either
reasonably vandal proof and easily replaceable
should be considered.




                        16
3   DESIGN MATTERS

    3.1   GROUND ASPECTS OF DESIGN AND SAFETY

          The safety of the sports ground covers two aspects.
          First structural safety, which means that each individual
          structural component as well as the whole structure
          should be sound, adequate and durable, and able to
          resist the pressures and loadings associated with high
          crowd densities and all other loading conditions.
          Adequacy inevitably includes structural fire protection.
          The second aspect is safety of spectators, which
          concerns hazards to the crowd and elimination as far
          as practicable of the sources of such hazards.

    3*2   OTHER ASPECTS

          However, the implementation of safer sports grounds
          has to be made with regard to human behaviour, so
          that both the risk of failure is reduced and the chance
          of success is increased. In the light of limited budgets
          priority (in terms of safety) has to be given to those
          aspects of any facility that most improve safety. Lack
          of adequate funding does not justify potentially
          dangerous conditions. Such conditions will require
          restricted use or closure.
    3.3   USAGE

          3.3.1   Place in the community
                  Sports grounds need to be seen by the
                  community as a comfortable recreational
                  facility suitable for the family. They should
                  be capable of diversification of use.

                  The football authorities hope that grounds
                  will become a more broadly based recreation
                  facility for the family, to compete with
                  television and become a facility for the
                  community. There is a need to think in wider
                  design terms, e.g. the implications of
                  converting standing areas to seated areas,
                  provision of family only sections, separation
                  of home and away fans for soccer, and other
                  uses.

                  Grounds need the flexibility to cater safely        Code of practice for
                  and comfortably for multiple usage from             pop festivals, GLC
                  pop festival, football league, international
                  tennis to, say, secondary school sports, which
                  may require very different crowd safety
                  control arrangements.

          3.3.2   Managing grounds safely
                  The great challenge in designing sports grounds     Canter D, Comber M,
                  to give greater safety is to do so without          Uzzell D: Football in
                  creating the impression that the place is           its place: an
                  a fortress or prison. Physical structures           environmental psychology
                  carry meanings to the public that may not           of football grounds,
                  be intended or even though of by designers          Methuen 1988
                  and engineers. It is therefore necessary that


                                         17
they consider what the meanings and social
implications are of what they design and
build.

They should consider implicit messages that
their structures may carry for different groups
who see and use them. The symbolic
implications of spatial arrangements, materials,
textures and colours should all be examined
closely. Freedom of movement and standard
and range of secondary services all indicate
to staff, spectators and the interested public
the regard in which they are held.

Anxiety    and     distress    in    threatening
circumstances, are magnified by a feeling
of lack of control over one's own actions.
The greater the freedom the spectator feels
in using a sports ground, the happier that
experience is likely to be. Designers should
seek to enhance this feeling of being in control,
taking into account the current significance
of the role of police in managing most large
crowds.

Designing to reduce the impact of vandalism
is a special case in which an imaginative
design response should be combined with
effective management.       Making potential
targets for vandals as tough as possible
(sometimes known as 'target hardening') can
create an ambience in which the public may
feel alienated and vandals challenged. Design
and maintenance strategies that allow broken
fitm ents to be rapidly replaced ('target
softening') may create a situation that is
more inviting to the public and less attractive
to vandals.

Additional facilities beneath stands
The use of grounds on an interm ittent basis,
is a commercial limitation that necessitates
additional income from other sources such
as pools and sponsors. The use of space for
diverse commercial businesses within sports
grounds can provide financial resources for
the club and can benefit the local community
by employment and service to industry. Space
available below inclined seating may well
be suitable to provide additional facilities
provided that such uses are adequately
compartmented from the stands above. In
providing such facilities, full account must
be taken of its effect on the safety of the
ground in general usage, including the need
to provide adequate fire compartmentation
between the different uses.
 3.3.4     Comfort
          Comfort of the spectator also forms a major
          consideration in the design of stands. Inevitably
          in these days of television, fewer and fewer
          people will be attracted to sports grounds
          unless comfort conditions are improved. The
          level of comfort can be raised by providing
          a warmer environment, roomy seats or
          accommodation, protection against elements
          (i.e. against rain or chilly wind), refreshment
          facilities of reasonable standards, as well
          as toilet facilities.

 3.3.5    Viewing and sightlines
          One of the important parameters in the design
         of sports grounds is ’good viewing’. It is
         essential that the spectator should be able
         to see the principal object of the sports (such
         as the football, tennis ball, the athlete, the
         horse or the car as the case may be. This
         is also a primary consideration in appraising
         an existing sports ground. When large crowds
         are present and densities are high, the
         frustration from lack of proper visibility
         of the principal object can cause distress
         and other emotional reactions with a
         consequent build-up of pressure within the
         crowd. Where viewing areas do not afford
         a satisfactory view of the event, they should
         be eliminated from capacity calculations.

         Some consideration of viewing and sightlines
         is given in Appendix E.
3.3.6    Circulatory space
         It is necessary to provide a greater area for
         circulation in the case of perambulatory
         viewing such as athletics and horseracing
         than for stationary viewing such as football.
SAFETY OF SPECTATORS

3.4.1    Home Office Guide
         Since the Ibrox Park disaster on 2 January
          1971, the safety of spectators in sports grounds
         has been extensively studied in the UK. The
         sources of problems have been identified
         and recommendations given in the Guide
         to safety a t sports grounds to minimize hazards
         to the crowd, with particular emphasis on
         football grounds. Recommendations include
         both ingress and egress arrangements to and
         from the sports ground and means of escape,
         standards for stairways, ramps and handrails,
         fire precautions as well as the standard for
         viewing slopes and terraces, including layout
         of and design criteria for crush barriers.
         Pressures can be set up within a departing
         crowd by impatient people; such incipient
         pressures can and must be contained and
        controlled by careful attention to the detailed
        design of barriers, stairways, gangways and
        exits. Reference should be made to Section
        5 for further information on flow rates etc.
3.4.2   Deviations
        Although the recommendations of the Guide
        are not mandatory, they are accepted as
        guidelines by the local authorities in enforcing
        the Safety of sports grounds Act 1975. The
        Guide however, was prepared primarily in
        the experience of football grounds; therefore
        some of the recommendations may need
        modification before being applied to grounds
        used for other activities such as tennis,
        horseracing, etc.

        Deviations from individual guidelines are
        possible without necessarily detracting from
        the overall safety of the ground. The variety
        of type, function and layout of sports grounds
        and the inter-relationship of the different
        parts of them means that a flexible approach
        should be maintained to take account of the
        particular circumstances at individual grounds.

         It is necessary to evaluate flow characteristics,
         which are generally based on notional ideas.
         The rate of ingress at which people move
        is variable and could easily change, e.g. parents
        looking for children etc. Ingress and egress
        rates are hard to calculate as people do not
        divide themselves evenly. People will go
        where they want in order to get on to ’target*
        to where they are going, rather than sorting
        out into an even distribution. At certain
        events, e.g. Olympics, people drift in and           Jake Pauls: American/
        out depending on the attraction of the event.        Canadian Olympic Games
        To have even flow it is essential that exits
        are free from obstruction, and/or loose or           Life safety code
        ill-repaired surfaces and remain free of smoke       handbook, FK 802, 1988
        in the event of a fire in the facility. Crowds
        progress at different rates, which are slower
        for old than young people and are also reduced
        with increasing density. Planning for orderly
        ingress and evacuation of large crowds in
        any condition is difficult and needs serious
        quantitative and qualitative consideration
        by an appropriately qualified professional
        person. Section 5 and Appendix B deal with
        this aspect more fully.

        The types of safety problem to be considered
        within a ground and in its immediate
        surroundings, all of which are linked in some
        way, include;

        1.   hazards that cause individuals to trip,
             slip and fall, causing individual injury
             and possible serious further injuries as
             a result

                              20
                   2.   uncontrolled   and  unacceptable  build
                        up of crowd pressures during ingress
                        and/or within any spectator zone during
                        the performance

                   3. danger of crushing of          people during   Life safety code
                       evacuation, particularly      in emergency    handbook, 4th edit., 1988
                       conditions.                                   Ed. James K. Lathrop
                   4.   risk from fire (see Section 4)

                   5.   failure of elements of construction under
                        the effects of crowd pressures (see
                        Sections 6 and 7).

          3-4.3   Information transmission
                  The importance of communicating clearly
                  and audibly to people, particularly those
                  waiting either on exit or entry, cannot be
                  stressed too strongly. Good public-address
                  systems are required.
^   3.5   STRUCTURAL SAFETY

          3.5.1   Appraisal and Codes
                  References
                  Structural safety is the primary consideration
                  of structural appraisal and design. For a
                  new structure, the design generally follows
                  the recommendations of the Codes of Practice
                  appropriate to the material to be used. If
                  guidance in some respect is not clear cut
                  or sufficient in the Code it is based on
                  engineering judgment and appreciation backed
                  up by experience and/or tests.

                  In the current Codes of Practice an accepted
                  level of safety is deemed to be achieved
                  by the use of partial safety factors on loads
                  to allow for the possibility of a given load
                  being exceeded accidentally and by partial
                  safety factors on the strength of m aterials
                  to cater for its probable variation in the
                  actual construction. At the design stage,
                  for example, many factors remain unknown
                  and need to be covered by a safety margin
                  in loads and materials.

                  Where the design involves the construction
                  of structures of unusual configuration, long
                  span or the use of unconventional materials
                  it is especially important that the construction
                  be monitored on a continuous basis by
                  competent engineers familiar with the
                  intentions of the design so that safety margins
                  are not impaired by faulty or substandard
                  construction.

                  In the appraisal of existing stands, however,
                  the situation is somewhat different since
                  most of the variables are determinate. In
                  consequence, it is possible and often preferable
                                        £i
              to apply engineering judgment as to the
              appropriate level of these safety margins
              such that the assessment does not become
              inordinately conservative. When appraising
              existing structures particular attention has
              to be paid to the effects of joints or elements
              from corrosion, from cracking and from
              potential degradation by fatigue. What is
              most important is the application of rigorous
              methodology to the m atter of appraisal so
              th at nothing is missed or misinterpreted.
              Accordingly, it is essential that this appraisal
              is carried out by a chartered structural or
              civil engineer with appropriate experience
              of such structures.

              The Institution of Structural Engineers has        Appraisal of existing
              published Appraisal of existing structures,        structures. IStructE,
              which gives general guidance for assessing         London, 1980
              structures. It is recommended that this
              document should be followed in the structural
              assessment of existing stands and their
              components.
3.6   LOADING

      3.6.1   Permanent loads and load combinations
              All relevant loads should be considered            NFPA 102 Assembly
              invidually or in the approriate combination        seating, tents and
              to give the most critical effects on the           membrane structures.
              elements and the structure as a whole.             1986, Chap 4
              In addition to its self-weight and any other
              permanent loads, the structure should be
              designed to withstand loadings from crowds
              and their movement, wind, snow and any
              other forces to which it may be subjected.
      3.6.2   Vertical imposed floor loads
              For the most part, it is likely that the loading   BS 6399: Part I: 1984
              in BS 6399: Part 1, Table 7 is appropriate.        Loadings for
                                                                 buildings
                  areas without fixed seating 5.0 kN/m2          Additional information
                  or a concentrated load of 3.6kN                in South African Civil
                                                                 Engineer; August 1971
                  areas with fixed seating 4.0 kN/m2             ’measurement of live
                                                                 load on a temporary
                  corridors, passageways   and    stairs         stand for spectators'.
                  5.0 kN/m2 or a concentrated load 4.5
                  kN.

              In come circumstances, it may be appropriate
              to appraise a stand in the light of the static
              and dynamic loads it is likely to receive.

              In this context a t peak crowd densities without
              obstacles a person will occupy an ellipse
              equivalent to 54 persons per 10 m. Seated
              areas generally operate at a density of 2.4
              to 3.6 seats per m 2 dependent on the type
              and arrangement of seats. These figures
              are exclusive of gangways.

                                  22
              3.6.3    Imposed roof loads
                       The roof structure must be able to withstand        BS 6399; Part I
                       the effects of imposed loadings given in
                       BS 6339: Part 3. Attention should be paid           BS 6399: Part 3
                       to the effects of concentration or asymmetry
                       caused by possible patterns of snow drifting        BRE Digest 332
                       in valleys in relation to the shape of the roof     (May 1988)
                       and to the possible effects of previous remedial
                       works on the self-weight of the roof.

                      In determining the adequacy of the roof attention
                      should be paid to its accessibility. This will
                      apply particularly to existing roofs, where
                      access other than for cleaning, although
                      unintended, may be possible.
             3.6.4    Wind loads
                      Both in the design of new stands and in the         Supplement to the
                      appraisal of existing ones, the assessment          national building Code
                      of wind loadings is crucial.                        of Canada 1985,
                                                                          Commentary B
                      For locations in the UK, reference should
                      be made initially to CP 3: Chapter V: Part           Wind loads, National
                      2* and BRE digests 119, 283 and 284.                Research Council of
                                                                          Canada, Ottawa, 1985
                                                                          CP 3: Code of basic
                                                                          data for the design
                                                                          of buildings: Chapter V:
                                                                          Loading, Part 2: Wind
                                                                          loads*
                                                                          BRE digests:
                                                                          119 The assessment of
                                                                          wind loads (1984)
                                                                           283 The assessment of
                                                                          wind speed over
                                                                          topography (1984)
                                                                          284 Wind loads on
                                                                          canopy roofs (1986)
                                                                          Cook, N. J.:
                                                                          'Reduction of wind
                                                                          loads on a grandstand
                                                                          roof’, Journal of Wind
                                                                          Engineering &
                                                                          Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                                          10 1982
                                                                          ’A novel working approach
                                                                          to the assessment of wind
                                                                          loads for equivalent static
                                                                          design’, Cook, N. J., <5c
                                                                          Mayne, J. R. Journal of
                                                                          Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                                          1979


* This code is due for replacement by:
BS 6399: Loading for buildings. Part 2: Wind loads
The new Code is expected to include a static/dynamic classification.
                                                                              j.
For stands of unusual configuration, form        Cook, N. J.: 'Calibration
or location, this assessment may require         of techniques for the
specialist knowledge where consideration         prediction of peak
of both quasi-static loadings and dynamic        pressures', BRE, 1982
effects may be necessary, along with both
overall and localized effects.

When wind loading data are insufficient,
reference should be made to available
meteorological information on wind speeds
and direction, and an appropriate assessment
of design wind speed made for that particular
location.

For correct assessment of wind loadings on       Cook, N. J.: Simulation
a particular group of stands, a representative   techniques for short test
wind tunnel test may be required (see Section    section wind tunnels:
6 of Appraisal of existing structures).          roughness, barrier and
                                                 mixing device methods.
                                                 BRE, 1982
Where necessary specialist literature should     N. J. Cook. The
be consulted or specialist help sought.          designer's guide to wirei
                                                 loading of building
                                                 structures: Part 1:
                                                 Background, damage
                                                 survey and structural
                                                 classification.
                                                 Butterworth, 1986
                                                 Part 2: Static structures,
                                                 Butterworth (in
                                                 preparation).
                                                 Redfeam, D.: A test rig
                                                 for proof-testing
                                                 building components
                                                 against wind loads, BRE,
                                                 Information Paper
                                                 IP19/84, 1984
                                                 Recommendations for
                                                 calculating the effects
                                                 of wind on construction.
                                                 Report no. 52, 2nd Ed.,
                                                 European Convention for
                                                 Constructional Steelwork,
                                                 Brussels
                                                 Supplement to the
                                                 national building Code
                                                 of Canada 1985,
                                                 Commentary B
                                                 American National
                                                 Standards Institute A58.1
                                                 Minimum design loads
                                                 in buildings and other
                                                 structures
                                                 'A novel working approach
                                                 to the assessment of
                                                 wind loads for equivalent
                                                 static design' Cook, N. J.
                                                 <5c Mayne, J. R., Journal
                                                 of Industrial Aerodynamics,
                                                 1979
                    2 .4
                                                            Cook, N. J: ’Reduction
                                                            of wind loads on a
                                                            grandstand roof’, Journal
                                                            of wind engineering
                                                            and industrial aerodynamics
                                                            10,1982
                                                            Eaton, K. J.: 'Buildings
                                                            and tropical windstorms',
                                                            Overseas Building Notes
                                                            no. 188, April 198
                                                            Calibration of techniques
                                                            for the prediction of peak
                                                            pressures,
                                                            Cook, N. J., BRE Crown
                                                            Copyright, 1982
3.6.5   Imposed horizontal surge loads
        In addition to wind forces, the structure will
        need to resist applied longitudinal or transverse
        horizontal loads resulting from coordinated
        motions in the crowd.

        Recent research indicates that a force of           BS 5973; Access and
        up to 156 N per person parallel to rows of          working scaffolds and
        people, and 200 N per person perpendicular          special scaffold
        to seating rows should be allowed for. Such         structures in steel
        a force can be particularly significant to
        frameworks whose own self-weight is low
        (such as temporary stands), or those in a
        poor state of maintenance, and where crowd
        densities are high.
3.6.6   Dynamic loads
        Traditionally design has dealt with dynamic
        loads as equivalent static loads, increasing
        the value of dynamic forces by perhaps 15%
        or 20% and then treating them as static. This
        is perfectly satisfactory both from strength
        and stiffness requirements as long as the
        dynamic forces cannot excite resonant
        vibration. When an existing structure is known
        to be very lively or for any new structures,
        it should be confirmed that the amplitudes
        of vibration are small enough to avoid fatigue
        problems.

        For flexible roof structures, there is the
        possibility that steady winds may excite vortex
        shedding and hence resonant vibration of
        an appreciable amplitude. Likewise, concerted
        swaying, Jumping or dancing by spectators
        may excite resonance of floors, barriers or
        handrails where there are natural frequencies
        below 4 Hz.




                             25
3.6.7   Handrail loads
        Handrails and balustrades should be capable         BS 6180: Protective
        of withstanding the loads defined in Table          barriers in and around
        3 of BS 6180. The strength of handrails             buildings             "
        (including supports) used to divide a stairway
        into channels should be as given in Table
        2 of the Guide to safety at sports grounds.
        This is especially important where masonry
        or other discontinuous materials are employed.
3.6.8   Crush-barrier loadings
        The loadings for which crush barriers, perim eter   Tuan, C. Y. <5c Saul,
        or dividing fences need to be designed are          W. E.: Journal of
        given in Section 9 of the Guide to safety           Structural Engineering.
        a t sports grounds. Clearly, the individual         ASCE, Vol III, no. 2
        building elements to which such barriers
        are fixed must withstand such localized load
        effects (see Section 6)

        The loading to which such barriers need to          Crush Barrier Strengths
        be designed are listed in the Guide to safety       and Spacings. Home
        at sports grounds and take into account the         Office Note, March
        maximum number of rows of spectators,               1973
        the activity levels and the incline of the
        sloping terrace.      Different categories of       Creasy, L. R.:
        activity were categorized as ’lean’, ’strain*       Protective crowd
        and ’heave* in studies carried out by the GLC.      barriers, Ministry of
        These studies form the basis of forces for          Works, 1948
        which crush barriers need to be designed
        (see Section 6, Appraisal of existing structures
        of existing structures and Appendix C).

STRUCTURAL SAFETY IN FIRE

3.7.1   Fire resistance
        The statutory requirement for the minimum
        period of fire resistance of a structure is
        normally specified in the Building Regulations
        or associated guidance.

        However,        single-storey  sports    ground
        structures, being open to the air without
        significant internal compartmentation for
        additional uses, may not be required by Building
        Regulations to have a specific fire resistance
        rating for structural members that only support
        a roof. Structural members that are built
        into or support a wall or cladding however
        may need to be fire resisting depending on
        the distance of the wall or cladding from
        the site boundary. The relevant period of
        fire resistance may be £ h or lh depending
        on the size of the stand. However, when
        there are additional enclosed uses (such as
        beneath inclined seating or if the structure
        supports tiers of seats one above the other),
        then those elements must have a minimum
        1 h fire resistance.
        The structure should be able to withstand
        a fire without collapse and prevent its growth
        and spread for a sufficiently long period to
        enable safe evacuation of the occupants. The
        degree of fire resistance required, therefore,
        varies with the fire risk of the building as
        well as the facility for rescue operations.
        In general it       is governed by three
        considerations:

        (i)   type of occupancy (i.e. the purpose for
              which the building is used)

        (ii) floor area and       cubic   capacity   of
             compartments and

        (iii) general height above the average ground
              level.

        Considerations (i) and (ii) are indicative of
        the expected fire load, the area of ventilation
        and the geometry of compartments that
        influence the fire severity and thus determine
        the degree of fire risk. Consideration (iii)
        relates to rescue operations. The higher
        the building, the more time is likely to be
        needed to evacuate the occupants to safety.

        Roof members do not normally need any
        specific fire rating unless they are designed
        to provide stability for the structure. In
        that case the period of fire resistance for
        the roof members will be the same as required
        for the pertinent area of the structure. Also,
        where the fire effect on a particular element
        may cause a disproportionate area to collapse,
        an additional protection may be necessary
        for the element to provide a minimum of
        I h fire resistance. Steel columns supporting
        large areas of roof on the stands where there
        is a potential for a high local fire is such
        a case in point.
3.7.2   Smoke venting
        The form, organization and constructional
        material of a stand or sports ground must
        be such that accumulation of the products
        of combustion (smoke, toxic gases) does not
        occur so as to inhibit escape to the outside,
        either in still wind conditions or under the
        various directions of prevailing wind. When
        there are significant fire loadings, wind-
        tunnel studies may be required to assess the
        likely consequences of particular wind
        directions, and additional smoke venting
        provided.

        Outdoor places of assembly are not to be
        considered as inherently 'smoke protected',
        expecially if they are constructed of
        combustible material.   Such constructions

                           27
will need evaluation using applicable methods
if there is any doubt as to the integrity of
the evacuation routes as 'places of safety'
free from smoke logging.

The provision of fire resistance as required       Cook, G. M. E. <5c
by Building Regulations is usually sufficient      Morgan, P. B. E.:
to ensure structural stability during the time     Thermal bowing in fire
necessary to permit safe escape, and also          and how it affects
professional   fire   fighting   from    inside    building design. BRE
conventional buildings.      Deformations of       Information Paper
substantial steel, concrete and masonry can        IP 21/88
be large in fire temperatures, rising as high
as 1200°C for considerable periods. Within
indeterminate constructions second order
stresses should be investigated. Premature
failure from thermal bowing of tall walls,
especially walls of (or containing) masonry
should be considered since standard fire
resistance tests are conducted on walls of
only 3 m high.       Such consideration is
particularly necessary when the failure of
one or more major structural elements subject
to fire can cause collapse remote from the
fire, where people have not yet had time
to escape.

The period for which stability is required
for life safety purposes must allow time for
evacuation to commence and the area to
be vacated to a place of safety. Protection
of elements to meet the half-hour standard
fire resistance test will achieve this, provided
that the deformation effects are also
considered.




                    22
4    FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY
    Safety from fire is achieved by measures that restrict               Guide to safety at
    initiation, rate of early growth and later spread of fire; provide   sports grounds
    and protect escape routes; segregate higher fire risk areas;
    provide warning (and where necessary detection) of fire;
    and assist with fire-fighting operations. The fire officer
    should always be consulted on m atters of fire safety.

    The type of accommodation that can present the greatest hazard
    in the event of fire is the existing covered stand where
    spectators sit orstand, where the level of combustibility
    may be high and the resistance to propagation and spread
    of fire is low. Such a combination of properties can endanger
    life, and because these are many combinations of
    accommodation fire engineering guidance should be obtained.
    Poor housekeeping, combustible structures, poor stewarding,
    no evacuation procedures, a lack of firefighting appliances
    or these not in the appropriate places, creates a great potential
    danger from fire. Before the granting of a safety certificate
    these hazards will need to be remedied.

    It is essential that in the event of fire, people in a stand have
    ample time to be able to make their way to safety by use
    of protected exit routes without having to endure smoke
    and toxic gases, heat radiation, etc. The means provided
    for escape depend on the rate at which the fire may develop,
    the number of people involved, as well as the size and geometry
    of the structure.

    4.1   FIRE SAFETY APPRAISAL STRATEGY
          The age of existing structures, their construction and
          resistance to spread of fire will vary considerably
          along with the chances of safe escape. It is therefore
          not considered practical or viable to produce a definitive
          set of rules from which a judgment can be made.
          Therefore an approach based on the experience of
          fire-prevention officers, licencing authorities and
          club management working within a set of defined
          parameters should be adopted. The assessment of
          the fire performance of an existing stand is dependent
          primarily on:

          . the layout

          . the materials and detailing of construction

          . the management of the facility

          all of which must independently comply with a minimum
          standard.

          However, it is important that the assessors, the club
          management and the local authority recognize that
          a performance of one aspect that is below minimum
          acceptable levels must result in severe restriction
          to the use of that element or improvement to the
          minimum level.



                                      29
In order to enable a relatively reliable means of assessing
the large number of parameters that influence fire
safety, the sports facilities are grouped into two risk
categories depending on construction materials and
contents. Tables 4.1 'Category 1 stands' and 4.2
'Category 2 stands' define this interaction and provide
the data defined in Fig. 4.1. Tables 4.1 and 4.2 set
out how additional escape time may be gained by the
provision of additional management and other system
features.


(1) Maximum capacity of stand based on the defined
    minimum fire protection measures



(2) The means of escape time as a function of the
    fire capacity can then be calculated from Section




(3) Stand capacity is defined and certified as the
    smaller of (1) and (2) above.

Fig. 4.1 Concept of appraisal strategy to determine
capacity of stand or ground

4.1.1    Allocation of stands to two categories
         Provided that there is compliance with the
         minimum standard, the most significant
         features     of   any    enclosure   are   the
         combustibility, spread of fire and smoke
         characteristics of the cladding and lining
         systems. These are therefore used as the
         criteria for allocation of a sports facility
         to one of the two categories given in clause
         4.1.2. The assessment is a function of the            BS 476: Part 6;
         spread of flame performance (i.e. Class               Definitions surface
         0 or Class 1 - Building Regulations, Part             spread of flame
         B) and the risk of lateral spread of fire. For
         'non-traditional' materials such as coated            Building Regulations
         textiles the assessment is more appropriately         Approved Document
         based on large scale ad hoc testing or a              B2/3/4 for Class 0
         manufacturers fire test certificate.                  definition
         Research into behaviour in fire shows that
         untrained people do not easily receive a warning
         of fire from the frequently ambiguous clues
         it gives when they are engaged on absorbing
         tasks such as eating, making a purchase or
         in this case watching a sporting event.
         Centralized control of the situation is therefore
         of importance.

        There is no basic awareness of the extremely          Canter, D.: Studies of
        rapid fire growth due to roofs and ceilings,          human behaviour in
        since experience of fire is, by and large,            fire; empiricalresults
        derived from cooking and bonfires. There              and their implications
        is a strong tendency therefore to stand and           for education and
        watch a fire, even in large rooms. A stand            design, BRE, Garston
        is an extreme case, where very hot gases
                               30
         collect and rapidly migrate down its length.
         These radiate intense heat, which accelerates
         the fire growth and bums the occupants
         directly. Central management must be aware
         of this weakness in perception and have
         measures capable of overcoming it.

         All formal provisions for escape are directly
         related to the time a t which escape
         commences, typically rather late in the
         development of an emergency. The ability
         to initiate early movement is a major factor
         in the economics of providing safety.

         The maximum and minimum escape times              Guide to safety at
         for the two categories are defined in Fig.        sports grounds. HMSO



         category             minimum         maximum
                              exit time       exit time
                              mm              min
         (1) Category 1       2.5             4.0


         (2) Category 2       4.0             8.0



        PiS* 4.2    Exit times for different categories

        Emergency evacuation time is the notional
        time taken by all people occupying a zone
        directly affected by the outbreak of a fire
        to reach a place of relative safety away from
        that fire.

        Calculated evacuation times should not exceed      National Fire Protection
        8 min, as longer tim es can lead to restiveness    Agency 101 (1988)
        in the crowd and the build-up of physical          Appendix D Life safety
        pressure that can also endanger life.              code 102 Appendix A
                                                           3-3 2.2
4.1.2   Category 1 stands
        EITHER
        A stand consisting of walls and roof with
        a Class 1 spread of flame rating (BS 476:
        Part 7). The seating area to have minimum
        Class 2, or Class 0 if cushions are used. Where
        the linings consist of a composite of a number
        of materials the class rating is to be supported
        by a test for the composite construction.
        OR
        A stand consisting of combustible m aterials
        where it is possible to justify that the lateral
        spread of fire will not inhibit escape or fire
        fighting operations. For fire and flame spread
        assessment see subsection 4.4.

                              31
 4.1.3    Category 2 stands
          A stand consisting of walls and roof with
          a Class 0 spread of flame rating (BS 476: Parts
          6 and 7). The seating area to consist of Class
          1 surfaces, or Class 0 if cushions are used
          and all means of escape are adequately smoke
          protected.

4.1.4    Circulation areas
          In all categories, circulation areas, stairways
          and exit routes leading away from the stand
          should have Class 0 surfaces.

GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
OF CONSTRUCTION AND PLANNING
4.2.1    General
         Generally, the appraisal should be guided
         by Building Regulations and appropriate
         legislation (see subsection 2.1). However,
         specific items that relate particularly to
         sports grounds must be considered in addition
         to the basic planning and structural aspects
         defined in this report and in the Guide to
         safety a t sports grounds. Tables 4.1, 4.2
         and Fig. 4.3 should be referred to assist in
         the appraisal.

4.2.2    Compartmentation/protection of tiers
         Fire-resisting and fire stopping construction
         is required to separate high fire risk areas
         and voids. Floors separating stand tiers should
         also     have     appropriate      fire-resistant
         construction (see      minimum requirements
         defined in Tables 4.1 and 4.2). Fire engineering
         guidance should be sought in these instances.

         Automatic sprinklers could be considered
         as an alternative to a lesser standard of
         compartmentation, although in the majority
         of cases compartmentation is the better
         option. If sprinklers are used in outside stands,
         a dry system may be necessary because of
         the problem of freezing.

4.2.3    Influence of fire and smoke on escape routes
         Escape routes should be planned to keep people
         well clear of the smoke from a fire. The
         hot buoyant smoky gases produced by a fire
         will flow upwards and will collect under and
         flow along roof spaces, balconies, etc. and
         be adversely affected by wind.

         The escape routes should be planned with
         these factors in mind so that people can
         generally move downwards and away from
         the smoke and be protected from radiation.
                           T A B LE 4 .1     CATEGOR/ 1                STA M PS

                                                                                                             o n e a to
                                                                                                              ’
                                                                                                              ’io n
                                                                                                            JJMCB
                                                                                                            Sj c z z
                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                            •o 5
                                                                                                               a o2 ° °
                                                                                                            rn
                                                                                                            n9
                                                                                                                 M
       Surface* to coaply with
       Class X standard. Fir*       Pire and saoke hazard a m s i M R t is required unless                n u rs
                                    surfaces coaply with Class 1 standard.
       and saoke asaassaant                                                                               • w * *
       required.                                                                                          Ag n n
                                                                                                          OC O
                                                                                                          r sm >




      Quality Assurance             A written submission froa        No written submission from       M5S22
      procedures are recommended    management is required                                            - -2s>sn ?o
      Ref el. 4.3.1.                                                 Management essential, but
                                    for justification of their       recommended. Appointing
                                    proposals to approving           authorities to be satisfied         gH aZ pm sn
                                    authorities.                     with proposals. Ref. 4.3.           S«33

      Determinate                   Determinate
      Structure          1 Hour                         1 Hour       Determinate
                                    Structure                        Structure        J Hour

      Indeterminate                 Indeterminate
      Structure          1 Roar                         J Hour       Indeterminate
                                    Structure                        Structure        J Hour


      Fire resistance to be 1
                                                                                                   |» a    >hn
                                                                  Minimum $ hour. Sprinklers z
                                   Pice resistance to be }                                      5 > x3 o
      hour or as superstructure    hour or as superstructure
                                                                                              S IO
                                                                                             I . M
                                                                                                     OO   I
                                                                                                        Z ■»
VO    whichever is greater.        whichever is greater.
                                                                  may be used to offset            c- O _
                                                                                             I* o m h o so
                                                                                                          >
      Voids under seating not                                     shortfall. Voids under
                                   Voids under seating not        under seating acceptable    NrHSIH
tt    acceptable.                  acceptable.
                                                                                              • • M »
                                                                                             |%>* m n < n
                                                                                                          X
                                                                  if cavity barriers and
                                                                  detection provided.           l**    23
                                                                                                i,

     To be agreed with approving authorities.     Ref cl. 4.3.3., 4.3.4., 4.3.8.                           3*51
     Details to be included in operating plan.                                                      » ia
                                                                                                     HHZ



CO
     As 300 to 800, but allow      Additional systeas and trained personnel above that
     i ainute aaxiaua escape
     tiae only.                             " operating plan, if the measures are
                                   considered to be affective and appropriate.
                                                                                                                 n



     As 300 to 800, but allow
     i minute maxinua escape       Additional facilities above that defined in operating
                                   plan if appropriate.
     time only.




                                                                                                          so w o
     Section 5.0 deteraines capacity by calculation             T*                                           ur
     clear, short and easily identified, additional Escape tJie if                    ** ****             g  ow >
                                                                                                                > so
                                                                                                              n *om
                                                                                                            W4
                                                                                                                K




                                                                                                          (•■*>
                                                                                                          K WO
                                                                                                          MOH
                                                                                                          H XM
                                                                                                          a
                                                                                                          *h  <
                                                                                                            m n
                                                                                                          ux
                                                                                                           a '
                                                       table4.2 CKTECoRy 2 stamps
                                                                                                                            ;2 c
                                                                                                                               xoou
                                                                                                                                 h*h
                                                                                                                            oxio«
                                                                                                                            rnzx"
                                                                                                                            nxnso
                                                                                                                                MO t

                     Surfaces and fixed seating          Surfaces and fixed seating
                     to comply with CXaaa *0*            to coaply with CXass '0*
                                                                                         Surfaces to coeply with
                                                                                         Class *0* standard.
                                                                                                                           o n iri
                     standard. Pir« and seek*            standard.
    U1               spread assessment is                                                                                 H O > n >
                     required.
    f t
    O        U       QuaXity Assurance
                                                        A written submission froe
                     procedures are recommended                                         Ho written submission from
    :z       *                                          management is required          management essential, but
                     Ref. cX. 4.3.X.
                                                        «or justification of their      reco— ended. Appointing
    >        s                                          proposals to approving          authorities to be satisfied
                                                        authorities.                    with proposals. Ref. 4.3.
    O (ft

                     Determinate                        Deternlnate
                     Structure                1 Hour                        1 Hour      Determinate
                                                        Structure                       Structure          I Hour
    £ °
                   Indeterminate                        Indeterminate
    P2             Structure                  1 Hour
                                                        Structure           { Hour      Indeterminate
                                                                                        Structure          i Hour

                   Fire resistance to be X              Plre resistance to be {                                       5 2 2 •*h o
                   hour or as superstructure                                            Minimus * hour. Sprinklers    S 3 S -3 9 '
                   whichever is greater.                hour or as superstructure       nay be used to offset                                    ■V
                                                        whichever is greater.                                                            ..
    uj W           Voids under seating not
                   acceptabXe.
                                                        Voids under seatng not
                                                        acceptable.
                                                                                        shortfall. Voids under
                                                                                        seating acceptable if
                                                                                        cavity barriers and
                                                                                                                      • f t M M O 30
                                                                                                                      MPHSlH
                                                                                                                      • • M
                                                                                                                         *H
                                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                 If
       s                                                                                detection provided.                        S3
                                                                                                                        •e»•n > nj
                                                                                                                                   III
                   TO be agreed with approving authorities.             Ref. cl. 4.3.3., 4.3.4.. 4.3.8.                 h s o x S L
a f i                                                                                                                   g o x o sol 3
                                                                                                                        ■ x w *9
                            to     included in operating plan.                                                        J H 1 C
                                                                                                                      X H MZ
                                                                                                                      S aX nSBnM
eg
ti|               As 500 to 2000, but allow
                  i minute maximum escape
                  time only.
                                                       Additional systems and trained personnel above that
                                                                  operating plan. If the measures are
                                                       assessors^       effective and appropriate by the
         8                                                                                                                             S VoH
         DO                                                                                                                            Hid
         V>       As 500 to 2000, but allow
                  i minute maximum escape              Additional facilities above that defined in operatlna
HI hi             time only.                           plan If the measures are considered to be affective                   s2 o5*51*
                                                       and appropriate by the assessors.
a        *                                                                                                                                   >


f C                                                                                                                                         *
                                                                                                                                       S2 t >
                                                                                                                                   Si *rt
                                                                                                                                   £j
                                                                                                                                 »Crt* W
                                                                                                                                *2_,
                                                                                                                                CA O l
                 K     J i s r     i ? ,: s               ^ s a s f i n s r s . r r 1"           “ **-* —                       wx
                                                                                                                                   n|

                                                                                                                                Z Nl
                                                                                                                                H >1


                                                                                             s a y s : *■                   H* 3D 3
                                                                                                                             RH




                 S S 5 s s . f 1S i £ r s s t K 2 n 2 5 * t i 2 ?                 :i3                 11                   to Cl H I S
                                                                                                                           h*h           r
                                                                                                                           Z
                                                                                                                           teh    ar
                                                                                                                           caZ  ll*
                                                                                                                             A*q|
                                                    Obtain drawing* and apptaii»w w*iuLina
                                                    construction and lUecitt to riak
                                                    cataguiy




                                                                      _^^Pooo
                       NO {OPTION 2)                            mlnlnwi|C««andard
                                                        construction for that category




    Close                                                                     H   111*
                       NO                                       ntand comply      _
    Ktand
                                                            th Biniitua oiandard lor
                                                       active lira maaauraa and manage
                                               iec.£ eanAhtn»« nfip r.hai-^ 4.3 4.4 «.



 calculate capacity                                                      la there
 of at and baaed gtl   NO
 minimum escape time                                               ftfttirwMnt to
                                                                  *•»* ■litimua M s i p * t i n
 w i n g appendi*                                                    taee Flo l.||f_______




                                            tnoreaoe tho oeeape time uaing Chart®
                                            fi?
                                            general. guicianuu
                                                      '    * 4,S'
                                                               iu text.   and




                                            C^loul^tm OrfpACily or                        rl ha   on
                                            tftia tine using Beetieit $.




                                                                   Dm i milt
                                                                capacity exceed
                                                            tha capacity of stand



                                                            NO                           'KS

                                       / i l * d t t p .«     \
                                       ( capacity of
                                                                                     /     (leu
                                       • land .10 tita                               stand to
                                        haunt] on                                          run
                                                                                     nnpnnlfy
P I O U R B                            \ eaeapo                   j
                                       \     tine            /
The influence of the geometry and the form
of the roof influence the lateral spread of
fire and smoke and therefore should be
considered when planning means of escape.
Proposals for means of escape and smoke
assessments should be referred to the fire
and licensing authorities. No routes that
can readily be smoke logged should be
permitted.

Measures to prevent or retard early fire growth
It is absolutely crucial to restrict fire growth
rate to manageable proportions because of
the impact of fire growth rate on escape.

There is a need to break the interaction
between fire spreading in cavities, wooden
seating and flooring. This can be done by:

     maintaining clean cavities (or filling
     voids with non-combustible material

     providing adequate compartmentation

     replacing combustible materials in floors
     and seating.

Fire resistance of structure and supporting

The fire-resistance period of the structure
supporting the stands should be compatible
with the compartmentation (see clause 4.2.2)
and usage and also sufficient to prevent
premature collapse or progressive failure
of a facility (indeterminate structures are
an advantage in this respect).

General requirements for fire-resistance
periods are defined in the charts (Tables
4.1, 4.2 and Fig. 4.3). However, these values
are not definite, and careful consideration
is required in appraising the consequences
of failure of a particular element and its
implications on means of escape and subsequent
fire-fighting.

Fire-resistance appraisal
Where specific test data, BRE guidelines
and other sources are not available, an
alternative fire-engineering approach may
be adopted to make an assessment. This
approach recognizes the influence of fire
load, ventilation, location of structural
members and their working stresses.

The stability of structural members during
a fire is controlled by the rise of temperatures
and corresponding reduction in the strength
of the material and the nature and magnitude
of    loading     in    the    members.     The
          fire-engineering method of design can quantify
          the conditions to which structural members
          will be subjected in the event of a fire.

          Different approaches can be made when
          implementing fire-engineering, many being
          simple, while others are complicated, costly
         and time-consuming. For concrete structures,
          guidance for appraisal of fire resistance is
         given in the joint report of the Institution
         and the Concrete Society Design and detailing
         of concrete structures for fire resistance.
         In view of the cost implications involved
         in the length of a study, the level of potential
         cost savings should be evaluated to establish
         whether the application of fire engineering
         is worth while.

GUIDANCE FOR ASSESSING MINIMUM STANDARD
FOR MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES AND RELATED
ACTIVE FIRE PRECAUTIONS  -----------------------------
 In both existing sports grounds and in those of new
 design, the way management organize the ground,
 their stewards and supporting equipment is fundamental
 to the safety of the spectators in the event of a fire.
 Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying
 out their normal duties and seeing that they are aware
of their role in an emergency situation should be given
the highest priority. It is the responsibility of the
management who should have the best knowledge of
their particular situation to produce the documented
evidence (operating plan) that they have considered
the to tal problem and that the stand/ground is safe
for the certified occupancy. It is important that the
licence holder be a person with authority to implement
decisions made either in ground improvements and/or
during the use of the ground.

4.3.1   Quality assurance for larger facilities
        For     larger   facilities,  quality-assurance
        techniques can be used beneficially to provide
        the documentary evidence and give an effective
        means of monitoring the application of the
        management intent.        The following steps
        are a simple resume of the process:

             produce an operating manual to cover
             all aspects relating to crowd management,
             emergency situations and equipment

            verify and monitor the manual for, say,
            one year to show that it is adequate
            and consistent and that it forms a basis
            for certification

            adjust and update the manual as necessary

            continue monitoring the process, based
            on the operating manual.
              include in the manual itself details as
              to how these procedures are to be
              monitored on a regular basis for
              effectiveness.
 4.3.2    Emergency procedures and staff train in pr
         It is essential that plans should be made for
         dealing with emergencies including fire. The
         onus to do this lies with the management
         of the facility. Joint consultation between
         management, police, fire, local authority
         ambulance and other emergency services
         should take place in order to produce agreed
         plans of action for all foreseeable types of
         emergency. While the public are in the ground,
         the number of staff on duty should be sufficient
         to cover entrances, exits and other strategic
         points and to fulfil other essential duties.
         As well as fire stewards, other staff should
         be trained in the use of firefighting equipment,
         and in the action they should take in the
         event of fire.

         It is necessary for management to make
         provision for the collection of information
         of a quality that will convey real conviction
         at a sufficiently early stage for it to activate
         plans for dealing with emergencies. This
         will almost certainly involve a control centre
         with authority to collate and act on information
         and means of communication with individuals
         on the ground staff, police and the public.
         In many instances of major life-loss fires,
         the transmission of information through normal
         organizational hierarchies has been too slow
         to be effective. Persons such as referees,
         gatekeepers, caterers and sales staff (implied
         by the additional facilities noted in clause
         3.3.3) must be included to remove the conflict
         of interest noted in clause 4.1.1.

         Organization of stewards and their training
         to respond appropriately in an emergency
         is the management's responsibility, but the
         advice of the local fire and police authorities
         should be sought on the content of their training
         programme and channelled through the club's
         licence holder/safety officer.

         It is recommended that each steward/attendant
         is issued with a written set of basic operating
         instructions appropriate to the particular
         location and responsibility (see Appendix
         A2).
4.3.3    Public-address system
         In dealing with any emergency situation it          Canter, D. (ed): Fires
         is important to recognize the way people            and human behaviour,
         behave. The seriousness and extent of effect        2nd edit., David Futton,
         has been found to depend considerably on            1989

                            3$
t



             the reactions and patterns of activity of
             people associated with the emergency or
             fire situation.

             It is especially important that appraisers
             and designers recognize the need to minimize
             any delay to the start of the evacuation. In
             this context, clear authoritative and planned
             instructions that tell people simply and directly
             that there is a need to evacuate the area
             and giving them direct instructions on how
             to do this are needed. It is important to
             identify exit routes and gates (see clause
             2 . 2 . 6 ).

             It is extremely important that these are given
             on a reliable and audible address system. At
             no stage should the term 'panic' be mentioned,
             especially not in the form of 'don't panic'
             or even implicitly in the form of 'please keep
             calm'. There should be no reference to actual
             or potential emotional state, simply directions
             telling people what to do. In a complex
             building, this may require different instructions
             to be given to people in different parts, but
            everyone should be kept informed of the
            procedures being put in motion. Staff should
            be made aware of the situation. A prearranged
            set of code words is one way of keeping staff
            informed. The capability to arrive a t an
            early decision to evacuate an area will assist
            the announcers considerably in making such
            low-key messages. Experience of past fatal
            fires has revealed attem pts to delay
            announcements of a developing fire in case
            'panic' should occur.
    4.3.4   Fire detection (fire alarm systems)
            A monitored automatic fire-detection system
            is needed to enable reliable early detection
            and start on evacuation procedures. This
            must register in the control centre/room
            where the public-address system is situated,
            and to prevent potentially dangerous confusion,
            should not be audible to the general public.

             When considering the specification of a new
            system, BS 5839 should be used. Attention            BS 5839: 1988
            is drawn to the provisions for life safety.
            The     modem      computer    based    analogue
            addressable systems are more easily maintained
            and have considerable self-checking ability.
            They have an inherent capability to provide
            information giving the precise location of
            the device that detected the fire and a t many
            locations remote from their control equipments.
            This is an essential for safe first aid, fire­
            fighting, rapid discovery of false alarms or
            to convey sufficient information for the control
            centre to activate the most suitable strategy
            to deal with the problem.

                              39
                                                                               *




          Video surveillance
         There are financial penalties associated with
         suspension of activities and, by inference,
         the pressure on control centre staff to avoid
         implementing emergency plans. On Football
         League grounds police video surveillance
         of crowds is already provided. Consideration
         should be given to using those facilities so
         that control centre staff receive sufficiently
         positive information a t first hand so that
         they can make decisions quickly. Colour
         equipment is necessary to make judgments
         on fires. It will be borne in mind that a
         correctly handled event will have caused
         a disruption apparently for nothing, since
         neither death nor even casualty will occur.
4.3.6    Fire loading
         Seating, partitioning and any other fixed
         or movable contents including seat cushions,
         hired or sold, should possess a good performance
         in fire. Cushions and seating should comply
         with current furniture legislation.
4.3.7    Contents
         Contents should not be easy to dismantle
         and used maliciously as projectiles or to start
         a fire.

4.3.8    Litter
         Accumulation of litter should be scrupulously
         avoided; easily accessible non-combustible
         litte r bins should be provided with provision
         for collectionprior to each activity.
4.3.9    Provision of fire-fighting equipment
         Advice will need to be sought from the local
         fire authority. At least the following should
         be considered and should form part of the
         safety certificate:

             provision of adequate water supply and
             hydrants

             hose reels to BS 5306: Part 1, of sufficient   BS 5306: Part 1
             length to reach the whole area

               provision of portable fire extinguishers,
               properly maintained and protected from
               vandalism to BS 5423 and sited and           BS 5423
               maintained according to BS 5305: Part             BS 5303: Part 3
               3.
4.3.10   Measures to restrict the extent of fire spread
         in later stages
         Restricting the extent and speed of fire spread
         in the later stages of fire will reduce the
         possibility of people's escape being further
         threatened, assist the operations of the fire

                               4o
          brigade, and reduce the ultimate size of fire
          and extent of damage. Most measures that
          reduce the rate of fire growth in the early
          stages will help to restrict fire spread in
          later stages.

 FIRE AND SMOKE ASSESSMENT
 4.4.1    Smoke assessment
          Where the roof geometry is not in itself capable   Thomas, P. H., &
          of ejecting smoky gases, then reservoirs to        Hinkley, P. L.: Design
          contain them together with roof venting            of roof venting systems
          to cause them to flow to the outside may           for single-storev
          be advisable. The design of such systems           buildings. HMSO, London
          is normally made for still-air conditions. With    1964
          an open building of this kind, the effectiveness
          of the venting can be strongly influenced
          by the wind because over-pressures generated
          above a roof and/or sections underneath it
          can oppose the flow of smoky gases out of
          a vent and even cause a complete reversal
          of flow so that air from above the roof flows
          down through the vent. Thus roof venting
          cannot be a universal solution.

         As the gases rise, they entrain air strongly
         which increases their volume and lowers
         their temperature. Further cooling takes
         place by radiation and convection heat transfer
         as the gases flow under roofs etc., and
         eventually they may have lost enough buoyancy
         for them to follow air movements created
         by any wind. This could mean that, within
         a stand, smoke is brought down to ground
         level. Expert assessment and possibly wind-
         tunnel testing may be required.
4.4.2    Smoke control measures
         It is vital to keep smoke away from escape
         routes by restricting its travel and even making
         it flow out of the building altogether.

         Geometries of some roofs, e.g. transverse
         open-ended barrel vaults, can promote the
         rapid ejection of smoky gases from a stand
         and inhibit their spread along it. Conversely,
         longitudinally vaulted roofs favour the rapid
         spread of smoky gases along a stand. Expert
         assessment and possibly wind-tunnel testing
         may be required.

4.4.3    Restriction of flame travel under roofs
         Flames from a large fire that impinge on
         the underside of a roof or balcony, even one
         made of inert material, will elongate very
         considerably as they flow along under the
         roof and, radiating downwards, can put people
         below in great danger and greatly enhance
         the spread of fire horizontally at floor level.
         As with smoke spread the geometry of the
         roof can inhibit or favour spread of flame
         along a stand and should be carefully
         considered.
          A stand consisting of combustible materials
          where it is possible to justify that the lateral
          spread of fire and smoke will not inhibit escape
          or fire-fighting operations may be acceptable.

         The desirability of preventing undue flame
         travel under roofs, even those made of inert
         material, is important. Where this cannot
         be prevented by the intrinsic form of the
         roof, then it may be possible to restrict the
         travel of flame along the underside of a roof
         by installing deep roof screens, combined
         with substantial areas of venting in the roof
         to allow the flame to pass to the outside.
         The reservoirs so formed should generally
         be much smaller than are needed for smoke
         ventilation in order to reduce the area of
         stand exposed to unacceptably high levels
         of heat radiation. Much larger areas of venting
         would be required than are needed for smoke
         venting. However, with the greater buoyancy
         of the flames, the effect of wind is likely
         to be less important. The roof screens together
         with their fixings must be able to resist attack
         by flame and very hot gases for a period
         commensurate with escape and fire-fighting
         operations.

         Where the roofs of stands are so connected
         that smoke and flames could travel along
         essentially two or more sides of a pitch, a
         wide break in the roof should be made to
         separate each side, unless flame travel could
         be eliminated by the measures above.

         In very difficult cases, removal of the roof
         altogether should be considered.

PROVISION OF ADDITIONAL FIRE PRECAUTIONS
TO EXTEND MEANS OF ESCAPE TIME
If the exit capacity of the stand is less than actual
capacity of the stand, it is feasible (subject to the
limitations of Fig. 4.2 and guided by Tables 4.1 and
4.2) to increase the escape capacity by the addition
of further safety provisions. The methodology of the
approach is defined in the flow chart of Fig. 4.3.

Additional      management      activities      or active
fire-protection measures must be justified by the
management and supported by a sound technical
submission, and agreed by the licencing authority.
It should be clear that the additional provisions will,
in reality, improve the safety of the facility.
COVERED GROUNDS
Although completely covered grounds in which both
the sporting activity and spectators are covered by
one single enclosure do not come under the Safety
at sports grounds Act, many of the criteria and
recommendations concerning category 2 stands are
appropriate to covered grounds.
4.7   NEW STANDS AND COVERED GROUNDS
      The recommendations defined in this section are
      appropriate for both new stands and covered grounds
      and can be used as a basis for developing and approving
      new designs that are 'smoke-protected places of
      assembly'.

      To be described as a 'smoke-protected place of assembly'   NFPA 102: Assembly
      all surfaces must generally have low combustibility        seating, tents and
      of Class 0, means of egress must be direct, and the        membrane structures
      roof must be at least 5 m above the highest seating.       1986           ~
      Further, a smoke ventilation system should be engineered
      to maintain the level of smoke generated by any possible
      fire within the area or adjacent compartments at a
      minimum of 2.5 m above the highest seating or walking
      levels.

      However where occupied areas open to the space are
      over 5 m above potential fire load then the clear height
      from the highest occupied level to the calculated smoke
      base should be at least 3.0 m.




                               43
5.   CROWD SAFETY AND COMFORT

     5*1    general

            The Guide to safety at sports grounds contains procedures      Guide to safety at
            for evaluating the capacity of different parts of sports       sports grounds. Home
            grounds. Chapter 16 of that Guide gives examples for           Office/Scottish
            the estimation of safe ground capacity.                        Office, 1986
            Assessment must be made of:

                     the holding capacity of a terrace or viewing
                     slope or seated area

            •        the capacity of a given exit routes from a terrace
                     or stand in combination or singly.             Full
                     consideration has to be given to the effects
                     of potential obstructions that could occur

                     the location of crush barriers to minimize
                     pressures associated with crowd movements.

           The number of people that can be safely accommodated
           on a terrace or in a stand (or other covered
           accommodation) is either its holding capacity, or the
           capacity of the exit system to be used in normal
           circumstances at the end of an event, or the emergency
           exit system, whichever is the least.

     5.2   PASSAGEWAY BLOCKAGES
           With a crowd moving along a passageway, physical blockage
           can occur once a critical density is reached. In these
           conditions crowd pressures can escalate to a dangerous
           level, and if a person stumbles or falls the crowd cannot
           adapt to avoid him or to stop to help.

           The blockage may be 'spontaneous' and does not require
           an obstruction such as people forming a 'comprehensive
           arch' against the onward stream between the 'abutments'
           of the passage boundaries. Any obstruction such as people
           falling will of course aggravate the effect.

           Once a blockage occurs, the build-up of pressure and
           resultant injury and asphyxiation may be rapid if the
           following crowd is not halted and is unaware of the
           obstruction ahead.

           Since this type of danger arises from crowd pressures
           its remedy lies in their removal or restraint within safe
           limits.

           The essential limits are:

                    the means of controlling the crowd density
                    along the route by limiting the rate of access
                    into the route such that the rate does not exceed
                    the capacity of the route itself

                    the design of the passageway to eliminate
                    obstructions to flow and other hazards



                                        44
           provision of sufficient barriers on terraces
           to restrain surges in 'peak' or 'other' viewing
           areas without incurring pressures on the human
           body that cannot be 'tolerated'.
 FLOW RATES
 The recommended flow rates given in Chapter 1? of
 the Guide to safety at sports grounds are:

           From stands and stairways, a flow rate of 40
           persons per minute per unit of exit width (i.e.
           550 mm) should be used. From terraces (including
           covered terraces) and the ground generally
           a flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit
           of exit width should be used.

 The design of each passageway             section against these
 flow rates should be for those           flows expected in an
 emergency and where necessary             take account of the
 possible loss of availability of other   exits in an emergency.

 It should be noted that all rates may be reduced where
 spectators may be less physically able, after consultation
 with both the licensing and building authorities. For
 such conditions Appendix B gives the derivation behind
 the currently accepted rates of flow for crowds.
SEQUENCE OF CALCULATION
The capacity of an element is the product of the flow
rate, the available width and the emergency evacuation
time, as defined in Section 4.

The sequence of calculations for each element in the
ground is illustrated in Fig. 5.1. It recognizes that should
a particular element fail to reach the required capacity
the options are generally to improve the element or
to reduce the overall capacity (see Fig. 4.3).

CONTROL OF CROWD FLOW IN AN EMERGENCY
 The need to control the flow of crowds in emergency
 situations is recognized. In an emergency, reactions
 may not be logical, and clear concise directions must
 be given. It is important that exit passageways are
identified, signed and sized, and allowance should be
 made for the emergency situation when other exits may
be unusable. Care should be taken in the planning of
exit systems so that, in the event of an emergency that
blocks any of the usual exit routes, alternative routes
will be available. Management and stewards must be
familiar with both the layout and organization of the
ground and the plans for emergency evacuation.
Arrangements for entry and exit and those for seated
or standing accommodation can conveniently be considered
separately. Disasters at Ibrox (1972) and Birmingham
(1984) occurred during egress, while those at Bolton
(1946), Oxford and Carlisle (1973) happened on the terraces
because of collapse of barriers or insufficient barriers.
              CALCULATE E N C L O S U R E C A P iniT V

                           r----
              CHECK E N C L O S U R E EXITS                   REDUCE CAPACITY
                      - t-                         loUcT      ^ IM P R O V E EXITS


                        O.K.

                        I
              CALCULA T E T E R R A C E CAPACITY



        f
                        I
             CHECK T E R R A C E EXITS
                                                  [N O T      REDUCE CAPACITY


                        I
                       O.K.
                                                  I o . kT     IMPROVE EXITS




                        I
            CALCULATE STAND CAPACITY



    |
                        I
            CHECK STAND EXITS
                                                  NO T
                                                  ----        REDUCE CAPACITY
                                                  O.K.         IMPROVE EXITS


                      O .K .


                       i
            DEFINE EXIT R O U T E S



            CALCULATE CAPACITY O F EACH
            ELEMENT ON EXIT ROUTE



I              CHECK FLO W AGAINST CAPACITY           1—° £   IMPROVE ROUTE

                       I
        -------------------


                      O.K.
                                                      1O.K.
 5.5.1    Entry control
          Spectators generally arrive over an extended
          period and are 'filtered' by the turnstiles, which
          assist control. Entry should be controlled both
          into and within the ground. Crowd pressure
          can however occur outside the ground, because
          of late arrivals or under 'house full' conditions
          after the turnstiles have been closed. An
          important provision is means of automatically
          recording the numbers admitted a t each point.
          This information should be continuously available
          a t a central control point.          This allows
          management to control the total number of
          spectators to an area or section but will not
          necessarily prevent surge pressures that can
          even occur in partially filled pens if the crowd
          concentrates in a favoured area as is common.

         Procedures should be developed to manage
         situations where excessive crowds gather outside
         the entrance to a ground. These procedures
         will depend on local knowledge, police advice
         and available options, such as opening additional
         entrances.

         So that queuing is not normally excessive,
         sufficient turnstiles should be provided to allow
         full terrace/stand capacity to be reached in
         approximately 45 minutes at the rate of 750            What is the basis for
         persons per turnstile per hour.                        using 45 min? Reference
                                                                required.
         Ideally, each tum stile/entry gate should feed
         a specific viewing area, choice being decided
         before entry. Where this is not possible, once
         through the tum stile/entry gate, spectators
         should be clearly directed, by the use of
         channelled routes to the appropriate viewing
         area. In the la tte r case, adequate stewarding
         will be required.
5.5.2    Exit control
          Where problems occur as in the event of an
          exit passageway blockage for whatever reason,
          it is essential that the entry to that passageway
         is closed quickly. The public-address system
         should be used to reinforce, and even inform,
         stewards. However, such communication cannot
         be achieved unless the public-address system
         is aimed a t the specific passageway or the
         passageway itself is clearly identified in some
         manner for example, alphabetic or numeric.
         The labelling of each of the passageways/exit
         routes at regular intervals such that, for instance,
         it could be announced that passageway R was
         closed and passageway T should be used as an
         alternative would be of benefit. The ability
         to redirect crowd movements by such clear
         identification of exit routes is of major
         importance.



                             47
         Protection provided to stairs, landings and
         passageway should be enclosed to a standard
         such as not to pass a 100 mm diam eter ball
         through the protection.

         Splitter barriers are those that are arranged
         parallel with the flow and split it into separate
         lanes. They have a regulatory effect, help
         to reduce surge pressures and provide a desirable
         hand support on one side. Some reduction of
         flow occurs with lanes less than 1.1 m wide,
         and such lanes should be excluded from flow
         calculations.
CRUSH BARRIERS
It is important that crowd pressures cannot be generated
so as to cause injury to those spectators pressed against
the barrier, and it is of paramount importance that collapse
of barriers under crowd pressure does not occur. It should
be recognized, however, that on terraces, viewing slopes
and elsewhere maximum pressures will occur when all
spectators contribute simultaneously to the build-up
of pressure. Although this seldom occurs it is likely
to cause gross discomfort rather than actual injury. It
is important therefore that no undersized crush barriers
are permitted.

The Guide to safety at sports grounds contains guidance
on the reduced spacing of barriers in areas where
spectators may crowd together, for example behind
football goals.

For some events, such as 'pop' concerts, barriers may
need to be provided in front of the audience to create
a 'sterile' zone between audience and the stage, race
track, etc. Care is needed in the design of such barriers
that they are both adequate elements in themselves
and properly founded and that they do not cause injury
from excess pressure on individuals against the barriers.
Padding out may be necessary to prevent this.
Consideration should also be given to curved barriers,
with areas for overspill at each end.

Appendix C has been included to provide professional
engineers, architects, surveyors, etc. with the scientific
background to barrier design and which may in certain
instances be necessary for a proper appraisal.

Where barriers are substandard either by strength, height
or in any other way do not comply with the Guide thev
should be excluded from capacity calculations. Where
any barriers are so substandard as to offer a positive
risk to safety they should be removed or such areas taken
out of use.
STRUCTURAL APPRAISAL

6.1 GENERAL APPROACH
    In carrying out an appraisal of an existing ground or
    individual stand it is important that the survey of
    conditions of both the overall structure and all its
    individual details is methodically and meticulously carried
    out so that as complete a 'picture' of its existing condition
    and likely structural performance can be identified.

   Any remedial measures that may be required to provide
   structural adequacy can then be more precisely targeted.
   Although the process of appraisal inevitably leaves less
   scope for choice of strengthening necessary than does
   the process of designing a new structure, it is nevertheless
   important that measures should be as clean lined, simple
   and attractive as possible. The imagery of such basic
   structures has been shown to play a significant part in
   how the facility is viewed by the public.
6.2 EXISTING SURVEY DRAWINGS
   Original drawings should be sought. If not available,
   a survey should be undertaken to identify the construction
   and provide base drawings for use and annotation during
   appraisal (see subsection 6.3).

   For all new works (and old if possible), stadia should
   retain original as-built records on the premises, preferably
   in negative form so that they can be readily reproduced.
6.3 SURVEY OF CONDITION & RECORD OF FINDINGS

   Determination of the physical condition of the structure         Appraisal of existing
   is important. The task of determining the condition              structures, IStructE,
   of a structure should be approached with an open mind            London 1980
   without prejudging the cause of any apparent defects.
   There is always the danger that new defects that are
   outside of previous experience will be missed, and much
   effort may go into trying to find a well known type of
   defect that is not present. It is necessary to describe
   the conditions adequately so that the situation can be
   reviewed objectively.    However, previous experience
   of defects should be borne in mind and checks made
   for them. Reference to similar age and types of building
   should be made.

   The engineer should trust only the evidence of his own eyes.
   Members and connections that the engineer judges may
   contain defects will need exposure. Additional labour
   is needed to facilitate necessary exposure and help close
   elements up again after inspection. Clear notes, together        (Fig.6.1 to be based on
   with sketches and photographs should be kept; a possible         Appendices in Appraisal
   form is shown in Fig. 6.1.                                       of Existing Structures
  The report Appraisal of existing structures should be
  consulted for guidance on surveying the condition of
  a structure.
6*4 POTENTIALLY     DANGEROUS,                DEGRADED        OR
    SUBSTANDARD FABRIC                                   ‘-------
    6.4.1  Drawings
           Such drawings as exist of the structure should
           be examined with the view to identifying potential
           problem areas and details in the construction.

               Water traps in metal construction are
               particularly notorious, for example:
               a channel on its side
               roof hook bolt fixings
               eaves and gable framing members
               column head connections, and other similar
                  details where rust can develop freely.
               'loose' terrace units resting on supports
               which could move sideways and fall off
               under sway loading should be noted. Thick
               packers under units can be potentially
               hazardous. Poor-quality in situ concrete
               terracing can create a tripping hazard.                                      »

               Attention should be paid to block/brick
               walls enclosing public corridors, perim eter
               walls and those forming entry/egress
               gateways especially if not adequately
               restrained, since they may be subject to
               significant lateral loads from        crowd
               pressures.

               All parapets, barriers, etc.

               In the case of slender structures with long
               cantilevers   and    long-span   structures,
               attention should be paid to the effects
               of    fatigue   resulting   from    possible
               fluctuations. Principal welds should be
               inspected on a regular basis for evidence
               of cracks.
  6.4.2   Inspection
          What needs to be inspected must be safely and             Appraisal of existing
          easily accessible. Temporary staging may have             structures, IStructE
          to be erected to make this possible.                      July 1980
          There is always a temptation to view from                 Structural renovation of
          a distance, especially in bad weather, and reliance       existing buildings.
          must not be attached to impressions gained                CIRIA report III 1986
          from distant viewing.

          Gutters/downpipes should be included in a                 Historical structural
          'structural fabric’ inspection to see whether             steelwork Handbook
          leaking water is getting to metal structure               BCSA Publication
          (especially) not protected against its effects.           No 11/84




                               50
             Early grandstands may be 'light' on stability,       Use of redundant
             e.g. Victorian iron sheds are often dependent        buildings -
             on their corrugated iron for frame bracing.          sheets 19, 20, 21 and 22.
             The engineer must therefore beware of removing
             cladding, without prior appraisal. He should         Architects Journal,
             consider whether permanent extra bracing is          March 21 and 4 April
             desirable.                                           1979.
         Checks should include identification of deleterious
         or hazardous materials. These will include:

          .     high-alumina cement in structural elements

               woodwool slabs used as permanent formwork

               calcium chloride in admixtures in reinforced
               concrete

         .     sea-dredged aggregates (inadequately washed,
               so containing residual chlorides)
               asbestos products

         .     concrete subject to alkali-silica reaction

         Toilet areas, designated or otherwise,              or
         structures below toilets are particularly           at
         risk from acids etc. and should be checked.

        Pre-World War II concrete may contain clinker
        or otherwise sulphate/nitrate rich aggregates.
        Leaks through these can highly corrode existing
        embedded filler joists or supporting steelwork.
        Embedded details may require sampling or
        widespread opening up.

        The services of an expert are recommended
        to inspect timber elements for rot, insect attack,
        and to identify or warn of conditions that could
        encourage these. (Damp unventilated areas
        are notorious for dry rot.)

        Details that contain junctions of steel and
        concrete should be checked for corrosion, e.g.
        precast terrace or seating units on steel frames.
        Anything fixed by chemical or expanding anchors
        should be regarded as potentially suspect.

        GRC is a material that will bum and become
        brittle, and its presence should be identified.
6.4.3   Recording of results of condition
        Specific comments should be meticulously marked
        on a 'proforma' checklist as per Fig. 6.2. Ideally
        the locations of any particular defects should
        be cross referenced to the survey plans, and
        photographs should be taken.




                               5*1
LOCATION      ITEM                             CONDITION   COMMENTS
Structure/   Columns       Cast/wrought iron
Buildings    <5c w a lls   Steel
                           Concrete
                           Timber
                           Brickwork
             Beams         Cast/wrought iron
                           Steel
                           Concrete
                           Timber
                           Other
             Decking       Wrought iron
                           Steel
                           Concrete,
                             in situ
                           Concrete,
                             precast
                           Timber
                           Other
             Roof       Wrought iron
                           beams/trusses
                        S te e l, beams
                        Steel trusses
                        Concrete,
                           in situ
                        Concrete,
                           precast
                        Timber, beams
                        Timber,
                           trusses
                        Other
             Advertising hoardings,
             Roof claddings
                       Material
                       Fixing and
                         fastenings
             Wall claddings
                         Material
                         Fixings
             Bri ckwork/b 1ockwork
                           Internal
                           External
             Lintels
             Fire separation and
             compartmentation
             Retaining w alls
             External envelope
             Foundations




                                      52.
 LOCATION        item                          CONDITION   COMMENTS
 Structure/      Crush barriers
 terrace         Segregation fences
                 Lateral fences
                 Pitch perimeter fence
                 Associated boundary fence
                 Associated boundary w a lls
                 Retaining w alls
                 Ground terrace
                 Suspended terrace
                 Column supports
                   Beam supports
                 A ncilliaries
                   fastening and fixings

Structure/    Brickwork/blockwork
boundary wallsConcrete      reinforced
                           plain
              Steel
              Fences
              Exit gates
              Turnstiles
              Retaining w a lls
Structure/      O verall structure
floodlight      Platform s
towers          Ladders and rails
                Fastenings and fixings
Structure/      Gangways
exits           Stairways
                Handrails
                Balustrades
                Fire protection
                Crush barriers
Structure/      Advertising hoardings
others          Toilet blocks
                A ncillary buildings
                TV camera positions
Temporary       Anchorages
structures      Handrails
                Guy wires

Fig. 6.2




                                   5*3
6-5 POTENTIALLY    c o m b u s t ib l e    m a t e r ia l s   and
    BUILDING FABRIC "
    Guidance on m atters concerned with fire appraisal has
    been given in Section 4.

6.6 TESTING OF MATERIALS & ELEMENTS

    Where the survey provides sufficient information to
    enable the engineer to complete the appraisal and reach
    conclusions and make recommendations with confidence
    there will be no need to test. Requirements for testing
    will arise where, for example,

           there is lack of information on what materials
           are present in the structure

           the presence of deteriorated or deleterious material
           or substandard material is suspected
    Such requirements, whether they be for materials testing
    or for load testing are described in Appraisal of existing
    structures

6.7 TESTING OF CRUSH BARRIERS/HANDRAILS
    Crush barriers should be tested in accordance with the          (Fig. 6.3 Testing of
    Guide to safety a t sports grounds using an approved testing    barriers at Bradford)
    machine (see Fig. 6.3 and Appendix D).

    Where testing is carried out on isolated members, as
    opposed to complete barriers, then the loading on the
    member should take account of any loading transfer
    due to fixity of components.

   The results of each individual test must be recorded             Ref Guide to safety
   and kept in a log. Copies should be available to both            at sports grounds
   the licence holder and the local authority. Tests should         I Annex C
   be carried out either on a five year cycle or totally at
   least every fifth year. This information should be noted
   on a 1:200 plan of the ground, and should be incorporated
   into an annual report for inspection by the licensing
   authority.

   Adequacy of barriers should be to the criteria laid down
   in the Guide.

   All failures should be repaired or renewed prior to the
   next activity taking place, or the areas in question taken
   out of use until made safe.

   Any works of strengthening and refurbishment carried
   out as a result of a failure must be retested and logged
   before being opened to the public.

   All new or renewed work should be designed to comply
   with the Guide for loading capabilities and to the relevant
   structural codes of practice and, if supervised, by a
   chartered civil/structural engineer, need not be tested
   on completion.

   The incorporation into a testing schedule of all new or
   renewed barriers/handrails should be determined by the
   engineer.
                                 54
8 APPRAISAL OF EFFECTS OF WIND

 6.8.1     Wind tunnel tests
          If during the process of appraisal, doubts are raised
          as to the effects of the wind regime on the structure
          or    on    smoke      venting,   investigations   by
          representative wind tunnel tests may be necessary.

            Sports ground structures tend to dominate their
           environment and can make major changes to the
           original airflow pattern. Sports grounds are seldom
           built on level sites free from obstructions, so
           that the topography and all structures in close
           proximity will need to be included in any wind
           tunnel test. Care must be taken that this does
           not reduce the scale of the model so much, in
           order to fit the wind tunnel, that the model is
           too small to reproduce the dynamic effects
           accurately. Suitable wind tunnels are specially
           built to reproduce the gusty nature of the wind
          to the same scale as the structural model and
          are available in specialist laboratories. Tests
          in the smooth and uniform flow of aeronautical
          wind tunnels give inaccurate and misleading results
          since they are directed merely to the determination
          of quasi-static wind pressures and forces. Special
          attention needs to be paid to dynamic effects
          if these are to be measured with any accuracy.
          Guidelines for wind tunnel tests are given in
          Appendix K of CP 3: Chapter V: Part 2, and Part         CP 3: Chapter V:
          2 of The designer's guide.                              Part 2, Appendix K
6*8.2 Analysis of effects of dynamic loading
         The two main sources of dynamic load are wind            Bolton, A.: 'Natural
         loads and spectator activities, and damaging effects     frequencies of
         will follow only if these can excite resonance           structures for
         of a part, or the whole, of a structure.                 designers’, Struct.
                                                                  Eng., no. 9, 56A,
                                                                  Sept. 1978
         For existing structures the amplitude of any
         vibration that arises can be directly measured.
         For structures subject to upgrading, calculations
         should be made to determine the natural frequency,
         the amplitude of vibration and the dynamic stress.

         Approach to the assessment of wind loadings is
         covered in clause 3.6.4 and of other dynamic loading
         effects in clauses 3.6.5 and 3.6.6. It is unlikely
         that the majority of structures will have natural
         frequencies within the bands that can be excited
         by either source and so can be analysed for response
         under quasi-static allowable values.

         Gust loading excites vibration over a wide range         IP19/84 Table 1
         of frequencies however, which may cause problems
         of fatigue. Data on the loading cycle for fatigue        Fatigue assessments
         assessments are given in Table 1 of IP19/84 and          ECCS report no. 52
         in Fig. 24 in ECCS report no. 52.                        Fig. 24
6.8.3 Resonant wind loading
       Flexible stadia structures, especially those including
       slender cantilevers, tall flag poles and lighting
       masts, may display excessive dynamic effects
       because of vortex shedding. Lattice structures
       and typical stand enclosures are not usually subject
       to this problem.

      If investigation, for instance using the classification   Cook, N. J.:
      procedure in BS 6399: Part 2, or Chapter 10 of            'Designers guide to
      The designer's guide, shows that natural frequencies      wind loading of
      of the structure exist close to the bands of possible     building structures',
      vortex excitation, care should be taken to consider       Ch. 10.
      these aspects. Further studies investigating the
      interaction of the structure and the air flowing
      over it, the determination of the forces that this
      causes and the response of the structure itself
      to these periodic forces may be necessary.

      It is unlikely there will be need to assess the
      complex behaviour of large amplitude responses,
      since the engineer is required only to avoid such
      an occurrence. This can be achieved by altering
      the form of the structure to eliminate periodic
      aerodynamic forces altogether by changing the
      member stiffness to move the natural frequencies
      away from any aerodynamic forces that cannot
      be avoided, or by increasing the damping to reduce
      vibrations to negligible proportions.

      Even relatively simple arithm etic calculations
      as in BS 6399: Part 2 and ECCS report no. 52
      will be sufficient as long as they can demonstrate
      that there is no danger to the structure from
      wind loading or any feasible behaviour of the
      spectators.
6.8.4 Spectator loading
      Spectators usually act independently, but at
       moments of excitement the crowd may surge.
      This is best dealt with by normal quasi-static
      analysis using loading considerations of clause
       3.6.8. Concerted swaying in time or dancing may,
      however, cause forces of up to two or three times
      the total weight of the spectators vertically with
      a considerable horizontal component. Neither
      of these effects will distress a normal structure
      unless there is a natural frequency that the crowd
      can excite, but it should be realized that the
      presence of any such natural frequency will bias
      the spectators towards it. The maximum frequency
      that this concerted action can affect is about
      4 Hz, and any natural frequency of the structure
      below this value is best removed by increasing
      the stiffness of members or by changing the
      construction to incorporate more damping.

      Section 7 deals with the effects of spectator loading
      on light demountable stands.



                               5a
      6*8.5 Regular inspection of slender structures
             Occasionally, appraisal will reveal a structure
            that is sufficiently light, slender or ill-conditioned
            that possible exciting frequencies approach the
            natural frequency, and resonance is possible with
            an amplitude considerably greater than in statically
            loaded conditions.

            Such a condition may cause some fatigue damage
            over the years, which coupled to the effect of
            imperfections in the construction, corrosion, etc.
            can lead to reduction in reserves of strength in
            the structure, and eventually to a dangerous state.

            In consequence, it is extremely important that
            any long-span' structure, receives 'resident
            supervision' during initial construction from the
            design consultant, so that construction follows
            the designer's intentions, and that sufficient regular
            and thorough annual checks are made on key
            elements for damage, corrosion, etc. A full record
            of the initial construction supervision and all
            subsequent inspections, remedial works, etc. must
            be kept.

           Should possible resonance of a structure be
           established, then specialist advice must be taken,
           possibly using techniques of structural appraisal
           from the aircraft industry to establish the possibility
           of cumulative damage. It may be necessary to
           a lter the characteristics of the structure to suppress
           resonance.

6.9 APPRAISAL     of     stru ctu res            a g a in s t
    DISPORPORTIONATE COLLAPSE" -------------------------------

    With so many people collected in one area, it is necessary
    to check that sports ground structures would not collapse
    disproportionately to the cause.

    A graphic example of such a condition is shown in Fig.
    6.3, where without any secondary action between adjacent
    principal beams, collapse of the front column would
    lead to collapse of that section of the roof. Such a
    potential condition could be aggravated by a roof form
    that enabled the build-up of considerable snow drifts.

    The engineer must therefore consider in his appraisal
    the degree of redundancy of the structure and the potential
    for redistribution of loads, possibly using 'membrane'
    action from two-way structural continuity.               Such
    consideration may be especially important in the
    assessment of the adequacy of early 'structurally light'
    constructions, or on structures where degradation of
    initial strength is evident from corrosion or other effects.

6.10 REPLACEMENT OR STRENGTHENING O F DOUBTFITT,
     ELEMENTS            ---- ------------------------- --------
    Where either the survey or subsequent testing or appraisal
    shows an element to be unsatisfactory, it should either
    be replaced or be suitably strengthened.

                                 57
              ‘                                      •?
                          r ^ r r C T s T^


                         ffa     1 4 e n c f a u l tu u lfiU    C     r   f

                   ftttk C s M , y v t t   M    u / f t A & v tr & '£ * c

                  “L-j         j& ^e/ u
                                      C /ea
                                         i/e n A
                                               A etL   t^' &
                                                  e u .t*  tte ^
                                                               / r /r
                                                                    mm £

                                   jM * tc h ti* y , C4u ru /A            fa

                                   —L-*             /A    t-   fo w y y


   FIG. fi.5                                              fa    /fa   r

                                                          f/ttcMdr+s.
Such considerations may well require the installation
of temporary support until such time as the permanent
remedial work can be undertaken. All such temporary
works should be designed and constructed with the location
and nature of usage in mind and be reasonably proof
against vandalism.

Adequate access will need to be provided to undertake
these measures, so that they can be correctly effected
and inspected prior to commissioning.
7    TEMPORARY STANDS, FLOODLIGHT/PYLONS, ETC.
     7.1 Temporary stands
           While many of the aspects are common to the design              Safety considerations
           of permanent stands, there are a number of items that           for the design and
           are likely to be of greater importance for those classified     erection of
           as temporary, or demountable, or used for special public        demountable
           events such as pop concerts and golf tournaments.               grandstand, IStructE,
                                                                           May 1989
           These features include:

                 overall stability                                         'Demountable grand­
                 disproportionate collapse in the event of the             stands’, J. F. Dickie &
                 removal of a component                                    G. R. Tomlinson,
                 dynamic response                                          Struct. Eng. Review
                 effects of repeated use
                 lack of fit
                 effects of added loadings from fabric structures,
                 flagpoles,   scoreboards,    attached guy   wires
                 supporting other structures
                 presence of adjacent high fire loads.

          In such circumatances it is necessary to check that the
          original design is capable of providing the public with
          an adequate margin of safety.

          Inspection should be made for effects of corrosion on            BS 5973: Access
          all elements of the structure, and that the fire separation      working scaffolds &
          of the construction from other structures is sufficient.         special scaffold
                                                                           structures in steel
          Fixings and handrails for all platforms, stairways, etc.
          must be adequate.

          Means of escape from such temporary stands on evacuation
          must be direct to a sufficient place of safety outside.
          Special care needs to be taken so that in providing
          sufficient means of egress from the temporary stand
          or place of assembly that the capacity of means of egress
          from existing or adjacent structures is not impaired
          (and vice versa).

    7.2   Other structures
          Particular events in sports grounds and other places
          of assembly will require in addition to temporary stands,
          the provision of temporary structures such as tents,
          fabric structures, flagpoles, e tc .. additional floodlighting
          pylons, lighting trusses, protection barriers and additional
          means of escape. All such structures used in the presence
          of the public need to be properly designed to resist the
          loads to which they might be subjected.

          An occasional licence for such an event may well be
          needed from the local council. This licence will be
          comprehensive and will need to cover most of those
          elements referred to in the specimen of Appendix G.
          This will require a prior appraisal under the direction
          of an experienced professional engineer of all m atters
          mentioned earlier in this report for sports grounds in
          normal operation. In particular:



                                         59
       Crowd capacities section by section in relation
       to adequate means of managed ingress and egress.

       Additional exit routes, bridges, zones should be
       sized as in the Guide to safety a t sports grounds,
       and appropriately signed and taken directly to
       an outside place of safety, without surpassing
       the capacity of existing or other exit routes.

       Crowd barriers and their anchorages will need           NFPA 102, Assembly
       to be designed to resist the loads from crowds          seating, tents and
       to which they are subject (see Section 9 of the         membrane structures,
       Guide). In other cases these horizontal barriers        1986        ‘
       will need to be designed on the basis of the purpose
       for which they are needed and detailed to prevent
       crushing. Additional padding may be required.

For instance, the barrier between the front of the audience
and the performance should provide a sterile area, and
the barrier and its foundation or anchorage should be
designed for 3.0 kN/m.

All tents, pylons and protection barriers should be properly                      #
anchored to resist the loads from snow, wind and people
on them. It is appropriate to amend the wind and snow
loads to account for the temporary duration, season
of the year, and likelihood of the event proceeding in
the circumstance of bad weather. A service load of
20 kg/m8 in addition to self-weight and consideration
of 1 in 10 year wind loading condition for the location
are then appropriate, unless higher snow loadings are
specifically required.

      The back guys to temporary structures should
      not be lower than 2.5 m above any means of escape,
      and no anchorages should lie within any escape
      route to provide a possible trip hazard.

      Appraisal should be made of any existing elements
      of the grounds to which such facilities are tied
      back so that the combined loading does not impair
      the integrity of either structure.

      Materials used for fabric structures should be           BS 3199/3120
      durably flame proofed and inherently resistant
      to flame spread to BS 3119/3120 (or B1/B2 of             DIN 4102; Flame spread
      DIN 4102).                                               resistance of membrane
      Lighting bridges should be adequately designed           BS 6399: Part 1 1984
      for the access required of them and for the loads        Loadings for buildings
      of lighting etc. to be carried by them. Wind loading     Table 7
      is often a critical element in the design of such
      structures. Handrails and safety harnesses should
      be provided. They should be designed so as to
      prevent access by unauthorized personnel and,
      in particular, by the audience.

      Unless specifically approved and properly designed,
      equipment, lighting trusses should not be suspended
      over areas occupied by the public.



                             Q>O
Any electrical installations should comply with
the relevant British Standards and IEE Wiring
regulations, and their installation should be to
the satisfaction of a professionally qualified
electrical engineer of appropriate experience
(see also Section 8).
8   ELECTRICAL LAYOUTS

    (To be developed in consultation with IEE/chartered electrical
    engineers.)




                                      G2.
    APPENDIX A l      DAY-TO-DAY RESPONSIBILITIES OF MANAGEMENT

    A list of the ’day-to-day’ routine responsibilities of the dub
    includes:
    1.  Maintain certificate in force
    2. Keep Local Authority informed of alterations
    3. Provide and maintain crush barriers
    4.  Provide police control room
    5. Provide and maintain emergency lighting
    6. Provide and maintain fire-fighting equipment
    7. Provide and maintain communication and warning system
    8. Provide and maintain first aid room
    9.  Carry out crowd control measures deemed necessary bv
        police                                                 J
  10. Provide and maintain notices re fire-fighting equipment
  11. Provide and maintain fencing
  12. Provide and maintain wind measuring equipment (if required)
  13. Provide and maintain general fabric of stadium
  14. Provide annual inspection (before 1 August of each year
 15. Before each specific activity, test exit doors and gates,
       emergency lighting and communication systems etc.
 16. After each specific activity, check condition of terraces,

•
      staircases, stand seats, crush barriers, perim eter fences,
       penfences, gates and balustrades
 17. Record inspections 15 and 16 in log book and log work
       requiring remedial works and take steps to carry out that
       work
 18. Have responsible person in attendance
 19. Provide first aid staff
 20. Arrange adequate policing
 21. Arrange adequate stewarding
22. Arrange attendance of electrician
23. Make sure all escape gates are easily openable, except
      that certain gates may be locked, provided that steward
      is in attendance with key
24. Open all gates to evacuate stadium, as directed by police
25. Maintain ingress and egress routes clear from obstruction
26. Maintain self-closing doors
27. Provide and maintain non-slip surfaces to exits
28. Provide and maintain exit signs
29. Provide and maintain escape routes in perim eter fencing
30. Record crowd attendance figures
31. Record inspections
32. Record training and instruction to staff
33. Give each member of staff and steward a copy of emergency
     procedures
34. Train staff and steward in emergency procedures
35. Give means of I/D to people (e.g. press) having free access
36. Only store flammable gases and liquids to Local Authority
     approval
37. Clear all combustible rubbish
38. Park vehicles only in an approved manner
39. Provide record drawings




                                              Al
APPENDIX  A2      DRAFT   RULES             FOR     INSTRUCTION
OF STEWARDS O N EVENT DAYS

INSTRUCTIONS FOR SAFETY STEWARDS

1   Safety Stewards to report to Cash Office a t ... two hours before specified activity.
2   Holder to allocate responsibilities.

    Responsibilities
    (a)   Door stewards, stands and ground:
              Each door steward to collect standard keys and distinctive surcoat
              Report to allocated area. Check exit door(s) for egress
              Remain in position to monitor exit door(s) during all of specified activity
          -   Unlock exit door(s) ten minutes prior to end ofmatch         or on instructions of
              a police officer or public address message.
    IN EVENT OF FIRE*
          -   Operate nearest fire alarm point
          -   Unlock exit door(s)
          -   Await instructions of fire picket

    ON HEARING EMERGENCY PA MESSAGE*
        - Unlock exit door(s)
          -   Assist in evacuation if required
          -   Secure exit door(s) at end of specified activity, or on instructions of a police
              officer or responsible person
          -   Return standard key and surcoat
    (b) Door stewards - Stand B area
    BEFORE EVENT
    Report to stadium Administrator two hours before the event starting time

    Collect distinctive bib and emergency exit keys from stadium Administrator. Receive
    instructions as to allocated areas etc.

    Report to allocated area. Check the exit door(s), remove lock and securing bar and
    place in Stewards room adjacent invalids tunnel. Open doors fully to ensure easily open
    obstructions. Inform Stadium Administrator of any problems encountered.

    Check position of fire alarm call point and position of nearest fire and door stewards.
    DURING EVENT
    Remain in close proximity to exit door(s) throughout the event.

    Open exit door(s) ten minutes prior to the end of the event or on instructions of a police
    officer or public address message i.e. ’Stewards Operate Code 1’.
    AFTER THE EVENT
    After the event the spectators have left the stadium or on instruction from the police
    or stadium administrator, secure the exit doors.

    * Coded by Stand Area
 Return bib and keys to stadium administrator.

 Note: Replace security bars only a fte r the public have left the premises.
 (c)    Fire stewards:
        East fire steward to collect standard key and surcoat.       Each fire picket team
        leader to collect emergency communications radio.
       Carry out prematch inspections and tests:
       - Radio
       - Fire alarm
       - Fire fighting equipment
       - Housekeeping

       Fire picket team leader to deploy fire pickets
 ON HEARING FIRE ALARM
Check the location of fire on the fire alarm indicator panel

Team leader report affected zone to control via radio

Proceed to affected zone. Team leader to assess the incident and decide on the action
to be taken.

Team leader to report circumstances or incident to control, and advise on evacuation
vlC*

Team leader to liaise with fire brigade on arrival.
AT END OF SPECIFIED ACTIVITY
Check stand/ground and ensure all patrons have left. Check all fire fighting equipment
is in place, and report any deficiencies to the holder.
Return all equipment.

(d)    Police control room:

ON HEARING FIRE ALARM OR BEING INFORMED OF FIRE
Call the fire brigade by telephone immediately (999)

Ensure all exit door(s) in affected zone are unlocked by making the following
announcement over the PA system: ’Stewards Stand A/Stand B etc. Code 1*.

            ati0n fr° m n lre pickeV If p«Juip®d *>y fire picket team leader announce
evacuation message over PA system for affected zone.

Note: the word 'FIRE' should not be used over the PA system.




                                     A3
t




    APPENDIX B       GROUND FLOW RATES


     OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
     INTRODUCTION
         Ages

        Gender

        Density

        Level of service

        Directions

        Topography

        Light and visual

        Physical fitness/speed relationship

     PREFERRED RATE

    ANALYTICAL MODELLING OF FLOW RATE
        Ramp

        Stairways

        Doorways

       Static crowd/circulating crowd
       Emergency situations

    REFERENCES




    This Appendix will be drafted taking into account the ’systems’ approach to such
    problems as ind,cared J Fruin's article 'Crowd dynamics and audlfo,Tum ma„agement'




                                      A 4
APPENDIX C   PERFORMANCE OF CRUSH BARRIERS


 OUTLINE OF CONTENTS
   GENERAL

   CROWD PRESSURES
     Lean

     Push

     Slope

  MEDICINE

  STRENGTH
     (See also Appendix D)
  NUMBER OF ROWS

  HEIGHT & WIDTH

  GRADIENT & SPACING

  REFERENCES
APPENDIX D    TESTING O F C R U S H BARRIERS

      (To be developed)




                                  AG
 APPENDIX E         SIGHTLENES AND VIEW DISTANCES


 The maximum distance a t which an object is just recognizable      Bobrowski, J., Bardhan-Roy
 to a spectator’s eye is given by the relationship                  B.K., & Maciag, T.: ’The
                                                                    design and analysis of
           d    =     0.86 s                                        grandstand structures',
                                                                    Structural Engineer. 52,
 where     d    =     distance in m                                 no. 2, Feb. 1974, p.37
 an<3      s    =     size of the object in mm
                                                                    Reed, J.: The layout and
 Table A1 shows the maximum distance against different sizes        construction of sports
 (s) of the object, while Fig. A1 illustrates this point.           grounds and grandstands’,
                                                                    Structural Engineer. Feb.
 Table A1 - The maximum distance (d) against different sizes        1933, p.74
 (s) of the object
                                                                    Serby, M.: 'The good-view
s                     d                s                            factor in stadium design',
                                                        d           Engineering news-record.
(size of                                (size of
object)                                                             103, 11 July 1929
                                       object
mm (in)               m        (ft)      mm (in)        m    (ft)

 40   (1.557)        35    (115)      160   (6.299)   138   (453)
 60   (2.362)        52    (171)      180   (7.087)   155   (508)
 80   (3.150)        69    (226)      200   (7.874)   172   (564)
100   (3.937)        86    (282)      222   (8.740)   190   (623)
120   (4.724)       103    (338)      240   (9.449)   206   (676)
140   (5.512)       120    (394)


As the diameter of a football is 220 mm, it follows that the
maximum distance between a spectator and the furthest point
on the football playing area should not exceed 190 m. It should
be borne in mind that at this distance the object is barely
recognizable and does not in fact provide a good and unstrained
visibility. The maximum distance therefore should, where
possible, be reduced by 20-40% of that calculated by the above,
i.e. for a football ground the furthest point of the field to
a spectator should be limited to, say, 150m. In a football (and
also in a rugby) ground this will correspond roughly to a circle
of 90m radius from the centre spot as shown in Fig. A l.

Figs. A2 and A3 show the optimum viewing circle and the
maximum distance in two existing grounds - in St James’ Park,
Newcastle, and Wembley Stadium. It is clear in the case of
Wembley Stadium that a section of the spectators will remain
outside the optimum sight distance or even the maximum sight
distance of the full arena.

This consideration sometimes is most crucial in deciding whether
the stand should have a single rake or multi-tiered ones.




                                        A7
                                                                                              *

Another aspect inter-related to good viewing is the sightline.
The slope of the rakers should be such that the lines of sight
from the eyes of spectators in each row to the focal point
should be clear of or at least tangential to, the top of the
head (together with the head cover) of the spectator in the
row in front. The focal point is taken as the near edge of
the playing field or the centre-line of the nearest line of the
nearest lane of the athletic track. The profile of the raker
can be determined graphically and by calculation. Simplified
formulae can be obtained from references listed in the              Handbook of sports and
Handbook.                                                           recreation buildings design
There are three main categories of raker:

1.   straight rakers of constant slope

2.   series of straight rakers of different slopes, and
3.   curved rakers.

The curved arrangement is theoretically ideal but cumbersome
in practice, and apart from the high cost, there can be a safety
hazard where crowd movement is involved. Orientation of                                       #
the stand as well as positioning of the first row with respect
to the arena (touchline, for example) is important to allow
a good view of the whole of the touchline by all viewers.

Depending on the nature of the performance there appear
to be three borad patterns of crowd circulation in stands:

(a) Static crowd: which exists where the show is continuous
    or even interm ittent such as football, rugby and some
    athletics, but without any interrelated diverse activities
    during the interval.

(b) Circulating crowd: which exists where the show consists
    of several consecutive events with interrelated extra
    activities during the interval between them, and generally
    associated with betting, such as horse racing, dog racing
    etc.

(c) A combination of (a) and (b), where one part of the stand
    could have a static crowd while the other parts have
    circulating spectators.

Compared with (a) crowds are smaller and more leisurely in
the other two categories, especially in (b). The design criteria,
of necessity, will be different and the facilities provided by
the designer will, of course, have to be compatible with the
requirements of the patrons in each relevant category. A
relevant numerical comparison of the three categories is given
in Table Al.
Table A1

category    name of stand                  space per spectator

(a)         Typical fo o tb all stand -               0 .6 8   m8
            Manchester United, Old
            Trafford

            Typical a th letics stand -              0.835 m 8
            Meadowbank, Edinburgh
(b)         ♦A scot Racecourse                        2.04 m 8
            Grandstand
            **Sandown Park Racecourse                 2.60 m 8
            Grandstand
            Doncaster Racecourse                      2.96 m 8
            Grandstand
(c)         Calgary ’G reatest Outdoor                1.42 m 8
            Show on E arth’ Stampede
            Grandstand

* Ascot Racecourse Grandstand does not have the same amount
of built in facilities for multi-purpose use of the buildings
as doe the Doncaster and Sandown Park Grandstands.

** The area of 2.60 m 8 per spectator was calculated with
regard only to the seating and standing capacity of the rakes.
Durking major races a crowd of 30 000 could actually use all
the facilities and then space per spectator would come down
to 0.69 m 8 only, thus comparable to category (a).




                                          A9
                         Fig Ai Maximum distance b atw an recognizabip object and
                         tha spectator’s ey*




                                                                     maxnum vmmng
                                                                     8 0 m neks from aacfi
                                                                     M l ol optnun
                                                                              150m           from




                                                                    assumed ootim um view ing
                                                                    circle 90m rackus from
                                                                    centre spot
                                A7 The maximum viewing distance for football is 190m. The
                                 optimum is about 150m. An optimum viewing circle can be
                                 assumed at 90m from the centre spot for both football and
                                 rugby




A 3S /. James’ Park, Newcastle. The value of using comers
 has been realised and on site, with transverse dimensional        * Z l 7 biey, Stadtum *** much too large an arena and suffers
 constraints, the additional accommodation can become               from a single~tter section. An overlapping multi-tier
 indispensable. St fames’ Pork (for Newcastle United) when                              b n n g m ore speaators m o th t ° pnm um
fully developed will seat 16 000 with 34 000 standing.
Stamford Bridge for Chelsea was designed to seat 60000.
CardiffArms Park, when fully developed, wiU have 75000
seats and space for IS 000 standing



                                                      Alo
    APPENDIX F    SPECIMEN DRAWINGS REQUIRED FOR APPRAISAL
       Specimen drawings to be provided for
       (a) large ground
       (b) small ground


    APPENDIX G SPECIMEN LICENCE CERTIFICATE
       To be compiled


    APPENDIX H BIBLIOGRAPHY
       To be compiled


    ILLUSTRATIONS FOR REPORT
        To be provided




«




                                  Al l
BIBLIOGRAPHY



CROWD SAFETY AND REGULATIONS

(1)      Guide to Safety at         Sports Grounds            (The Green    Guide)
         HMSO  1976

(2)      Report of the  Inquiry  into   Crowd   Safety                    at Sports
         Grounds    (Rt Hon Lord Wheatley)   HMSO   1972

(3)      Committee of   Inquiry into  Crowd Safety and Control at
          Sports Grounds, Interim Report   (Mr Justice Popplewell)
         HMSO   1985

(4)      Safety at Sports Grounds Act 197 5            HMSO

(5)      Crush    Barrier     Strengths     and     Spacings (Home Office
         Note)    1973

(6)      Crowd Safety - Survey Team Report              (DOE       Report)    HMSO
         1970

(7)      Protective Crowd Barriers          (L R Creasy)           1948

(8)      Safety at  Sports Grounds  - Preliminary    Notes on Flow
         Patterns and Crowd Control   (R J C Stanton)   1987




DESIGN OF SPORTS GROUNDS

(1)      Load Testing of Structures and Structural   Components
          (Report of  an ad hoc Committee of the Institution of
          Structural Engineers)  1989

(2)      Demountable Grandstands   (J F Dickie            & G     R Tomlinson)
          Structural Engineering Review   1988

(3)      Demountable Grandstands           (J     F Dickie)     The Structural
          Engineer Vol 61A  1983

(4)      The Good-View Factor in   Stadium            Design       (Engineering
         News Record) Vol 103    1929

(5)      The  Lay-out and   Construction   of  Sports Grounds and
         Grandstands (James Reed)   The Structural Engineer   1933

(6)      Some Representative Types of Covered Spectators' Stands
          for Open-air Sports Venues                   (Klaus Idelberger) Journal
         A c l e r - S t a h l - S t e e l , Dusseldorf   1974
(7)      A Grandstand in South Africa    (Journal of           Concrete and
          Construction Engineering)   1953

(8)      The Design and Analysis of Grandstand Structures
          (J Bobrowski,    B K    Bardhan-Roy,  T Maciag)                   The
          Structural Engineer  1974

(9)      The  New  Grandstand  at   the Crystal           Palace National
          Sports Centre (A J J Bartak, D C Kaye,          T J George)  The
          Structural Engineer  1977

(10)     The  Engineering  Features  of  the  Epsom Grandstands
          (Harold Cane)  The Structural Engineer  1928

(11)     The Design and Construction of the N e w Ibrox Stadium
          (S Thorburn   & K C W     Van  der Lee)    The Structural
          Engineer Vol 61A  1983

(12)     Centres and Stadia  - An   Architectural   Essay                (John
          Rice)  The Consulting Engineer Vol 35   1971

(13)     Introduction to  a Discussion  on the Effect of Wind on
          Structures  (R G Taylor)   The Structural  Engineer Vol
          12  1973




FIRE AND FIRE SAFETY

(1)      Fire Precautions    in Football     Stadia - A Post-Bradford
         Analysis   BRE Report  1985

(2)      Bradford City Football   Club     Fire          BRE   News    of Fire
         Research   1985

(3)      Suggested Layout   of Fire Precautions (Working Group on
         Revision of Green Guide, Fire Research Station)   1985

(4)      The    Application    of     Fire      Engineering   to the
          Specification       of       the        Structural    Fire
         Resistance/Protection Requirements in Sports Stands
          (B R Kirby,    British  Steel    Corporation Laboratories)
          1985

(5)      Fire  Prevention       Journal     of     the    Fire   Protection
         Association Vol 181   1985

(6)      Fire Safety and Safety    at     Sports     Venues           (The Home
         Office)   1986

(7)       Guide  to   Fire  Precautions  in        Existing   Places  of
          Entertainment and  Like  Premises          (The   Home Office)
          1987
                                                    «</*•Pt




        SOUTH YnXSHIRE CQUNry COUNCil




® SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
      GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                                                          r




                                             #r«"




                           •   l i l i

    >oc. L                 J g p H M b ...
                                       South Yorkshire County Council




                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT. 1975
                           GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address of prem ises for which                                 The Hillsborough,Stadium,
this Certificate Is Issued                                     Penlstone Road, Sheffield.

Occupier of the prem ises                                      Sheffield Wednesday Football
          and                                                  Club Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate

Use of the prem ises in respect                                Football matches.
of which this Certificate Is Issued                            Religious Conventions.

1.       This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect of
         the prem ises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by O rder
         under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a stadium
         requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.       The term s and conditions set out In the Schedules attached hereto are hereby
         Imposed.

3.       The term s and conditions hereby Imposed are those which the South Yorkshire
         County Council consider necessary o r expedient to secure reasonable safety at
         the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in respect of which this
         Certificate is issued.

4.        The words used in this Certificate and the Schedules attached hereto have
      - - the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this Certificate and
          Section 17 of the Act.

 5.      The Schedules and Plans attached hereto all form p art of this Certificate*

 6.      This Certificate commences on the twenty first day of December, One
          thousand nine hundred and seventy nine for an indefinite period.

          DatQ      21stJDecember, 1979^                  Signed . .
                                                                 ^Chie$ iVeajgwe-TStrbehalf
                                                                  of and dtily authorised by
                                                                  the South Yorkshire County
                                                                   Council.
                          In terp retation

Tho Act                           means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.
Authorised Person                 means a person authorised in accordance with
                                  Section 11 of the Act.
The Building Authority            means the Sheffield City Council.
The Chief Constable               means the Chief Constable for the time being
                                  of the South Yorkshire Police or, as the case
                                  may require, the Police Officer having charge
                                  of the Stadium on the occasion of a Specified
                                  Activity.
The Chief F ire Officer           means the Chief F ire Officer for the time being
                                  of the South Yorkshire County F ire Service or
                                  his designated representative.
The Certificate                   means the written General Safety Certificate of
                                  which the Schedules and Plans form part.
The County Council                 means the South Yorkshire County Council.
The Guide                         means the '•Guide to Safety a t Sports Grounds"
                                  as from time to time amended, Issued by the
                                  Home Office, o r such other code of practice as
                                  may be so Issued.
 The Holder                        means the applicant for and person to whom the
                                   General Safety Certificate has been Issued and who
                                   Is a 'qualified person’ for the purposes of the Act.
 Invalid Carriage                  means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled
                                   o r not, constructed o r adapted for use for the
                                   carriage of one person, being a person suffering
                                   from some physical defect o r disability.
 The Plans                          means the document o r documents attached to and
                                    forming p a rt of the General Safety Certificate and
                                    signed by the person signing the Certificate an d /
                                    o r any other document o r documents which may
                                    be added to o r substituted for such document o r
                                    documents and signed on behalf of the County
                                    Council.
  Specified Activity                means a football match or a Betlgious Convention.


  Spectator                         means any person occupying accommodation
                                    provided for spectators a t the stadium.
  The Stadium                       means the Hillsborough Stadium, Penis tone Hoad,
                                    Sheffield.
  Structural Parts                  includes stru ctu res, components, installations,
                                    fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

  Vehicles                           includes invalid carriages.
i.                                                          SCHEDULE 2

                                                    ^nATfll Terms and Conditions

               (1)            The Holder's nominee for the time oerng                                  for a
     1.                       county Council shall be present whenever the iStadium                    ^
                               Specified Activity and he shall on beha               u d with at
                               ttfe terms and conditions of the Certificate are compiled with
                               the Specified Actlvtty.




               ■               H                           S S S S
                                    “ “ » v » t l L of any term or condition of the Certificate.

                   The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
      2   .        Specified Activity is taking place.
                                                                , ... .       stadium and to the several areas of
          3.       I     £          X     ™     m     ^   “ on I Z n the Stadium shali not exceed the flares
                   specified in Parti of Schedule 3.


          4.

                    more of the following

                                        the playing of music or singing;
                       (a)
                                        the provision of news or comment associated with football;
                       (b)
                                        the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes, new-sherts
                       (c)
                                        and souvenirs;

                        (d)             the sale and consumption of refreshments;

                        ,e,             any other use anciUary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
                                         in writing of the County Council.

                         W              Where the
                                          r r r b y t e CH         "      r ? o m“         - least » days before the
                                          occurrence in respect of which it is required.

                             (2 )        K whOst the C e rtifl^ a t^ i^ m o ^ U o n ^ ^ ^ t i O T e ^ i n Section 8
                                          Stadium                   S S S S S t 21 days before the carrying out of the
                                          ^     ^           r     ^ v e ^ t t T w r i ^ the proposal to the County

                                              Council.
(1)      The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at lea st 21 days
          (or such sh o rter tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent)
         p rior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
         employed in connection with the Specified Activity and (In relation
         to a Football Match) the methods to be used for the segregation of
         home and visiting supporters.
(2)      The Holder shall refuse admission to, o r evacuate spectators from,
         the Stadium o r any p art thereof at any tim e before o r during a
         Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to do from the
          Chief Constable.

The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified A c t i v i t y of an adequate number of police officers to secure the
orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed between the
Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such sh orter time to
which the Chief Constable may consent) befbre a Specified Activity takes
place.
(1)    Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the County Coun
        the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
        of the County Council a suitably equipped F irst Aid Room. The first
        aid room shall be adequately signed and shall be capable of being lit
        oy the emergency power supply referred to in paragraph 12 of this
        Schedule.

(2)      The Holder shall ensure that during every Specified Activity a
          physician employed o r retained by the Holder is available to attend
          at the F irst Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known
          to those j n the Police Central Control Room at the Stadium.

(3)      The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
          of such numbers of qualified F irst Aid assistan ts as the County Council
          shall require but without prejudice to the foregoing the Holder shall
          ensure that at every specified activity th ere is at least one F irst Aid
       • - assistant for every 2 , 0 0 0 spectators.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of such
number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 2 of Schedule 3, and
shall ensure that the Safety Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out
their duties (b) properly trained and Instructed (c) identifiable by dress (d)
provided with written Instructions as to their general duties 1&order to carry
out the following:"

 (1)      Manning of exits as Indicated on the plans

 (2)      Control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the
          Stadium

 (3)      Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency tnninrftng
          raising an alarm and extinguishing any sm all fire.
Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an
emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the
Stadium at least once every th ree months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, o r other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the inside
and shall be manned at all tim es by at least the number of stewards required
by P a rt 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors o r gates shall be opened by the
stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a time before
the end of a Specified Activity agreed between the Holder and the Chief
Constable and at any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium o r a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform o r by the
sounding of the alarm .

(1)     The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
        F ire Officer exit signs comprising white le tte rs on a green background
        over all exits from the Stadium and all exits from spectator
        accommodation therein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
        illuminated by both the main and emergency lighting system s. Such
        supplementary illuminated signs in such locations as the Chief F ire
        Officer may require shall also be provided by the Holder.

 (2)    The Holder shall ensure that the co rrid o rs, gangways and staircases
         indicated on the Plans may be illuminated when required during a
        Specified Activity by both the main and emergency lighting system s.

 (3)    The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
         illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a
         Specified Activity o r as directed by the Chief Constable.

 (4)    All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to and from
         any Spectator Accommodation therein shall be maintained free from
         obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particular
         s ta ir coverings shall be secured and maintained so that they do not
         constitute a source of danger.
 (1)    Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the Chief F ire Officer,
          the Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief
         F ire Officer a separate emergency power supply fo r providing
         electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting throughout the
         Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the communication system s
         within the Stadium, such emergency power supply to be operable
         Independently of the main power supply and to come into automatic
         operation within ten seconds of the failure of the la tte r and to be
          capable of maintaining the necessary power output for a minimum of
          three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

  (2)   At least once in each period of 12 months the Holder shall supply to
         the Chief F ire Officer a report as to the condition of the emergency
        Power Supply certified by an independent E lectrical Engineer.

(3)     On the day of a Specified Activity and not less than 3 hours p rio r to
        its commencement the emergency power supply shall be tested for
        a period of 30 m inutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
        rectified before the commencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)     A competent electrician employed o r retained by the Holder shall be
        present during a Specified Activity.

(1)     The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
        of the Chief F ire Officer a fire warning system .

(2)   The fire warning system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction
       of the Chief F ire Officer.
Subject to such interim arrangem ents as may be agreed by the Chief Constable,
the Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable

 (1)    A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with such
        ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

 (2)    Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room
         and for adm inistrative purposes.

 (3 )   A public address system audible in all p arts of the Stadium. The Police
         shall have the right to use the public address system for police purposes
         in priority to its use for any other purpose.

 (1 )    The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium
          in sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide
          and in all cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

  (2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and
          renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to tim e by the
          County Council.

  The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium
  (including the electrical and communications installations) and all emergency
  equipment In good and efficient working o rd er to the satisfaction of the County
  Council and shall undertake such maintenance rep air o r renewal as may from
  tim e to tim e be necessary to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

  The Holder shall place within the Stadium, a t such positions as may be specified
  by the Chief F ire Officer, emergency procedure notices which shall be
  maintained legible and unobstructed in those positions.

           The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be
           restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise
           approved for emergency purposes by a Police Officer in uniform.
(2)      The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
         satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for emergency
         vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the P re ss, T .V . and radio services
having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are Identifiable
as such.

Television cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such
positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)      Liquid refreshments may be sold o r distributed at the Stadium only In
         containers constructed from soft plastic o r other soft m aterial, o r as
         allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)      No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones o r other m aterials which
         in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as m issiles
         shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium to which
         spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, d irt, surplus m aterial o r goods shall
be perm itted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity
approved in writing by the Chief F ire Officer.

No flammable gases o r liquids shall be stored o r used in any part of the
Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
Chartered Engineer (Structural o r Civil) In the presence of a representative of the
County Council within. 7 months of the date of the Certificate and a t least once in each
period of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall as soon as possible after
each Inspection supply to the County Council a Certificate by the said
Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance o r non-compliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant B ritish Standard
Specifications-and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate provisions and
recommendations of the Guide of all structural p arts of the Stadium excluding the
crush b arriers and handrails.

(1)      The Holder shall arrange for all crush b a rrie rs and handrails within the
         Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
         Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural o r Civil)
         in the presence of a representative of the County Council within 2 months
         of the date of this Certificate and fo r the resu lts thereof to be notified
         In writing to the County Council as soon as possible thereafter.

(2)(1)   The Holder shall ensure that not m ore than 7 months after the date of this
         Certificate and thereafter not less than once In each period of 12 months
         a representative sample of crush b a rrie rs and handrails               to not
         less than 20 % of the total number of such b a rrie rs and rails is tested in
            accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
            (Structural o r Civil) In the presence of a representative of the County
            Council and the results thereof notified In writing to the County Council
             as soon as possible thereafter.
(II)        a record shall be kept of those crush b a rrie rs and handrails tested in
            accordance with sub-paragraph (2)(1) alone and a b a rrie r so tested shall
             not be tested again within a period of    years thereafter.

The Holder shall within 7 months of the date of this certificate and thereafter
not less than once in each period of 12 months supply to the Chief Fire Officer
the certificate of an independent E lectrical Engineer as to the current
compliance o r non-compliance of the electrical Installation within the Stadium
with Section E of the I.E .E . Regulations o r other sections o r Regulations for
the time being in force relating to the E lectrical Equipment of Buildings.

(i)         The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium fire fighting
             equipment of such type and in such positions as may be required by the
            Chief Fire Officer.

(ii)        The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
             other water supply within the Stadium to be Inspected and tested as
             appropriate at least once in each period of 12 months by a competent
             person to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made
available for inspection at all reasonable tim e to Authorised Persons:

 (1)         A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during
             a Specified Activity and to each area of Spectator Accommodation
             therein mentioned in P art 1 of Schedule 3.

 (2)         A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium Is in
              use for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such
      - -    record to include the name, address, and age of the spectator
              Injured, the nature of the injury and how It was caused, as far as can
              be ascertained by diligent inquiry, and the location of the incident.
              The Holder shall provide a w ritten rep o rt to the County Council within
              48 hours of all such accidents o r incidents.

  (3)        A record of the training and Instruction given and the exercises held in
             accordance with the requirem ents of Paragraph 9 of this Schedule such
             record to include the date and tim e and duration of the instruction o r
             exercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
             Instruction o r exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

  (4)        A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and renewals
              carried out at the Stadium.
The Stadium shall be maintained with the facilities and structures including
all crush b a rrie rs , entrances, exits and means of access to the entrances
and exits in the number, size, position and strength existing at the date
of the Certificate and indicated on the plans and no alteration shall be made
thereto unless p rior notice in writing is given to the County Council in
accordance with paragraph 5(2) of this Schedule.

No spectators shall be allowed to use the Stadium in conditions of extreme
wind and/or snow loadings acting singular o r in combination and in
p articu lar:-

(1)    No spectators shall be allowed to use the stadium in wind
       speeds in excess of 100 K m .p.h. at 10m above ground level
       and this prohibition shall be effective when m ore than one gust of
       this speed of at least 3 seconds duration is recorded in the area of
       the stadium in the 30 minutes immediately p rio r to the tim e of the
       enquiry mentioned in (2) to the local m eteorological office.

(2)    The wind speed in (1) shall be ascertained by the Holder by enquiry
       to the local meteorological office by telephone not m ore than 30
       minutes before the admission of spectators to the stadium and
       the wind speed given shall be recorded at once in a book kept
        for the purpose.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall
have the right at any tim e to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange
for the conduct of any inspection o r te st which the County Council may consider
to be necessary in the in terests of securing reasonable safety at the
Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                         SCHEDULE s

                             PART 1
                         Crowd Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the stadium shall not exceed the following
figures:- -

Spion Kop                             16,850
South Stand Upper                     5.567
South Stand Lower                     3,310
West Stand                            4 ,465
West T errace                         7, 200
North West T errace                   2, 900
North Stand                           9 , 882

      Total Crowd Capacity            50,174


                             PART 2

                         Safety Stewards

The minimum number of Safety Stewards required for each function shall
be as follows: -

(1)     Manning of exists                                   26   Stewards (2 per main
(2)     Control and direction of spectators                                    exit)
         entering o r leaving the Stadium                   38   Stewards (1 per vomitory)
(3)   - Patrolling the Stadium and dealing
         with any emergency including raising
         an alarm and extinguishing any sm all Are           2   Stewards (under South
                                                                             Stand)
The Stewards shall be distributed as follows: -

Section of Stadium                     Number required for each function
                                          1            2         3

 Each Main Exit (13)                        26
 South Stand                                    -   1   2
 West Stand                                     -            8
 North Stand                                    -           18
 Under South Stand             '                -
            South Yorkshire County Council
            F. A. Mallett. LL.B., Chief Executive.              County Hall
                                                                Barnsley
            J . C. Harris. M.A.. LL.B. (Cantab)..               South Yorkshire S70 2TN
                County Secretary.                               Telephone Barnsley
            Department of Administration.                       STO (0226) 86141.
                                                                Ext.......................................

Our Ref:   DV/BB/583/5             Your Ref:   EE/CB            Date:     24th January, 1980


      Dear Sir,

      Safety of Sfrorts Grounds Act, 1975

      Further to my letter of 21st December, 1979, the County
      Council has now formally decided not to charge a fee for
      the General Safety Certificate In respect of the Hillsborough
      Stadium.

                                                    Yours faithfully.




                                                    Chief Executive


      M r. E. England,
      Secretary,
      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club L td .,
      Hillsborough,
      Sheffield,                            '                        .....
      South Y orkshire.
      S6 1SW
                     SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F00T3AIX. CLUB

                            HILLSBOROUGH STM>IUH



                      EMERGENCY EVACUATION PROCEDURE


Hie following notes of guidance are prepared anti issued to assist  i
official stewards and others in a position of responsibility at the
Hillsborough Stadium on the action to be taken and procedures to be followed
in the event of the possibility of evacuation of the stadium during the
playing of a game when spectators arc present. The notes are not intended to
be a comprehensive list of all the action necessary, but are for personal
issue to each steward and for retantion by the steward for immediate ref­
erence all tho time ha/she is on duty at the stadium.

It is appreciated that the reasons evacuation may become necessary are many
and varied, but the most obvious are fires or information that explosive/
incendiary devices have been placed somewhere within the stadium/ground.
That information may be received or discovered either by members of the staff
at the stadium, or by telephone to the stadium.- police- local or national
newspapers.

IT IS STRESSED THAT WHENEVER SUCH INFORMATION IS RECEIVED THE RESPONSIBILITY
FOR THE DECISION TO EVACUATE ALL OR PART OF THE GROUND RESTS WITH THE SENIOR
MANAGEMENT OF T H E CLUB. (The senior police officer on duty will be in a
position to advise as to whether the ’bomb call* is likely to be genuine or
not).

Whenever such information becomes known, a message will be relayed to the
police officer on duty in the "P. A. Commentary Box" at the ground, who, on
instructions from the^ senior police officer, and irrespective of whether
the match is in jorograss'or not, will cause the record 'flHgF.fi            to
be played over the loudspeaker system.                            Ttte^eTTtiB C,n
The playing of that record will indicate to everyone present at the ground,
other than spectators, that a possible emergency situation exists.

N.B, - As part of the regular pre-match brief of referees and linesmen and
       both teams, this information should be passed to then so that the
       game officials are also aware of the possibility of an interruption in
       play and tho significance of the playing of the record.

On hearing that record all club stewards will make their way to their des­
ignated duty points on gangways/gates/exits, etc. Those on exit gates will
open the gates and remain at that point. During this period senior
officials will consider the nature of the emergency alleged and will decide
to evacuate all/part of the stadium. Once that decision has been taken, but
not until, the senior police officer on duty will cause a spoken message to
be relayed over the *P. A. System" which will have the effect of

(1)   Stopping the game and removing players from the field of play;

(2)   Informing the spectators/officials of the precise nature of the
      emergency and its location if known, and requesting     or specified
      sections of the public to leave their scats and make their way out of
      the ground by the hearest normal exit route unless specifically directed
       to do otherwise by means of the aP. A. System".
                                                    -   2    -




   ~       E      ’ S S D. S £ £                                 S f          E,!CCTT ”
  m r y be p l a y e d , t h er e is e v e r y                             REajRD ,three b l k d m i c e ’
  e s ta b l i sh ise                                                      raiTI“ “ S i ™ ® « I U
  A SPOKEN MESSAGE TO EVACUAT^ TFE FAr-r^n '                                 XK THr*T 0132' ^JSTEAD OP
  m u . BE INDICATED                                                                    “«
  o n h e aring t h i s -a l l c l e a r * s t e u a r d s ^ S ^           ~                               4   'T
  REMAIN ON STAND-BY AT THAT P O l N T ^ r                                      ^ G'VNGWAVS « “ •
  a n d re su m i n g t h e i r no rm a l d o t ? ^ o s S i £ b ?             BEF0RE           7112 « «= «


                               c    ™   5    l^ f S 0
                                                    Ci^            fiSCOVering 4 « “      -   receiving
  iranediAtely -                                            n uX^sts within the ground, he will


      U)    notify the d u b Secretary by telephone

  (ii)      Inform any police officer.
                                                                       t


(iii)       S “         n                                                      * ■ * “    —      —


 SiSi12£nb£
 control point the location^? 2    ™ 9
                                                                  r 0?1^617sound“yfora°f
                                         Signal in the police staffed
 then deploy manpower to investigate th^cSisc.'^  policQ controller can
            event of discovery of fi r--» »w                 .
action in accordance with the f o l l o w s ^ 1 “ ^ -                         Sh°"ld “ “ ad<Jltl°"i'1
 (A)
           Sound tho al a m by brocO=lng the nearest break 9laSs call point,
 (B)
           Tackle the fire with the appropriate extinguisher if safe to do so:
(C)
           Close doors within the taaediate vicinity of tho fire,
CD)
           At no time mention the words ’Fire* or 'RomK< c     .
           don't panic, neither will tho crowd,-        ’ Renenber' if

(E)        Upon completion of the evacuation of your sec« n„
           assembly area (which has been s o e c i f i L ^ L tu     feport to ^
           the person in overall charge, who will in f?*               *** report to
           Service and any other relevant <>B o m « '        turn, report to the Fire
           attendance.                          g e y S8rvice which nay be in

« * StEWARDS MUST FAMILIARISE THEMSELVES WITH W E LOCAWOH op,.
(a)     Fire Alarm -Break Glass* call points;

(b)     Location of the Fire Fighting Equipment;

(c)     Knowledge of all escape routes at their sector of the ground.
                                           S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y   C O U N C I L




                                   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT                             1975

NOTICE OF AMENDMENT OF GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE                                         ISSUED ON 21ST DECEMBER            1979



1    TAKE NOTICE THAT THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE ISSUED TO SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY
     F O O T B A L L C L U B L I M I T E D IN R E S P E C T OF T H E H I L L S B O R O U G H ST A D I U M , P E N I S T O N E
     ROAD        S H E F F I E L D BY S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E C O U N T Y C O U N C I L O N 2 1 S T D E C E M B E R 1979
     (AS A M E N D E D O N 1 1 T H A U G U S T 1 9 89) IS H E R E B Y F U R T H E R A M E N D E D A N D A D D E D TO


2.   The amendments           a r e as s p e c i f i e d       in A p p e n d i x     1.

3.   T H E S E A M E N D M E N T S A N D A D D I T I O N S A R E I S S U E D BY T H E S H E F F I E L D CI T Y C O U N C I L IN
      R E S P E C T OF T H E P R E M I S E S D E S C R I B E D A B O V E B E I N G A S P O R T G R O U N D D E S I G N A T E D BY
      O R D E R U N D E R S E C T I O N 1 O F T H E S A F E T Y O F S P O R T S G R O U N D S A C T 1975 AS A S P O R T S
     GROUND REQUIRING A SAFETY CERTIFICATE.

4.   T h e t e rms and c o n d i t i o n s h e r e b y i m p o s e d are those w h i c h S h e f f i e l d Ci t y
      C o u n c i l c o n s i d e r n e c e s s a r y or e x p e d i e n t to s e c u r e r e a s o n a b l e s a f e t y at the
      S p o r t s G r o u n d w h e n it is in u s e for an a c t i v i t y in r e s p e c t of w h i c h this
      Certificate         is issued.



      The a mendments          and additional              conditions             s h a l l come   in t o o p e r a t i o n on the
      19th d a y of A u g u s t ,       1989.




      Dated     the    1 8 t h d a y of A u g u s t      1989.




                                                       Signed

                                                                      Mr. H. M. W e b s t e r ,
                                                                      A c t i n g H e a d of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
                                                                      a n d L e g a l D e p a r t m e n t on be h a l f of
                                                                      a n d d u l y a u t h o r i s e d b y the
                                                                      Sheffield City Council




       TO:-      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited
A P P E N D I X     1   -   A M E N D M E N T S




S c h e d u l e 3 of the S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e i s s u e d by S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e
C o u n c i l o n the 21st D e c e m b e r 1979 a n d as a m e n d e d on the 11th Au g u s t
s h a l l be f u r t h e r a m e n d e d           to re a d as        follows

" T h e n u m b e r of s p e c t a t o r s a d m i t t e d to the S p o r t s G r o u n d a n d to the v a r i o u s
a r e a s of the s p e c t a t o r a c c o m m o d a t i o n w i t h i n the S p o r t s G r o u n d shall not
exceed            the f o l l o w i n g f i g u r e s

 Spion Kop                                                   18,200
 South Stand Upper                                            5,567
 South Stand Lower                                            3 ,310
 West Stand                                                   4,465
 N orth West T e r r a c e - U p p e r                        2,300
 North Stand                                                  9,700

 Total Crowd                Capacity                         43,724"



 Additional Condition                         10 s h a l l    be a m e n d e d   to re a d as   f o l lows

  "10.        a)        N o s p e c t a t o r s h a l l be a l l o w e d a c c e s s to     that part of the S p o r t s
                        G r o u n d k n o w n as the W e s t T e r r a c e ex c e p t       in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s
                        specified           in b.

              b)        S p e c t a t o r s m a y be a d m i t t e d to that part of the W e s t T e r r a c e of
                         the S p o r t s G r o u n d k n o w n as the N o r t h We s t T e r r a c e - U p p e r if the
                         S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e O f f i c e r in c o m m a n d at the g r o u n d is of
                         the o p i n i o n that use s h o u l d be m a d e of that a r e a in a n e m e r g e n c y
                         to e n s u r e the r e a s o n a b l e s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s at the Sp o r t s
                        G r o u n d ."




   H B 7 A A I / J L
                                          SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

                                  S A F E T Y O F S P O R T S G R O U N D S A C T 1975

                    NOTICE OF A M E N DMENT OF G E N ERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE
                              IS S U E D O N 2 1 S T D E C E M B E R 1979



1.    T A K E N O T I C E T H A T T H E S A F E T Y C E R T I F I C A T E ISSUED T O S H E F F I E L D W E D N E S D A Y
      F O O T B A L L CLUB L I M I T E D IN R E S P E C T O F T H E H I L L S B O R O U G H STADIUM,
      P E N I S T O N E ROAD, S H E F F I E L D B Y S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E C O U N T Y C O U N C I L O N 21 ST
      D E C E M B E R 1979 (AS A M E N D E D O N 11TH A N D 18 T H A U G U S T 1989) IS H E R E B Y
      FURTHER AMENDED A ND A D D E D TO

2.   T h e a m e n d m e n t s are as s p e c i f i e d     in A p p e n d i x 1.

3.   T H E S E A M E N D M E N T S A N D A D D I T I O N S A R E I S S U E D BY THE S H E F F I E L D CITY
      C O U N C I L IN R E S P E C T O F THE P R E M I S E S D E S C R I B E D A B O V E B E I N G A S P O R T
      G R O U N D D E S I G N A T E D BY O R D E R U N D E R S E C T I O N 1 OF T H E SAFETY OF SPORTS
      G R O U N D S A C T 1975 AS A S P O R T S G R O U N D R E Q U I R I N G A SA F E T Y CER T I F I C A T E .

4.   The terms a n d c o n d i t i o n s h e r e b y i m p o s e d a r e those w h i c h S h e f f i e l d
      C i t y C o u n c i l c o n s i d e r n e c e s s a r y or e x p e d i e n t to s e c u r e r e a s o n a b l e
      s afety at the Sports G r o u n d w h e n it is in use for an a c t i v i t y in
      r e s p e c t of w h i c h this C e r t i f i c a t e is issued.



      The a m e n d m e n t s a n d a d d i t i o n a l c o n d i t i o n s   s h all come     into o p e r a t i o n o n
      the           day of $ 6 ^ r £ < M 4 i l 9 8 9 .



     D a t e d the      /f     day                   4*4     1989




                                                          Signed


                                                                      Mr. H. M. W e b s t e r ,
                                                                      A c t i n g Head of A d m i n i s t r a t i o n
                                                                      a nd L e g a l D e p a r t m e n t o n b e h a l f
                                                                      of a n d duly a u t h o r i s e d by the
                                                                      S h e f f i e l d Ci t y Council




      TO:- Sheffield We dn es da y Football                      Club Limited




HB8AAA/JJJ
                                               A P P E N D I X   1   -   A M E N D M E N T S




T h e S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e is s u e d by the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o u n t y C o u n c i l o n 21st
D e c e m b e r 1 9 7 9 a n d a m e n d e d o n 1 1 t h and 18 t h A u g u s t 1 9 8 9 s h a l l be f u r t h e r a m e n d e d
to rea d as f o l l o w s

Schedule       3


T h e n u m b e r of s p e c t a t o r s a d m i t t e d to the S p o r t s G r o u n d and to the v a r i o u s ar eas
of the s p e c t a t o r a c c o m m o d a t i o n w i t h i n the S p o r t s G r o u n d shall not e x c e e d the
f o l l o w i n g figures:


Spion Kop                                                                        16,800

South     Stand     Upper                                                          5,567

South Stand         Lower                                                          3 ,310

West    Stand                                                                     4 , 465

North West TerraceUpper                                                           2 ,300

North Stand                                                                       9,700



Total Crowd         Capacity                                                    42,142



Condition 5


W i t h o u t p r e j u d i c e to the p r o v i s i o n s of S e c t i o n 8 of the A c t the H o l d e r shall not
c a u s e o r p e r m i t the S p o r t s G r o u n d or a n y of its i n s t a l l a t i o n s to be a l t e r e d
( w h i c h t e r m s h all e x c l u d e m i n o r r e m e d i a l w o r k s w h i c h d o not i n any way affect
the s a f e t y of the Sports G r o u n d ) in a n y m a n n e r w h a t s o e v e r w i t h o u t the p r ior
c o n s e n t of the C o uncil.             In addit i o n , n o t e m p 6 r a r y s t r u c t u r e s hall be i n s t a l l e d
w i t h o u t the p r i o r w r i t t e n c o n s e n t of the Cou n c i l .          T h e H o l d e r shall sup p l y the
C o u n c i l w i t h cop i e s of s u c h plans, s p e c i f i c a t i o n s a n d c a l c u l a t i o n s as the
C o u n c i l m a y r e a s o n a b l y r e q u i r e to e n a b l e any a p p l i c a t i o n for such c o n s e n t to be
c o n s i d e r e d a n d s h all c o m p l y w i t h any c o n d i t i o n s a t t a c h e d to that consent.




PB/63/DB139
A P P E N D I X     1   -   A M E N D M E N T S




S c h e d u l e 3 of the S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e i s s u e d by S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e C o u n t y
C o u n c i l o n the 21st D e c e m b e r 1979 and as a m e n d e d on the 11th A u g u s t 1989
s h a l l be f u r t h e r a m e n d e d to read as f o l lows


  T h e n u m b e r of s p e c t a t o r s a dmitted to the Sports G r o u n d and to the v a r i o u s
a r e a s of the s p e c t a t o r a c c o m m o d a t i o n w i t h i n the Spo r t s G r o u n d s h all not
exceeftL-the f o l l o w i n g f i g ures

Spion Kop                                             18,200
South Stand Upper                                      5,567
South Stand Lower                                      3,310
West S tand                                            4,465
N o r t h West T e r r a c e - U p p e r               2,300
North Stand                                            9,700

Total Crowd                 Capacity                  43,542"



Additional              Condition          10 shall    be a m e n d e d   to read as   follows:-

"10.        a)      No s p e c t a t o r shall be a l l o w e d a c c e s s to     that part of the S p o r t s
                     G r o u n d k n o w n as the West T e r r a c e ex c e p t    in the c i r c u m s t a n c e s
                     s p e c i f i e d in b.


            b)      S p e c t a t o r s m a y be admitted to that part of the West T e r r a c e of
                     the S p o r t s G r o u n d known as the N o r t h West T e r r a c e - U p p e r if the
                     S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e Police O f f i c e r in c o m m a n d at the gro u n d is of
                     the o p i n i o n that use should be m a d e of Liiai. area in an e m e r g e n c y
                     to en s u r e the r e a s onable saf e t y of s p e c t a t o r s at the S p o r t s
                     Ground."




H B 7 A A I / J L
           FIRMS WHICH HAVE CARRIED OUT CRUSH BARRIER TESTING



Company                                                     Club

Nuttall Yarwood            & Part n e r s ,                 B a r n s l e y F.C.
T he G r o ove,
H i g h Street,
Dodwo r t h ,
Barnsley,
S75 3RQ

02 2 6 - 2 0 6 7 7 1



E a s t w o o d & Partn e r s ,                             Sheffield W e d nesday F.C
St. A n d r e w s House,
23, K i n g f i e l d Road,
She f f i e l d ,
Sll 9AS

0742 - 583871



SGS I n s p e c t i o n S e r v i c e s Ltd.,               Heart of M id lo t h i a n F.C
M a t e r i a l T e s t i n g Division,
89 - 91 L i v e r y Street,
Bi r m i n g h a m ,
BS 1RJ

021 - 236 - 6081



Bingham Blades           & Partners,                        Liverpool       F.C.
S c h o l e s Hall,
S c h o l e s Lane,
St. Helens,
Merseyside,
W A 1 0 3PA

0744    - 5 5 151



M a t t w T. Shaw,                                          B r e n t f o r d F.C.
320 L e w i s h a m Road,
L ewis h a m ,
London,
SE13 7PA

01 - 318 - 1421



P r o j e c t C o n s t r u c t i o n Ltd.,                 Bristol Rovers           F.C.
5, S m y t h e Croft,
Whitchurch,
Bristol
                                                -   1   -
Company                                                   Club

K. C h m i e l & P a r t n e r s ,                        B i r m i n g h a m F.C.
68a R e d d i c a p Hill,
Sutton Coalfield,
West Midlands,
B75 7BG

021 - 378 - 3781



R o y B o l s o v e r & Ass.                              W e s t B r o m w i c h F.C.
40 C a l t h o r p e Road,
E d g b aston,
Birmingham,
B15 1 T Y

021 - 54 - 5147



A c o u s t i c Tech.    Ltd.                             P o r t s m o u t h F.C.
58 T h e A v e n u e ,
Southampton,
SOI 2 T A

0703    37811



A n d r e w F i r e b r a c e Partn e r s ,               C a m b r i d g e U n i t e d F.C.
U n i t 2,
137 D i t t o n W a lk,
Cambridge,
C BS 8 Q D

02 2 3 4 1 1 1 0 0




G e o r g e C o r d e r o y & Co.
20/10/89




                                              -   2   -
