Tplfyihon                                                               Queen Elizabeth II Law Courts
                                                                        Derby Square
                                                                         Liverpool
                                                                         L2 1XA




                            From: Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steel DL




             Lord Justice Stuart Smith,
             The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
             Room 1106,
             50,Queen Anne's Gate,
             LONDON
             SW1H 9AT

             22 December 1997



                    LsU OWtcU.,
            Thank you for your letter of 9 December the contents of which I
            note.

            I was the Chairman of the Hillsborough Solicitors' Group Steering
            Committee which had responsibility for the conduct of the lead
            cases in the Civil Litigation, the Inquests and the Taylor
            Inquiry.   We divided the day to day work amongst the committee
            but I had the responsibility of Chairing the Committee, liaising
            with Member firms including notifying them of all developments
            by regular newsletter and briefing Counsel and instructing on the
            Inquiry.

            I attended the Inquiry itself two or three times each week but
            my (then) assistant solicitor Roy Wadeson was there all the time.
            He is now in practice in London but can be contacted via his
            Wallasey address:




            I did not see the 2 videos shown at the Inquiry, although I have
            seen, on many occasions, the compilation video.      I think it
                 !y that 1 was not there that day, or, if I was, had assumed
            that it would be substantially the footage I had seen and Roy
            would have dealt with the attendance.

            As far as the note by ACC Mervyn Jones (para 6 of your letter)
            is concerned, I can elaborate on that.   During the course of the
            Hillsborough Inquiry and subsequent litigation we held 4
            conferences with solicitors in the group and their clients. The
            first of these was held in the third week of the Inquiry and a
            number of points and requests were raised by relatives.       All
            these requests were treated seriously and helpfully by Counsel
            to the Inquiry. The one where concern was expressed by them was
            the request that the relatives should be shown the videos - there
            was a great feeling among the relatives that they "needed to
 know as much as possible of what had happened.    The concern of
 the Inquiry was that the videos were very harrowing in parts and
 that a showing to all relatives who wished to see them could be
 distressing.  This is reflected in ACC Mervyn Jones' note.

The West Midlands Police offered me the opportunity of seeing
them at the Unit in Birmingham to discuss the best way of dealing
with this.   I went down in July together with a Social Worker,
one of the Liverpool Social Work team leaders (who I thought
would be far better qualified than I to assess the likely impact
of such material on the relatives).       We were not shown the
videos on that day - although they were able to tell us that they
totalled some 40 hours!   They also showed us some of the stills
(the Polaroid photos taken at the temporary mortuary, which were
indeed horrific) and indicated the filing cabinet of stills taken
by all press and other photographers.

They explained the method used to identify each victim - starting
with clothing (which had been photographed , the photos being
placed over the Polaroids as the officers worked).     They first
sought any officials - police, ambulance, first aid etc: who
appeared on any photograph with the individual     - and working
from their statements, back through friends and acquaintances so
that relatives were asked to view the minimum number of
photographs and ideally only when there was a real chance they
would recognize their relative in the crowd.   At that stage the
enquiries were not complete and although the police had been able
to trace the movements of a number of the victims, there were
still some where the information was limited and a few where they
had by then been unable to find any sighting.

From their point of view they said it would be helpful to have
the opportunity of showing the video footage relevant to any
family who wished to see it and        that would have the added
advantage    from  their   point   of    view   inassisting   in
identification,   particularly where the police had limited
information.   Both the police and the Social Worker felt that a
semi public showing would cause distress to the families and that
the appropriate way of dealing with the matter would be to
provide for the video relevant to any individual to be shown in
their home, with one of the investigating officers and probably
also social worker support.    In this way, as it was put to me,
it would be possible at any time to stop for a break and a cup
of tea and the showing could be at the pace of the family and
continue only for as long as they wished.

This proposal was adopted and I     reported back by newsletter to
all solicitors instructed.   It was then up to them to make the
arrangements for the police to     meet theparticular family in
their home if wished.    I know   that some of the team came to
Merseyside to meet any families interested and to show the videos
as agreed but do not know to what extent the offer was in fact
taken up and how much footage was seen.
As far as the legal representatives are concerned, we were not
offered the opportunity to see the original tapes - other than
any showing at the Inquiry itself.   The compilation tape, as you
will know, covered matters then thought to be relevant, and that,
coupled with the evidence given to the Taylor Inquiry and the
statements taken by members of the group from clients and
witnesses (over 1300 statements in all) which were copied to the
Steering Committee were adequate to deal with liability issues
within the civil litigation.

As far as the Inquests were concerned, as you will know, the
individual Inquests - limited in scope - took place when the
issues of liability between Defendants was still live (they had
agreed to settle all claims other than the remoteness ones on a
full liability basis but with no admission of liability in
November 1989).
The full inquests were conducted after the DPP had made his
decision not to prosecute and after all liability issues had been
settled.       All the families in the group were told at a
conference the situation and also the financial situation, in
that legal aid was not available and, because there was no longer
any issue arising from the Inquests which affected the Insurers'
interests, they would not underwrite the costs.       Just over a
third (30+) of the families wished to instruct us and Counsel to
appear on their behalf.    We had, within the Steering Committee
divided the work to avoid duplication as far as possible and Mr
Fraser undertook the work of acting for the families at that
inquest.   Apart from appearing as advocate on 2 days when Tim
King was unavailable, I have no direct knowledge of the work done
or of any video footage in addition to the compilation video made
available to the parties by the Coroner.

The only other matter which may possibly be relevant - and this
is not from any direct knowledge but from "gossip" - comes from
a remark made by one of the Sheffield Wednesday staff.    Between
the opening of the Inquiry and the start of the evidence we (the
Steering Committee and Counsel) went to Hillsborough to see the
locus and when there were shown the security arrangements and the
room in which the banks of video screens were situated.   The man
in that room at the time, who was showing us how the system
worked, commented that the police had collected up all the video
tapes but there seemed to be one missing. He did not know which
one
I did raise this in passing with Counsel before the Inquiry but
understood that there was a large amount of footage - from the
Security Videos and other sources covering all parts of the
ground - and that the Inquiry would not be hampered by a single
missing tape. I am not certain after this length of time whether
the missing tape had been recovered or whether the position was
that there was video footage from another source covering the
same area and time.
