                                                         101


      MR. ISAACS:   I was unfair to my learned friend,
Mr* Payne.    1 have discussed the matter with him*    He
is going to be a lot shorter than I had envisaged*     I
was hopeful, having heard that, that we may well finish
if we do it in the way you suggested, namely, that each
person has their go, in the day.    I hope that is the
case.

     THE CORONER:   Do you think if I allowed two days
for the legal submissions, namely, Tuesday and Wednesday
- 1 am not saying we are going to take that long - but
are you going to exceed that period of time?

     MR. PAYNE:   I should think it is very unlikely.
To be constructive and helpful in view of the way the
timetable seems to be going, what I would respectfully
suggest is that it might be appropriate to put in any
written submissions that there are before the weekend.

     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful because I
could read them over the weekend*

     MR. PAYNE:    I am grateful to that indication.   Now
that being so it will be necessary before the written
submissions go in to ask you for a ruling as to the
extent of the submissions.    We will need to allocate a
little time to do that before we know how much we are
allowed to put in.    X do not think it will be a very
difficult ruling myself but it is something which we do
need to get a decision about*

     THE CORONER:   I think it is quite difficult,
actually, but be that as it may.   I will come back to
that, Mr* Payne.

     Anything else on the general point about the timing
for the legal submissions?   What I want to do is that 1
want to send the Jury out on Monday week because I do not
want to put them under time pressure to reach their
conclusions*   1 want them to feel that if need be they
can overshoot and spend the night somewhere.   Hopefully
they will not overshoot another night, but in fact there
is space, if you like, in the week for them to do that*
I would prefer, if X possibly can, send them out sometime
on the Monday morning, which means if we can get our
submissions done on Tuesday and Wednesday, I can start on
my summing-up on Wednesday and Thursday, then I think we
should be on target with timing and we should finish
these Inquests before Easter in fact.   That is what I
want to do.   Is that acceptable?   Does that sound
reasonable?   Nobody has got any complaint about that?
                                                            102


     Does anybody want to address me on the point
Mr. Payne has raised, namely, where do you draw the line
between questions of fact and issues of law?
     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, what I would respectfully suggest
is that the best use of time, certainly from my point of
view, would be if 1 were to invite you over the
adjournment tonight to re-read and remind yourself about
the case of Queen and Galbraith, of which I can hand in a
copy which, as I understand it, is the most up-to-date
ruling about the relevant considerations where there is a
submission of no case to answer, which seems to be the
appropriate criteria*
        THE CORONERi     Have you a copy of that?

     MR. PAYNE:   I have got a copy and perhaps if I put
that in overnight, the submissions could be more direct
and to the point.
        THE CORONER:     Yes, we can deal with them tomorrow.

     MR. KING:    Can I just say, and it is no fault of
anybody'8 , but it is now five minutes to five, sir, and I
for one am in certain professional difficulties now*

     THE CORONER:    Yes, fair enough.   We will conclude
the matter tomorrow.    We have got Friday in hand,
anyway .

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, can I mention ver/ briefly,
the Zeebrugge case, ex parte Spooner, may also be of some
assistance to you, since it certainly contemplates
submissions of the kind I think my learned friend
Mr. Payne is referring to.   It may be worthwhile
refreshing your memory.
     THE CORONERi   I have got a copy of that.   The
other one which you mentioned, Mr. Payne, I haven't got a
copy of.
     MR. PAYNE:   Have you got a copy of the decision of
the judge in the case Mr. Catchpole is referring to?

     THE CORONER:        Mr. Justice Turner do you mean?    I
think I have.

        MR. PAYNE:     Yes, his decision on Day 20.

        THE CORONER:     I have got something.
        MR. PAYNE:     I have got a spare copy of that as
well.
                                                                103




        THE CORONER:   If you could let me have a spare copy
   I will be able to tell straight away whether X have
   already seen that.

        MR* KING:   Given it is a legal matter, sir, I have
   been trying to trace a copy of that for some time without
   success.   I wonder if possibly I could have a copy also?

           THE CORONER;    Mr. Payne, you would not object to
   that?

           MR. KING:   I am obliged, sir.

       MR* PAYNE:   If submissions are going to be put in, .
  it would be helpful if they were put in by everybody.
  What I don't want to do - well, the implications of that
  are obvious.

       THE CORONER;   I think Mr. King is merely saying he
  would like to read the Judgment.

        MR. KING:   Absolutely.  I am talking about the law,
sir.   I am very willing to lend my copy of Smith and Hogan
in return, sirJ

           THE CORONER:   Very well.

                (The Inquests were adjourned until
                ten o ’clock the following morningT
                               51                       (V T i^ L vi/   •




                                                cf**4   /nu.   £*} .

                                                           D. GUTCESR

    Q. So what you have done is to try and reconstruct from your
       own recollection sorting it out with the assistance of
       other material, the video? - A. When I made that statement
       I had not seen the video obviously.  Since that tine \i e
       evidence I have given to the Inquiry to assist the Inquiry
       I have tried to make as accurate as possible.

    Q. At the time thatyou were at the turnstiles you say you
       could see that people were coming through and in an answer
       to Mr. Hytner you said that as it progressed something
       occurred. Now, as what progressed? - A. As the people
       were coining through at one stage I got into a skirmish
       with one particular youth who wanted to fight. He was
       that aggressive he wanted to take his fury out on the
       first person he saw as he got out of that crush and that
C      just happened to be myself.

    Q. Were you able tosee what was happening outside the turn­
       stiles? - A. Yes, I could quite clearly see what was
       happening, with restrictions.

    Q. And is it your firm recollection that you saw immediately
       outside the turnstiles a lot of people wanting to come in
       but others who were not under pressure coning and joining
       themra.t the back? --A. -They were st-ill pushing, sir, yes... _
       They were at the -other 'side- of >?.w Police norses vho were
       some distance away.   They were suill coming from Leppings
       Lane and still pushing the crowd towards the turnstiles.

    Q/ So having come through the Police they were running on to
       the backs of those who were waiting to come through the
       turnstiles? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

    Q. You saw that, did you? - A. Yes.

            MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you, sir.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Thank you very much, Sergeant.

            MR. COLLINS:    Police Constable Ryan, please.

            POLICE CONSTABLE MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN Called

                       Examined by   MR. COLLINS:

    Q. Mr. Ryan, your full name, please? - A. It is Michael Vincent
       Ryan.

    Q. Your duties have, I think, for some time involved being
       in the control room at Hillsborough.  How long have you
       been doing those duties? -A. About for the last five years,
       sir.

    0.. That means presumably that you have attended not only

                                               9-1
                               52




   routine matches but major semi-finals too? - A. I have
   attended all the major matches in that period, yes, sir.

Q. You came on duty on the 15th of April of this year at
   3 o'clock in the morning, I think? -A. That is correct.

Q. And that was with Sergeant Goddard? - A. Correct, sir.

Q. Did you check at that time and test the public address
   system? - A. Shortly after that time, yes.

Q. Yes. And was it all working properly? - A. Working
   properly, yes.

Q. I think there was one speaker which was being worked on.
   Is that right? - A. There was an engineer present at
   the ground quite near ground control.

Q. Which speaker was that?  Can you remember? - A. Yes, I
   can.  If you have been to ground control, if you look from
   the front bench to the left there is the door and it
   is the speaker that was affixed to the side of the
   West Stand.

Q. Side of the West Stand? - A. Side of the West Stand.
   The wall tp iSthe side of there.. ..There is, .a speaker
   somewhere '.rdund-.-aboutV -t-h^t" arf^ .u I-t- might have- been -
   yes, somewhere round about there.

Q. Facing out towards the pitch? - A. I cannot remember
   which way it was pointing, •sir, but there was certainly
   a speaker there that he was working on.

Q. Yes. Did you also check the cameras? - A. The cameras
   were switched on at that time, yes.

Q. There was a problem with one of them.' Is that correct?
   - A. That is correct,yes.  There was an apparent fault
   on the camera to the West Stand, West terraces. That is
   the ....

Q. Where is it mounted? -A. I think that is the one that is
   mounted on the electronic scoreboard.

0. Yes. Is that roughly where the Usher is pointing? - A.
   Yes.  I think if I can remember correctly it is on the
   right-hand side, the lower side of the scoreboard.
   Sorry. Down.   That is it, yes.

Q. Yes. And it is the one that gives you a view, is it, of
   the terraces and the West S t a n d ____ - A. That is correct.

Q. Is that a Police or a ground camera? - A. As far as I am
   aware all the cameras there are the ground cameras.

Q. I see.    What was the problem with that camera as you can

                                        94
                               53


                                                          a.

        recall? - A. The picture was very distorted.

q   .       LORD JUSTICE    TAYLOR:   Very what? - A. Distorted, sir.

             LORD JUSTICE   TAYLOR:   Distorted.   Thank . ou.

Q.          MR. COLLINS:     Was the fault mended or not? - A. I
        contacted the engineer myself.

0       That is Mr. Holdsworth? - A. Roger Holdsworth, yes. Ke
        attended and came out and worked on that camera ror some
        tine. Quite how long he was there I do not know. He
        was certainly there working on it for some considerable
        time. The picture was never satisfactory as far as I
        recall that day although that was not my specific duty
        to look at that.
0       I ^ n o w that. When you say the picture as far as vou
        can see was not satisfactory what was wrong withit?
        - A. It was not as clear as you would hope the picture
        to be.
Q. Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any wav
   inoperative or less adequate than normal or .... - A .
   As far as I recall the zoom was operative.     It was tne
   quality .of the picture that was the. problem,

Q. I see. The other ones were all working all right though,
   v/ere they? — A. Apparently so, yes.

    Q *    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    That camera would be able to
     ; rove, would it? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q    Would it   take in the whole of the pitch? What   wasit
        principally directed towards? - A. It is principally
        directed towards the West Stand terraces.

    Q    I see. - A. But it can rove round as well.  In actual
         fact the cameras were operated during that day by ^
         Police Constable Bichard who obviously knows the ruii
         capabilities of those cameras better than I do.

    0        MR COLLINS:     Yes. Well, I will ask him about
         that aspect of the matter.  What in fact were your
         duties during that day? - A. My duties were to deal
         with telephone conversations, telephone calls coming
         into the ground and also the public address.

    Q. Just dealing first of all with the telephone It is
       I think, that there are three, three telephones? - A. Yes
       that is correct.  There is one which gives us direct
       contact with the club.

    0. That is an internal system, is it? - A. An internal
     * system, yes, all the internal telephone extensions.

                                         95
                               54

                                                             —s*•-,, •
                                                             s.*.-...

     There is a Police line which gives contact to the Police
     Stations, as you appreciate, the internal Police telephone
     system.
Q.   Yes. “ A. Also gives us an outside line if /e require               one
     and there is also a direct outside line.

0    So far as the internal ground telephone is concerned
     where can you 'phone from there? Where are the otner
     extensions? - A. There is a list we have m the control.

     I see. - A. Which gives us the extensions of people within
Q.
     the club.
0    In particular can vou telephone the club s control room
     where the club has* its videos and more particularly the
     monitoring of people coming through the turnstiles. -A.
     Yes.
Q     And I think, you had aPolice Officer in that room, Police
      Constable Guest? - A. Correct, yes, sir.

0     Could you contact him directly through that telephone or
      did it co to a club official first? -A. How they operate
      in there I an not fully aware but certainly P.C. Guest
      is available, in,^that r o o m - at .that.-telephone. .There are
      c l u b * ' officials •in' the,rfe. -as well; '
                                                    •

0      What I am getting at is this.  If you were asked to check
       on the numbers who had come through the turnstile would
     ‘ you do it by using that telephone or would you normally
     ’ use a radio? - A.We could use either, whichever is
       available.  If the telephone is engaged then we also have
       a club radio.
 0    Well, which is the primary means from the control room ir
      you want to check with P.C. Guest for any reason? - A. Ir
      I was to check I would use the telephone.

      I   see. But there is also access through the radio, either
 Q- a Police radio or a club radio? — A. Yes.    There are a
      number of radios kept within the control room. Do you
      want me to describe those, sir?

           MR. COLLINS:   I am not quite sure how much detail
      you want about this, sir, because you of course have seen
      the layout and so, I think, have most others.  On tne
      other hand, of course, the public has not.

            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Perhaps if you could lead
       the witness on the various channels which we heard about.

           MR. COLLINS:   You are familiar with the radio set­
      up, are you? ~A. Yes.

                                       96
                          55




0   Well, in chat case can you give a brief indication?
    I wane to concencrate on the Police radio for the
    moment. “ A. Yes, sir.
0   The Police radio was operating, I thin'., on channel 25
    Is that right? “ A. That is correct, y«.a.

0   Now  that was a channel which was used, was it, by all
Q ' Officers involved at the ground? - A. That was the
    channel designated for uniform Officers engaged
    football duties that day, yes.

o Would that include traffic or just Officers st and
Q ' around the ground? - A. There are mobiles around the
    ®round, not necessarily road traffic aobi.es, but
    ill Police mobiles around the ground would operate on
    that channel as well.
0   '’’hat channel 25, was that designed as a talk through
     channel? - A. There is a talk through facility on
     that particular set, yes.




                                  / Q. How was it


                                     §7
                                     56

                                               M. RYAN


        Q. How was it designed to be used? I know there were problems
           later in the afternoon but what I want to get at is what
           was the system that was supposed to be in operation on
           that channel? - A. The radio can work in two ways. You can
           have either talk-through facility on.or off.   If the talk-
           through facility is off then it mean.: that Ground Control
           can talk direct to other Officers or another Officer outside
           the ground.
    B
        Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: That overrides anybody else?
             - A. I would not say it "overrides” sir. I would not knoiv
             what the technical details would be on that, quite frankly,
             but if we were to call on that radio if somebody else was
             talking, I don't know what would happen, but if we shout
             somebody from Ground Control on the radio everyone else
             can hear what we are saying. When he cones to reply the
             only person that can hear the reply or the only people that
             can hear the reply is in Ground Control.

        Q.       MR. COLLINS:   If you are operating and getting in
           touch with an individual Officer, he is replying to you,
           does that mean that anyone else who may want to try to talk
           to you can't at that moment? - A. I don't know what would
           happen under those circumstances.    I have a feeling that
D          we might get cut off if somebody else tries to interrupt a
         ' transmission.   I have a feeling.that that could cause
           problems.- ■ . -•

        Q. It may be, Mr. Ryan, that it would be better to ask some­
           body else about these details because it seems that you
          /don't have a full knowledge of the technical details?
           - A. No.

        Q. Let me just ask you about what channels existed. First of
           all there was Channel 25 which was the channel used for
           the uniformed Officers. What other radio channels were
           available? - A. There was a VHF channel 1 which was the
           designated traffic channel for that which would be
           connected to cars. Operations Room from headquarters
           would be monitoring that channel. We also had a set
           directly contacting us with the Operations Room.

        Q. When you say you "had a set" was that a different channel
           or was that still with VHF 1?   A. We have a VHF set in
           the Control Room.that monitors that Channel 1.

        Q. You have direct contact with Headqaurters through that?
           - A. Yes, Headquarter's Operation Room, yes.

        Q. I think there was also a CID channel that was in use?
           - A. Yes, that is right.  They were on Channel 19, that
           is UHF.

        Q. You also mention in your statement Channel 35 FI control.
           What is that? - A. Yes, each Police Station has a
H          designated channel to operate on. We did have a facility
           in there with a spare radio to go through to Hammerton
           Road Police Control if need be.       -0
                                                 9-8
                               57

                                         M , uviji



    Q. In fact Superintendent Marshall at one stage made use of
       that, I think, switching from 25 to 35 to go straight to
       the Station Control? - A. I don't know if he did but he
       certainly would be able to given the good facilities on
       his radio, yes.

    Q. I think you also, is that all the Police channels that are
       relevant? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. There was also the Club radio system, I think? - A. That
       is correct.

    Q. You had access to that, did you? - A. To a radio set in
       the Control Room.

    Q. Were you aware of the Club Officials who had radios and
       whom you could contact ±i you wanted to? - A. No, I don't
       have a list.

    Q. Is there a list in the Control Room as far as you are aware?
       - A. Not as far as I was aware, no. We do know through
       experience that there are certain Club Officials who do have
       them.
D
    Q. What, you would ask for a particular individual if you wanted
       to contact someone* on' 'the"Club radio? - A. Yes.        trr

    Q. You would ask for Mr. Lock or Mr. Thorpe or whoever? - A.
       Yes.

    Q.-'Just before we go on, Mr. Ryan, can I ask you this: you
       say that at the early part of the day, I think round 9ish,
       you spoke to Operations Room and D1 Control and checked
       with them -regarding any reported movement of supporters
       or any problems or points of interest there may be? - A.
        Yes.

    Q. What are you referring to there? - A. When we open control
       we contact everybody that will have some interest in the
        operation that is going on. We ring Operations Room
        to let everybody know that we are operational and it is
        to ask if there is anything that has happened probably
       'overnight or prior to us opening the Control Room, if
        anything of interest to us has happened.

    Q. Dl Control would give you what sort of information? - A.
       Dl Control, West Bar Control, they have information
       regarding the Railway Station and perhaps monitor any
       supporters that might arrive early in the Sheffield
       City Centre.

    Q. That is what that was about? - A. Yes, it also gives us
       a check on their telephone extensions that they are
       working from.
H                                      99
                               58

                                          M. RYAN


Q. Now during the course of the morning and up to lunchtime
   I think you received at Control a number of reports both
   from Police, and some from the public too, about individual
   incidents involving fans of one sort or another. Is
   that right? - A. Yes, that .i.3 correct.

Q.    Was there   then a direct line from the public to the Control
     Room? - A.   No, there is no direct public telephone.   They
     would have    to go through probably Hammerton Road Police
     Station to   get through to us.

Q. I was wondering why complaints from the public v/ere channelled
   through to you? - A. I don't know the answer to that, sir.
   I have included it in my statement.

Q. I see that you say that they v/ere but I wondered .... I
   mean that seems on the face of it to clutter up y o u r ---
   A. Yes, it does.

Q.   Can you think of any reason why that should have been done.
     That is all I am asking? - A. Unless they were that inundated
     with calls at that particular time that they had to pass
     the relevant ones on to us at the ground, other than that
     I don’t know.   I assume they perhaps did not know who was
     on the switchboard at the time.

Q. Anyway,-were"these'complaints channelled'through to you at V       c
   a fairly early stage? - A. Yes, I did not notice any times,
   I must admit, but they came through.

Q.- What I am getting at is do you know whether there v/ere any
    such calls that came through at the time of the build-up
    towards the kic3<-off between quarter-past-2 and 3? - A.
    Any of those calls get through?

Q. Yes? - A. I could not recall any particular ones to be
   honest, no.

Q. I want to come forward now please to about 10, quarter-past-2,
   up to that point it was busy, I think, but not abnormally
   so, that is the traffic in the Control Room? - A. It was
   very busy but we expect to be very busy at an event of that
   size.

Q. That is what I meant by "not abnormally". It was what
   you expected for an event of that size? - A. Yes, it is
   comparable to my experience for my job, yes.

Q. Did you at about quarter-past-2 look out and appreciate
   that the Nottingham Forest supporters seemed to be coming
   in pretty v/ell but that the Liverpool areas were still
   fairly empty? - A. I would not have said "fairly empty"
   but there was certainly spaces in all parts of the ground.

Q. Sorry, that was my word.  You tell me what the position
   was at the Liverpool end? - A. That was probably the last
                                    100
                                  59

                                              M. RYAN


         time I consciously looked around the ground due to the
         build-up and volume of work, but r did notice that the
         Nottingham Forest end was fuller than the Liverpool areas.

    Q. Were you aware at all of the unevenness of the build-up
       on the Liverpool terraces? - A. No, I did not particularly
       notice that.
B   q   . now I think you began to be aware, did you not, of the
          build-up at the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. Could you see the T.V. monitors? - A. The monitors are mounted
       above the head of the bench where we sit. where I am you
       have got to deliberately look up to see them. It was very
       rare I actually saw them but I did notice round about 2.3 0
       there started to be a build-up of the crowds.

    Q. I think at about this time too, the radio transmission and
       reception began to be rather poor.  Is that correct? - A.
       That is correct. How it was brought to my attention I
       do not recall, but I do remember that I became aware there
       was a fault on the radio.

D   Q. I think you became aware of a civilian member of the
       communications department, that is the Police communications
       depa rtmen-t,. M r . Sanderson, -coming ;■;u p t o Ground Con tro 1?
       - A. Yes', that is~'correct-                    •

    q   . I think it may be more sensible, may it not, to ask
          Sergeant Goddard about this aspect rather than yourself.
          Am I right? - A. I can explain what I saw.

    Q. You were not yourself directly concerned with operating
       the radio,.'as I understand it at this stage, or wereyou?
       - A. Not directly. Obviously if I received a message via
       the telephone that required passing over the radio and
       then rather than duplicate effort and pass the message on
       to Sergeant Goddard I would pass the message over the
       radio.

    Q. Perhaps just tell us very briefly and quickly what you
       saw in relation to Mr. Sanderson's efforts? - A. Mr. Sanderson
       apparently picked up outside the ground that there was a
       fault on the radio. He came in. He informed us of the
       situation. He checked one or two items. We had a spare
       set located underneath the bench. . He chanced the radio
       and changed the various adaptors. The new microphone was
       subsequently tested. That apparently did not work at the
       first try. We then changed to talk-through facility On
       that radio using another radio that we had in there.



                                       101
H

                                        /Q.     thereafter
                                   60




                                                   M. RYAN




    0     Thereafter you were limited to talk-through? - A. Yes,
         but we were on talk-through on the other radio prior to
         that.
B   0. You did not have the facility which you had had to over­
       ride, assuming such a facility existed. - A. We could
       have switched it up as well.

    0. Whatever the reason, from then on only talk-through was
       used, is that correct? - A. As far as I recall, sir.

    0 . I suppose that has a problem that if everyone talks at
        once it could be difficult to understand messages. - A .
        Only one person can speak at any one time on the radio.

    Q. If people try to talk at once does that not clog up the
       airways? - A. Yes.
    0 Did that happen as time wore on, or cannot you help about
D    '* that7 - A. I do know the airway channel became very
        congested,, y    ^ h a r e ^ a s ^ g^eat v o U m e .of traffic. (

        5 tir Rvan, at about tHis time were you aware again of the
           build-up at t h e turnstiles on the monitors. - A. Yes,
           sir.   The reason why I became aware of that was I nad ^o
          •move out of the way for Mr. Sanderson to get m at the
          ‘
          "spare radio.     I literally had to move out of imy ■
                                                               seat
           backwards and I think it was probably round about that
           time I became aware of the great volume outside.

        5 . We know from other evidence it was about 2.40 to 2.41
            that Mr. Sanderson came to mend the radios and he did it
            between about 2.40 and 2.45.   I am giving very rough
            times.   Does that accord with your recollection? - A.
            Yes.   I have great difficulty in recalling times.
            Events were such in the Control Room, the volume of jtork
            we had to get through, calls, radio messages, time real y
            to me was...
        Q. You obviously have considerable experience and
           of crowds of semi-finals and generally at Hillsborouan.
           Had you ever seen in your experience such a build-up
           outside those gates? - A. Never.

        0.    Did you form any opinion about whether it was g?inS to    be
         *    possible to get them all in before three o clock? - A.
             No, I never...    It was one thing that really
             crossed my mind.    I was busy doing wnat I was doing.

        Q. I think you were also aware that the turnstiles seemed to
           be operating more slowly than normal? - A . Yes , 1
           note that.   There was a large crowd outside and ^ u*}edo
           I noticed it or whether somebody else pointed it
                                          1 02
                                        M.   RYAN


not really know, but it seemed to me that few people
seemed to be coming through the turnstiles that X could
see.

Were you asked, or did you at any stage as this build-up
occurred, contact PC Guest to ask about numbers7 - A. I
do not recall speaking to him at all, sir.

Did you use the telephone at all to contact anyone in the
ground? - A. I may well have done, but I do not recall
any specific conversations.   I must say I do not
remember speaking to anyone in Ground Control, the Club's
Control.   That is not to say I did not take any messages
from them that they were passing on to other people.

That may be, but it follows from what you have told us
that you were never instructed to get in touch with the
Club Control in order to get any information from them? -
A. No.

Or, indeed, to  give them any information? - A. Not as   far
as X am •. _   . _         .^         ..

Let's come to the tannoy.     Up until this point, and I am
talking about., the time the technician was there, had you
been asked to, or had you given any message over the
tannoy system? - A. No.     When the engineer was there the
ground was empty.

No, I mean when Mr. Sanderson was there at 2.40 or
thereabouts'. - A. No doubt I passed a number of messages.
I cannot recollect all of them.    The general use of the
public address is for perhaps vehicles that are causing
obstructions, this kind of thing.    I may have passed one
or two of those.    The specific address I believe you are
referring to is one that has been drawn to my attention
that I made roundabout two o'clock or 2.15 to supporters
on the Leppings Lane terracing.

There has been considerable confusion in the evidence as
to whether any tannoy messages were made at any time.
That is why I am asking you whether you can recall making
any before 2.40 first of all.   The period up to 2.40 - I
am not interested in messages about cars blocking the way
- any tannoy message directed to fans in theground to do
anything at all, can you recall? - A. Yes.

What message can you recall? - A. Roundabout 2.15 I was
requested to speak to supporters in the Leppings Lane
terracing to ask them to move away from entrances.

To move away from entrances? - A. Yes, the entrances into
the terracing.
                             62




                                            M. RYAN


Q.   Which entrances: are those? Do you mean the mouths    of
     the tunnels? - A. The mouths of the tunnels, yes.

Q.   Who asked you to send this message? - A. I have no
     recollection of that.   It was somebody in Control.

Q.   What did you say, can you remember? - A. I would not like
     to recall my exact words but I would think they would be
     something to the effect, "A Police massage to Liverpool
     supporters on the Leppings Lane terraces.   Would you
     please move away from the entrances.   Please move away
     from the entrances to allow people in from behind.”

Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Are we talking about inside
     the ground? - A. Inside the ground.

Q.         MR. COLLINS:   This was about 2.15? - A. As near as
     I recall.

Q.   About the time, you told us, when you had looked at the
     terraces? - A. Yes, it would be roundabout that time.

Q. Did you look because of what you had been told to do or'
   did you look independently of the message? - A. I do nul
   know whether one followed the other to be honest.

Q. Am I right in thinking there is a facility on the tannoy
   'to use only some of the speakers?   That is to say, to
    direct messages to a particular part? - A. That is
    correct.

Q. Did you do that? - A. Yes.

Q.   Which speakers did you use? - A. The ones to   the Leppings
     Lane terraces, the west standterraces.

Q. How many times did you send out this message? - A. As I
   recall, once or twice.

Q.   Did it have any apparent effect, or don't you know? - A.
     Not as far as I recall, but I do not know.    I was not
     asked to pass the message again.

Q. That was a message at about 2.15.   What was the next
   message you can recall sending out over the tannoy, and
   again I am not interested in moving parked cars? - A. The
   next was a series of messages to Liverpool supporters at
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles.

Q. When were these? - A. It was at the time when the crowd
   started to build-up.   Somebody asked me to pass that
   message out.
                                  104
                                 63




                                                  M.   RYAN


    Q. Who is "somebody"? - A. It would be an Officer within
       Control.

    0. Was this before, during or after the presence of
       Mr. Sanderson? - A. I think that would be after.
B
    Q. What was the message you sent out? - A. I announced "A
       Police message to the Liverpool supporters at the
       Leppings Lane turnstiles.    Would you please stop
       pushing.    There are supporters being crushed at the
       turnstiles.    Would you please stop pushing."

C   Q. How many times did you send out that message? - A. A
       large number of times I passed that message over the
       public address.   Several times.   Many times.

    Q.   Are we talking about 5, 10, 20, 50?   - A. Five to ten.

    Q.   Did you limit that to the speakers at the turnstiles
         themselves? - A. Yes, to the turnstiles outside.
D
    Q. You can limit to the Leppings Lane turnstiles, can you? -
       A. You-.-.can ispeak to a-hy.-se^tianclof.-the-ground
       independently.       The facility will split into the i::ur
       sections of the ground, north, south, east or west.

    Q. -That I can follow, but is there also a split for outside
       as well? - A. Yes.
E
    Q.   Did you gather whether your message   appeared to have had
         any effect? - A. I can only say no,   it did not have any
         effect.

    Q. Were you a*rare of a request to open the gates?  Did you
       hear that? - A. Yes, in between passing the public
       address messages and obviously the other things that came
       up.   I was aware that a request had come over to open
       the gates.

    0. You were aware I imagine - and.I am not going to ask you
       this in detail because we have gone through it with
       others - of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield eventually
       agreeing to open the gates? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you remember the way in which-he made that request,
       or gave that order? - A. No.

               LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   If you moving on to
         something else we will adjourn and resume at one-fifteen.

                         (Luncheon adjournment)
H
                                      105
I N Q U I R Y   I N T O     T H E      H I L L S B O R O U G H


            S T A D I U M          D I S A S T E R




                            Before


                   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                     MR. B. JOHNSON
        (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                              and

                    PROF. L. MAUNDER.

                          (ASSESSORS)




                              At

                      The Town Hall,

                          Sheffield,

                              on

                  Friday, 9th June, 1989.




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                    (Afternoon Session)



           From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
                Official Shorthand Writers,
            55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                    10 6
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                          (Afternoon Session)

                                                Page

   m   v. RYAN Recalled

          Examined by Mr. Collins (Cont)         64
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Maxwell          65
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow          65
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis       67
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward         70

    M. GODDARD Called

          Examined by Mr. Phillips               71
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner           90
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Muller           96
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson          98
          Cross-Examined by M r . Maxwell        99
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Gibson-Watt     100
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis      102
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow         105


                                                108
mscussiON




                                      107
               EIGHTEENTH DA Y ’S PROCEEDINGS

                     FRIDAY. 9TH JUNE. 1989

                       (AFTERNOON SESSION)


     MR. GLASGOW:   Sir, before we continue, I have just been
talking to my learned friend, Mr. Collins.   We think we can
help with the reference in the transcript that you might have
been looking for this morning on the timing of the
communication between Superintendent Marshall and P.C. Buxton
as to the sending for the PA vehicle, simply if it is
convenient to you to have it in your note today rather than
fish for it later.  It is Day 10, page 99, and the time is
correct.  It is some time just before 14.44, which I think
is what you were probably searching for.

     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      Thank you.

      POLICE CONSTABLE MICHAEL VINCENT RYAN Recalled:

              Examined bv MR. COLLINS (Cont):

Mr. Ryan, coming up to the time when you became aware of
problems in the terraces, people climbing over after the game
had started, I think.   Is that right? - A. Yes, that is
correct, sir.

Now, I want to ask you again about Tannoy messages you were
asked to broadcast after that had started to happen? - A. No,
not immediately after that started to happen.  I d o n ’t recall
any message that I was asked to pass.

Can you- 'recall at any stage a message you were asked to pass
on the Tannoy? - A. Yes.

When was the first one you can recall? - A. When the
supporters were on the pitch I was asked to pass a message to
them to clear the pitch and to move on to the perimeter
tracks.
What stage was this? - A. I passed that message several times
during a period of a good few minutes.

But starting when? Can you remember? - A. When there was a
congregation on the pitch, I remember I was asked to pass that
message to get them to clear the pitch.

How long after the incident had come to your attention was
that, the fact of problems? - A. I am really guessing at this
time, sir.
     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   How long after the match had
stopped? - A. May be 5 minutes, sir, or thereabouts.

      MR. COLLINS:      Who asked you to pass that message? - A. I
                                108
                             65
                                                M. RYAN



     believe that was Mr. Duckenfield.

Q. Any other message that you can recall after that? - A. I
   recall passing a message or being asked to pass a message
   when Officers were trying to get into the back of the
   central tunnel

Q. When was this? - A. That would certainly be after I started
   passing the messages for them to clear the pitch. That was
   certainly the first message I recall passing.

Q     What was the message you passed then? - A. If I recall
      correctly it was, the Liverpool supporters in the central pens
      to move back to allow Officers to get in to assist injured
      people.
Q. To get back to allow Officers       A. To clear a way to allow
   Officers to enter and assist injured people.

q     To get back would be a pointless message, would not it,
      because that would simply block the tunnel? - A. To clear the
      tunnel, perhaps.
Q. Anything could have been said.  Can you remember what you did
   say? - A. No, I can’t recall what I said in detail.

Q. Who .asked; you. to.pass that, message?-   Can you remember? - A.
   No, I d o n ’t recail, sir.

Q. That is all I ask you, Mr. Ryan.
           MR. HYTNER:   I have a number of questions, sir, but I
      think they are probably directed at Sergeant Goddard, and
      rather than repeat them I will leave them.
                     Cross-Examined bv MR. MAXWELL:

Q. Mr. Ryan, selective use of the loudspeakers is possible so you
   can broadcast, as you said, either to Leppings Lane terrace or
   to the area outside Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

 Q. Is it possible to limit the broadcast to the concourse behind
    the West Stand, in that area on the ground side of the
    turnstiles? - A. The only two facilities on the public address
    system are to inside, the pitch side of the stands -and _
    terracing or to the outside.  As far as I know the public
    address would only speak to the outside of the ground.   That
    would be in total.
    Q. You ca n ’t limit it in the way I am asking about to the
       concourse? - A. No, sir.

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. GLASGOW:

    Q. One question, Mr. Ryan.  I think there is fairly regular
       contact between your control box and the club control bo
       ordinary circumstances during the build up to the matcn. -      a   -
                                       109
                                 6$
                                                     M. RYAN



        Yes, we keep in reasonable contact.

Q. One of the matters which is fairly often spoken about is the
   build up of the crowd figure which is being monitored on tfte
   computer in the club’s room, in the ordinary course «>: events.
   - A. In the ordinary course of events, yes, sir.

Q       Is it your recollection that for some reason that was not done
        on this day? - A. I don’t recall contacting the club regarding
        that matter, n o .
q     Let me put the small difference there is so you can deal with
    ’ it. Those within the club believe that practice was followed
      this day as always, namely that there was a fairly regular
      flow of messages telling your control box if not you
      personally what the build up figures were? - A. The difficulty
      I am faced with there is that I could have spoken to a member
      of the club, certainly, and passed the message on if he asked
      to speak to someone else within the control box, inasmuch as
      did not personally take a message regarding the build up of
      the crowd and figures. However, if somebody in the club
      control rang me and asked to speak to another O f f i c e r in the
      Police control then I would have put them on to that Officer
      and would obviously not know what the message was, but I
      personally did not check that message.

-q . The vfh'oie -point I' am- putting ••to you is -i t ;would
     dramatic or unusual thing to happen, because it happens all
     the time on the build up to all matches, and I am slightly
     concerned as to why you may think that it                      °n It
     this one occasion? - A. I am not saying it did not        happen, it
     just that I d o n ’t recall it happening.

 q       I see, but you do accept that the regular pattern is
         there is-’contact about that specific matter between the two
         boxes, your box and the club box? - A. We would normally be m
         contact regarding that, yes. •

    Q          LOR&-JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Did it occur to yout^e r e .was
         something missing on this day, that you were not hearing from
         the club like you usually did? - A. No, sir, t h a t u a s n o t t h e
         case.   I was inundated with a continual barrage of calls that
         day.
    Q    So you were not looking for any more? - A. I had sufficient to
         cope with what was coming in, basically, and the other
         instructions I had to deal with.
    Q         MR. GLASGOW:   Finally, Mr. Ryan, did anybody say to you
         at any time that they were having difficulty in getting
         through to the club? - A. I d o n ’t recall that, no.

    0. And without being rude, am I right in s u g g e s t i ngt hati f
       anybody had said to you, and all the other Problems you had
       with the radio, "And now the club radio won t work , or
       can’t get through to the c l u b room” , would you notlha''*
       simply? Well, why don’t y o u l M P i l i n g up the telephone? ?
                             «7
                                              M   pvj?T


   - A. I would probably have tried to contact the club myself.

Q. It is the obvious way of doing it, is not it? - A . I would
   have tried to contact the club myself if i was in that
   position.

Q. I entirely accept, and indeed I would have put to you, that
   there came a stage at about shall we say quarter-to-3 in round
   figures, when there was so much radio traffic going on that
   the last thing you would have welcomed was volunteered
   interference from the club? - A. If we had had a call from
   the club with information, obviously we would have taken the
   information.                                          ~

Q. But you were very busy? - A. Extremely.

Q. And in fact inundated with calls of one kind or another? - A.
   Yes.
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Mr. Glasgow, can I understand.
   You are saying there were calls between the club and the
   control - in what way? Radio? What?

        MR. GLASGOW:   Radio and ’phone, sir, up until about
   quarter-to-3, as I believe.

     .        -o Cross-Examined b y MR:.- KALLTPETIS-:

Q. Mr. Ryan, can you help me please with something- on the Snig
   Hill log.  I have a transcript of the recordings made of
   various 'phone calls and radio messages.  Do you recall
   speaking to somebody called Alf? Would that be Mr. Rooke from
   Snig Hill?
        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      This witness was not radio.    He is
   telephone and Tannoy.
        MR. KALLIPETIS:   I appreciate that, sir, yes, but it
   appears there is a ’phone call.

         THE WITNESS:   I d o n ’t recall that name, no.

        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Might he be shown, sir, a copy of the
   Snig Hill log, if it is handy?  (Handed to witness):

Q. Your name is mentioned there, Mr. Ryan, in the right-hand
   column.  Do you see it? — A. Yes.

Q. Is that in fact you speaking in response to a message asking
   whether you wanted ambulances? - A. Yes.

 Q. It is you? - A. I recall a message from someone in Operations
    Room, the name certainly I did not know, at some stage, yes.


 Q. You do recall that the messages that are recorded there         -
    A I certainly do not remember using those words.
                                      111
                                 68
                                                 M. RYAN



Q 'I can’t vouch for the accuracy of the transcript because I
   have not heard, this particular tape. In fact I did have it
   but I could not quite make out what he was saying. Somebody
   else has transcribed it. Is it right there was a
   request....
           MR. COLLINS:    It is page 8, the VHF Channel 1.

        THE WITNESS:       Excuse me, sir.   Is this the radio or
telephone?
Q             MR. KALLIPETIS:   If you look at the message
      before it, the time is just after l*-59, ’’Telephone       •
      call to Ground Control, ’I don’t know whether we need
      any yet.’ ’No I ’m ringing ground Control.” . Then your
      name appears in the right-hand column, ’’Ground control
      PC Ryan” . ”Yes, its Alf, do you want any ambulances.
      ’’W e ’re trying to monitor you but you know its.” and you
      carry on:
           ’’I t ’s chaos at the moment, w e ’ve got no reports of no
           reports of injuries but we, if you can monitor^
           the situation if you can just keep standing by .

      Now, do you recall that? - A. Yes, I believe I do

a     And that is but'seconds before~3 o ’clock, Mr. Ryan, because
      y o u S u l see the time in the left-hand column after the reply
      to what you have just said. "Yes. okay ta", and then in
      brackets, ” (1500)’\ - A. Yes.
 q   . At that stage can you think of any reason why Snig Hill would
       be making a request to you in the Police control box at
       Hillsborough whether or not you wanted ambulances. - A.
       not really, sir.
 Q    Did it strike you as odd at the time when you received the
      ’phone call? - A. Obviously not, otherwise I would have
      probably said something at the time.

    Q. Did you refer that request to your superior---
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am a bit concerned about this
     ' document, actually. We have had a time correction on it, have
       not we?
           .MR. KALLIPETIS:     We have, sir.
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    And that seems to have made a bit
       more sense of some parts of it but does not seem to have made
       any more sense of this part.
            MR. KALLIPETIS:     Forgive me, sir, I think in fact it
       does.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     Does it.   Very well.   There was a
                                       112
                            69




     request for an ambulance before 3 o ’clock?

          MR. KALLIPETIS:    Sir, that if I may say so is not
     putting it as it appears from the track, sir, and obviously we
     have not yet got a statement from the person who nuc’e this
     call, hence my request to this Officer who apparently received
     it, but it is a request from Snig Hill, it would appear,
     asking the ground whether they require any ambulances just
     before 3 o ’clock.  Sir, I think it is correct,s because if you
     turn to page 9 you will see at 15.04:   ’’Hillsborough ground
     control request dog handlers to attend the stadium
     immediately” , and then between 15.04 and 15.06 that message is
     transmitted to various people-, and then you will see on page
     10 just after 15.06 they call Operations Support.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Yes, I see that.

          MR. KALLIPETIS:    And it is then after that that there is
     message "for a fleet of ambulances at the bottom of page 11. So
     so far as timing is concerned it would appear to be accurate,
     and I understand it has been checked:

Q.   Mr.    Ryan, did you refer it to a superior Officer?- A. I
     have no recollection of that at all, sir.

0. You were asked about the Tannoys, Mr. Ryan, and you said you
   had checked them -before the match started-, and in particular
   the one that was being worked upon you checked at the request
   of the ground engineer? - A . Y e s ,. that is correct.

Q. Did you check the Tannoys to make sure each Tannoy in each
• area of the ground was working? - A. All the sections were
   checked, y es.
Q    May I just ask how you did it? - A. Yes, there were Officers
     around the ground.  We simply tested the public address that
     way.
Q. So you would have checked the Tannoy, would you, at the corner
   of the North Stand, between the North Stand and the Kop in tne
   area where the ambulance is parked? - A. As far as I recall,
   yes.




                                 /Cross-Examined bv MR   WOODWARD

                                     113
                              70

                                                      M.   RYAN


                    Gross"examined bv MR. WOODWARD:

Q       Mr Ryan, you were in the control box and we can see in
        West Midlands bundle, the thick bundle, views in the
        control box. Would you have a look, please, at photo­
        graphs 50, 51 and 52, the last three in the bundle?
        Where is your position in the control box? Do we see
        that in any of those photographs? —A. Yes, from photograph
        50.
Q. Yes. - A. If you look facing the playing area, the rar
   right, directly in front of there.

             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes.

Q.           MR. WOODWARD:   You are right in the far corner?
        - A. Ye s .
0       So the view that you have across towards the Leppings
        Lane terraces is at more of an angle than that which
        we see in photograph 51. You are further to the rl§^£
        of the camera position.  Is that correct. - A. Yes, that
        is correct.
0. Now, as the tine for the kick-off approached would it
   be rizht that ordinarily events would reach a crescendo.
   - A.cOh, -yes

Q. With increasing traffic, increasing natters to concern
   vou but during the time of the build-up to tne kic.c-
        off on this day in 1939 were you fron tine to ti~s
        looking out on*to the terraces? - A. The last tine I
        remember consciously looking out on to the terraces
        was round about 2 o ’clock/2.15 tine. The only other
        natter I probably recall was directly below the Police
        control which is slightly elevated where supporters at
        some stage were clinbing over the fencing fron the
        terracing towards the seated area which is more or -ess
        to my right.
0. Yes.   If we look at photograph 48 that would be a view _
   looking out, as it were, over your shoulder to the seating
   on the right. You say you saw some people climb up, did
   you7 Do we see the point where they climbed up there.
   - a ' No you w o n ’t see the point there because it is
   below that level.     If I recall there is a fence directly
   below the ....
    0    So your last recollection now of looking at the Leppings
         Lane terraces is some time before 2.30, is it. - A. Yes,
         earlier than that.  Before 2.15.

    0    There came a tine on the day when you saw the people
         climbing over from the Leppings Lane terraces. You saw


                                    1 14
                                                   M .   r.Yiii-I



     Chat something had happened down there? - A. Over on to
    'the pitch area, yes.

Q. Yes. Up to that time had anything struck you, although
   your only conscious recollection of looking at the
   terraces is at about 2.15, between that tine and the
   occasion when you saw the people coming over the
   perimeter fence had anything struck you about the
   state of the terraces? - A. No.

0. Nothing happening in the control box had drawn your
 ’* attention to anything abnormal down there? - A. No.

Q. You have been asked about communications with the club.
   - A. Yes.
Q   There is the club's radio and there is also the telephone
    link? - A. Yes.
Q. Ordinarily is the communication a two-way thing, inrorm-
   ation being passed each way? - A. Yes, that is correct.

0. Nov; is this the situation? You have no recollection or
 ’’ any *particular information coming to you or being passed
    by you down to the control room, to the club's control?
    -"A. No,.-I have no personal recollection.-

0 If there had not been any would that have been something
 ’* unusual? If it had been totally -silent and there had been
    no communication would that not have struck you? A. I*.
  • my lob had been totally silent?   If the ....

Q. Well, if there to all intents and purposes had been
   nothing -.the control room had been dead? - A. Yes,
   it probably would.

Q. Does it follow from what   you aresaying that there^may
   have been communications passing between the two of you
   but there was nothing unusual or abnormal about any or
   it? Could that be an explanation? - A. I cannot say
   that I did not get any calls from the club but I cannot
   honestly recollect.

          MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Thank you.

         -MR. PHILLIPS:   Sergeant Goddard, please.

             POLICE SERGEANT MICHAEL GODDARD Called

                    Examined by MR.. PHILLIPS:

 Q. You are Sergeant Michael Goddard.    Is that so? - A. I am,
