    From: Paul Pugh                               cc: Vic Clayton    /
            Head of Operational Policing              Peter Edmundspn o/r
            Policy Unit
          . Room 539
            Queen Anne’s Gate
            » 0171-273-3141
           04 July 1997




    Chris Bone


    HILLSBOROUGH


^ ^ T h is is to confirm formally that you will be taking on the post as secretary to
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny on Hillsborough.

   2.      As we have discussed, I think it is important to maintain a separation between
   the scrutiny and policy work which has been done within OPPU (and may be done in
   future) on this subject.        That is why this work needs to be done outside
   Peter Edmundson s section although you will need to keep in close touch with them.
   For the purposes of any administrative support that you need, you should look to the
   staff within that section. It is not my intention at present to appoint any other staff full
   time to support you, although you should let me know straightway if you think that is
   necessary. For line management purposes you should report to me, although you
   are independent of OPPU as far as the policy and content of the scrutiny is
   concerned. On that, you should regard yourself as having direct access through
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to Ministers.

   3.     No budget has been set aside for this exercise and costs should be attributed
   to OPPU. For the present I suggest any costs are attributed to the sub-heads of
   Peter’s section, although I would be grateful if you could discuss with John Usher
   establishing separately identifiable sub-heads for the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-
   Smith should be provided with whatever is necessary to enable him to carry out the
   exercise. I would be grateful if you could contain expenditure to the minimum
   necessary, and when you have the opportunity to estimate what the costs of the
   exercise will be please let me have an appropriate breakdown. I will give you formal
   delegated authority for that expenditure when we know what it is.

   4.     I will leave it to you and Vic to discuss your retirement from firearms matters,
   including whether a temporary change of accommodation would be helpful, and to
   arrange with Roy Henderson your accommodation in Clive House. I suggest you
   confirm with BEMU that no other more suitable accommodation is available (I would
   be astonished if it were).




  f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0271pddoc
5.     When you have an idea of what your accommodation and other
arrangements will be, I will circulate a note to Private Office and others with an
interest.

6.    I am very grateful to you for taking on this task. Needless to say, I would not
have asked you to take it on if I did not have full confidence in you.




                                    PAUI




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0271 pddoc
