                                           DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                4-12 QUEEN ANNES GATE
                                                   LONDON SW1H 9AZ
                                                   Telephone 071-273 8098
                                                   Fax       071-222 0802

Allan D. Green QC




                     PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


Richard Wells Esq QPM MA                                      9 July 1990
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




Dc<k
                     RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Thank you very much for coining to see me today about this
matter on which you have sought my advice.


I^have considered the report by           , It is dated 12 April
1990 but relates to an incident w m c n occurred on 18 April
1989. I assume that          who was driving the Staff car,had
no opportunity to make any note of the fragment of conversation
at the time. When did he first make any written note ? Plainly
it is vital to assess how accurately           Iheard and
remembered the precise words used,since a small difference in
what was heard or recalled may be crucial to the interpretation
of what was said.


On the assumption that                   heard and recalled the words
spoken accurately and tnat tney expressed an improper intention
(and on the further assumption that two very senior public
figures would have expressed such an intention in front of a
third party who was a South Yorkshire police driver) the
question arises whether there is any prima facie evidence of a
criminal offence. I do not believe that there is.I think that a
conspiracy to pervert the course of public justice must relate
to the course of actual or potential civil or criminal
p r o c e e di ng s ,and not to the conduct of a non-statutory inquiry
set up by the Home Secretary.There is no evidence here of any
bribery of a public official (see Archbold,43rd edition,volume
2 at par a .24-47) nor would there appear to have been misconduct
by an officer of justice,since Lord Justice Taylor was not
appointed by the Home Secretary to act as a judge in civil or
criminal proceedings (ibid.para.24-49).
It is therefore a matter for you to decide what further action
you should take. Plainly it would be open to you to consult Sir
John Woodcock or Sir Clive Whitmore at the Home Office. If you
wished to show this letter to Sir John or Sir Clive,I would
have no objection whatever.
