hs.3.14/dis&law.peb



Miss G Harrison
E Division



DISASTERS AND THE LAW


Thank you for your note of 13 March enclosing a copy of the
letter dated 4 March from the Lord Chancellor's Department about
disaster inquiries.


My first reaction to the Lord Chancellor's office paper is that
we would not necessarily feel in this part of the Home Office
that there should be a presumption in favour of holding a
statutory technical inquiry under the Health and Safety at Work
Act in the case of disasters arising from fires (such as
Bradford) or sportsground management and crowd control (as at
Hillsborough) . Our reason for taking this view is that these are
two areas where inspectors of the Health and Safety Executive do
not necessarily have expertise.         HSE have no statutory
responsibility in respect of general fire safety matters; nor do
they have any statutory responsibility, or in consequence
expertise, in relation to safety at sportsgrounds.


There are powers available under section 33 of the Fire Services
Act 1947 for the Secretary of State to hold a public local
inquiry into the circumstances of or the steps taken to deal with
any particular outbreak of fire, and this could no doubt have
been used for the purpose of the inquiry into the Bradford fire.
In fact Mr Justice Popplewell's inquiry was a non-statutory
departmental inquiry with no powers to call witnesses.       This
presented no problems in practice even though at the early stages
of the inquiry some parts were held in public.

Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the Hillsborough football
ground tragedy was also a non-statutory departmental inquiry.
I understand however from Mr Whalley, who was the Secretary to
the inquiry, that the option was left open of turning the inquiry
into a tribunal of inquiry under the Tribunals of Inquiry
(Evidence) Act 1921 if there was difficulty about securing
evidence from witnesses. In practice, this was unnecessary.


Nevertheless, I do not think that we can reasonably object to the
tenor of the paper from the Lord Chancellor's Department, since
paragraph 13 of the paper clearly leaves the final choice of type
of inquiry to the appropriate Minister.


I have only one comment of detail on the text, and that is very
minor. It seems to me that paragraph 12 does not properly form
part of the section on non-statutory public inquiries and that
it should in consequence either have its own sub-heading or
follow the heading which at present precedes paragraph 13.




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         62 Division


14 March 1991
