£«R «                               1 0 JUL 1990
                                    L



    22-7.JS                             I c>I -l.1   ^I   3


  • From:        J L Goddard                              cc HMCIC        )w/o
                 F8 Division                                 Mr Boys Smith)ends
                 Ext 3314                                    Mr Turney    )
                                                             Mr Addison
                 9 July 1990                                 Miss A Edwards
                                                             Mrs Catto
                                                             Mr Cane
                                                             Miss Goose
                                                             Mr Cogbill
                                                             Mr Bolton




    Miss Nicholson


    LORD FERRERS' MEETING WITH MR ANDERTON: TUESDAY 10 JULY

    I attach briefing for Lord Ferrers' use at his meeting with Mr
    Anderton tomorrow, at 11 am to discuss the policing issues
    arising from the final Taylor report. Officials will attend a
    pre-briefing meeting at 10.30 am.

    2.   The meeting was suggested by Lord Ferrers so that he
    could have a fi.fst hand report on the progress which ACPO have
    made in implementing the recommendations in Lord Justice
    Taylor's final report. Mr Anderton, as the relevant ACPO
    representative, has already provided a written progress report
    which is attached at the back of these papers. We suggest
    that the meeting follows the order of his report.    Briefing
    notes are attached in that order.

            A.   Offences and penalties
            B    CCTV and public safety
            C.    Review of police charges for policing matches
            D.   Training of police officers stewards
            E.   Review of arrest procedures
            F.   Written statements of intent
            G.   Ground Commander Training
            H.   All ticket matches
     I.    Football Supporters Club
     J.    Police reserve
     K.    Green Guide


3.   Also attached are notes covering matters raised by the
final Taylor report but not dealt with in ACPO's written
report.


     L.    Communications
     M.    Coordination of emergency services

4.   At some stage during the meeting Lord Ferrers may care to
mention the worth of the presence of Mr Malcolm George (ACC
Greater Manchester) at the World Cup and thank Mr Anderton for
sparing him for so long away from home. (Lord Ferrers will
recall meeting Mr George, and other English police officers,
in Cagliari.)

General comments


5.   Lord Ferrers may wish to make some general comments,
perhaps after the discussion of the detailed topics at A-M
above. He might say:-


     (i)   ACPO made a positive and prompt response to Taylor's
           interim report. It appears that there has been an
           equally encouraging response to the final report.

     (ii) Much of the work in hand will bear fruit over a
          longer period - the new training required is an
          obvious example: there needs to be a sustained
          impetus behind the developments now in hand.

     (Ill) Much of the work ACPO have in hand requires close
          liaison and understanding with other agencies:
          local authorities (safety certificate issues,
          charging for policing services); clubs (possible
          training of stewards, written statements of intent,
    CCTV); and other emergency services. Important
    that the mood of co-operation generated by the
    common response to the Hillsborough stadium disaster
    is sustained and developed.

(iv) Grateful for most constructive relationship between
     ACPO and Home Office in the response to Taylor's
     reports.




                             J L GODDARD
