                                         UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE
                                               Materials and Manufacturing
                        Departm ent of Mechanical/Engineering
                               Stephenson Building, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU       ^
                                                       Tel: Tyneside (091) 222 6000


                                                           27th September 1989



Mr. R. Whalley,                cc                   P tD
The Home Office,
Room 662,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London, SW1H 9AT.                               >    .SvvjfetJh


Dear Bob,

     The local derby, Sunderland vs. Newcastle, took place at Roker
Park on Sunday. The Club sent me a ticket for the stand and offered
no resistance to access to the terraces post-half-time.  I met the
Chairman, Secretary, Chief Steward and various officials, and, on
the police side, Deputy Chief Constable Chambers, match commander
Chief Superintendent Holder and most of the police in the police box.

     Kick-off was timed for noon. The approaches to Sunderland from
Newcastle were heavily policed, as were the terraced streets around
the ground: the only visible drinking was confined to soft-drinks -
and in one instance milk.   Turnstiles worked well (said to be capable
of filling the ground in one hour), and kick-off took place exactly
on time, despite information that several hundred Newcastle supporters
were in seriously delayed trains. Lively, carnival atmosphere, with
rival fans hurling abuse but little else.  Some police actions -
extracting trouble-making infiltrators from opposing camps, for
example, but all on a minor scale. There was no score on the field
and few moments of excitement.

     Facilities in the recently-extended police box were good,
including the public address system. The Club occupied an adjacent
box, where a count of turnstile entrants was being kept continuously
(reproduced, I think, also in the police box). Closure of turnstiles
when corresponding viewing areas were full had apparently been put
into effect pre-Hillsborough.

      The match was all-ticket and attracted a capacity crowd of about
30,000.    Substantial viewing areas were intended to be restricted to
Club members only, but this policy had been difficult to enforce and
a minority of Newcastle supporters had succeeded in infiltrating the
defences.   Generally, however, segregation in the terraces had worked
well.

     The perimeter fence was about 1 metre high.  It enabled police
to haul trouble-makers over the top with relative ease. On at least
one end of the pitch, the fence was reinforced by a small moat, the




                                -   1-
pitch-side edge of which was marked by a low wall rising to about
the level of the pitch. The moat itself seemed to offer a clear
walk-way for police and stewards, who maintained surveillance in
considerable numbers throughout the match. Unlike Hillsborough,
both police and stewards were present on the terraces.

     For two seasons (about 1984-1986) the Club had introduced
6 ft. high perimeter fencing, but abandoned it after some debate
at the Advisory Safety Committee, a body that was said to be well-
organised and effective.   The original 1 metre fencing was retained.
No pitch invasions had resulted.

     The Club Secretary, Mr. Davidson, and the Chief Steward, Mr.
Bailey, joined me for lunch at the University yesterday. Various
matters emerged.

     (i)     Gates in the low perimeter fencing had been removed
entirely, following the Interim Report. The gaps were heavily guarded,
but the cost of doing so was -thought by the officials to be excessive
for routine league matches - should there not, they asked, be a
dispensation?

     (ii)   Members' enclosures amounted to about 60% of capacity.
I am not clear about the seating/standing ratio, but my impression
was of 5,000 seating and 13,000 standing for members.  Strong opposition
was expressed to the idea of all-seating stadia on the grounds that
(a) it destroyed the collective atmosphere of terraces, and (b) it
made life more difficult for the police.

     (iii)   Alcohol was not regarded as a serious problem.

     (iv)    Police/steward cooperation was held to be excellent.   Many
             stewards were young and agile.

     (v)     Fences etc. - as above.

     (vi)   The Club believes that the methods of crowd control adopted
by the Club and the police were winning.  CCTV with zoom was highly
regarded.

     (vii)   Perimeter gates - as above.

     Finally, the consulting engineer is Dr. Eastwood - noted, I believe,
in the Hillsborough evidence. No comments by the officials on his
interpretation of the Green Guide.




                                       Yours sincerely,




                                           L. Maunder
