                          Chief Superintendent DXKEMFIELD



   As the Officer in charge of the operation of policing the ground on 15th

April, 1989, the criticisms identified in paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 are of

relevance to the Chief Superintendent's actions.   Particular aspects which may

have to be explored include the following:-



    1.    A lack of appreciation that there was a need to control fans before

    they reached the Leppings Lane entrance, to weed out non-ticket holders and

    drunks and to assist in ensuring orderly queuing.



    2.    A failure to cater for the possible late arrival of fans and for

    non-ticket holders.



    3.    Failure to provide in the operational order or in briefing (a) for the

    monitoring of the fences to achieve an even spread or (b) for officers to

    keep a careful watch to avoid overcrowding in the pens.



     4.   A failure to take steps to increase manpower to control the approach of

     Liverpool fans following the build up evidenced by the call for Leppings

     Tflnp to be closed made by Superintendent MARSHALL at 2.17 p.m. and his own

     observations of the state of the crowd at about 2.30 p.m.



     5.    It should have been apparent by 2.40 at the latest that the optimisn

     expressed at 2.30 p.m. that all could be got through by 3.00 p.m. was

     ill-founded: the kick-off should have been postponed.    Too much time was

     takpn caning to a decision so that it was left too late.



     6.    It was known that the match was a sell-out and that, if say non-ticket
holders got in or Liverpool fans also had tickets for the Kop went to the

West end, there was likely to be overcrowding: past events (i.e. 1981)

indicated that this could lead to crushing!   No steps seem to have been

tpkan to alert officers to watch out for this, emphasis being placed in the

operational order on stopping fans encroaching on the pitch.



7.   The first request to open the gate came at 2.47 p.m; there was an influx

through Gate C at 2.48 p.m. : it was not until 2.52 that the gate was opened

deliberately to let waiting fans in.   In those minutes, no steps were taken

to prepare for the effect of opening the gate.   It ought to have been

obvious (a) that pens 3 & 4 were full, (b) that a large number of fans, seme

without tickets, would take advantage of the open gate and (c) that most

would, if left to their own devices, go down the tunnel and cause

overcrowding in pens 3 & 4.



8.   A failure to use the tannoy on electric scoreboard to explain what was

happening and to calm the situation in the ground.



9.   A failure to take adequate control of the attempts to clear the pens and

tend to the dead and injured.



10. A failure to ensure that there was a proper plan of action to cope with a

need to evacuate the pens in case of overcrowding.
