                   M S l4tx>r>'u2,/—
E.R.
       From: E Soden                             cc   Ms   Adams
             F2 Division                              Mr   Chilcot
             Ext 3141                                 Mr   Boys Smith
             15 June 1989                             Mr   Norris
                                                      Mr   Turney
                                                      Mr   Mower
                                                      Mr   Watts
                                                      Mr   Lidington


       Miss Bannister


       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: LETTER FROM MR HICKS


       You asked for advice and a draft reply.


       2. Mr Hicks' latest letter is based on themisunderstanding that
       the Home Secretary is responsible for the investigation of
       allegations about the conduct of senior police officers. In the
       circumstances a short letter explaining the true position should
       suffice.


 ...   4.   I attach a draft reply for Private Secretary signature.




                                           E SODEN
    DRAFT




    T Hicks Escr




                                        For signature by PS to S of S




9
              The Home Secretary has asked me to reply to your
              further letter of 10 June.


              The responsibility for considering complaints and
              allegations against police officers of the rank of
              Assistant Chief Constable and above lies with the
              police authority for the area concerned, in this case
              the South Yorkshire Police Authority and, not with the
              Home Secretary.


              It would be inappropriate for the Home Secretary to
              become involved in any complaints about the activities
              of officers of the South Yorkshire Police, whatever
              their rank. This is because if a police officer is
              disciplined, he or she has a right of appeal to the
              Home Secretary. The Home Secretary can only be seen to
              be impartial in the hearing of an appeal if he has not
              been previously involved in the case.
 Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
London.
SW1H 9AT.


f.a.o:- The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd M.P                 10th June 1989.

Dear Home Secretary,
                         re:- Hillsborough Disaster

^ ^ n k you for your courtesy in replying to my letter of the 7th so promptly
 and for your personal expression of sympathy to my wife and I.


I was pleased to recieve clarification of your position regarding
discipline, however your letter does not really deal with the complaint
I was making. Namely, that it was totally improper of the Deputy Chief
Constable, whilst the Inquiry is still hearing evidence and the police
internal investigation is still taking place, to state publicly his
decision regarding further action against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.

His very well publicised action in stating that having considered the
matter carefully, subject to the findings of the Inquiry "it is my view
that no further action is required" appears to be at great divergance
from the position you claim in the last paragraph of your reply to me.

In view of the very poor impression that the police evidence has created
in the minds of the public, I cannot help but feel that the D.C.C. has
quite deliberately, and most improperly, "jumped the gun" in an attempt
to counteract the poor showing of his senior officers at the Inquiry.


As the improper conduct of an officer of the rank of Deputy Chief Constable do
                                                                            tC
is a matter for you, I would welcome your comments and intentions on this
particular point and await your early reply.


                             Yours F       liy,




                               Trevor Hicks.
