           South Yorkshire
           POLICE
           JUSTICE       with   COURAGE




Mr C Bone
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1108                                          Our Ref:      D&C/AMH/JDC
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                           Date:         16 October 1997




RE: RESEARCH AND AUDIT TRIAL RE COACHING OF OFFICER'S PRIOR TO GIVING
EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

I refer to the letter dated 8 August 1997, from Ian Daines addressed to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
in which the question of coaching of officers to give evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry was
first raised and to our conversation with the Scrutiny team on 24 September 1997.

Having carried out a search through some of the non-indexed documentation in the Hillsborough
Archive I traced a number of South Yorkshire Police update bulletins two of which make specific
reference to briefing of officers to give evidence before Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry. Rather than
repeat in this letter that which I have already written I enclose a copy of my memorandum on the
subject sent to ACC Ian Daines together with copies of the two bulletins.

You will note in the final paragraph of my memorandum that I do not feel able to progress this
further without speaking to officers who were part of the Inquiry Liaison Team. Is this something
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith would wish or permit me to do, or would he prefer the contact to be by
yourself or Graham Catherall, or indeed is he content with the documentation provided? If Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith does wish me to speak to the officers how would he wish the conversation to
be recorded, notes of interview, written statement, tape recorded or a combination of these?




A M Hepworth
Superintendent

Enc




           Discipline and Complaints Department
           Windsor Road
           Sheffield S8 8UB                        The person dealing with this correspondence is:
           Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3855   Superintendent Hepworth
           Direct Dial No:
                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


                                                           REF:           D&C/AMH/EMR

FROM: Superintendent Hepworth                              DCU/DEPT:      Discipline & Complaints

TO:      Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines              EXT:
         Legal & Technical Services
         Headquarters                                      DATE:          15 October 1997




SUBJECT:      RESEARCH AND AUDIT TRAIL RE COACHING OF OFFICERS PRIOR TO
              THEM GIVING EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


A search through non-indexed documentation in the Hillsborough Archive, i.e. documentation that
was not a part of the enquiry by South Yorkshire Police or West Midlands Police that was recorded
on the HOLMES system, has revealed copies of four update bulletins about the Hillsborough
Inquiry that were given wide circulation throughout the force. Updates I and II are unfortunately
undated, whilst III bears the date 2 June 1989 and IV 30 June 1989. Updates I and II are signed
by the then ACC Staff Services, Stuart Anderson and updates III and IV, by the then
Chief Constable, Peter Wright.

In relation to the above, action updates I and I I I are relevant and copies are attached
hereto.    Update I, although undated, was obviously written after the Inquiry started on
Monday 15 May 1989 and prior to Monday 22 May 1989. It outlined the purpose of the Inquiry, the
setting in which it was taking place, the wide admissibility of evidence and what
South Yorkshire Police had done to gather evidence for the Inquiry. The update listed
approximately 80 officers likely to be called to give evidence and encouraged and welcomed them
to visit Headquarters, to see the progress of the internal evidence gathering and to get a flavour of
the Public Inquiry. Officers responding to this invitation were to be shown a compilation video
lasting 2 hours; were able to pose questions about the Inquiry, the evidence to date, or about any
concerns to a member of the internal evidence gathering team; were given the opportunity to visit
the Town Hall and see the Inquiry in session.

Update III circulated to the force on 2 June 1989, after senior officers had given evidence to the
Inquiry, described how the Treasury Solicitors, acting as "Clerks of Court" circulate statements to
all parties to the Inquiry and this is the first indication that an officer is to be called. The update
goes on to say "relevant officers will be contacted by a member of the South Yorkshire Police
Inquiry Liaison Team and furnished with all necessary information and assistance.
(The underlining of these words is on the original memo and is not mine.)

These two documents were circulated throughout the South Yorkshire Police and indicate how
open the force was in assisting and preparing its officers to give evidence before
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry, but that this assistance falls far short of coaching them to give
evidence. More detail of the process could be obtained if I were allowed to contact the two officers
who acted as liaison officers.          These are Chief Inspector Norman Bettison, now
Assistant Chief Constable, West Yorkshire Police and Detective Chief Inspector Ron Brooke, now
retired. Brief statements from these two former South Yorkshire officers would support the
2 documents I have traced, clear up the question of coaching of officers once and for all and leave
no room for ambiguity in the mind of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
All the material was in the Hillsborough archives in the personal files of Chief Inspector
Norman Bettison (NB1 and NB2), now Assistant Chief Constable, West Yorkshire Police
and Chief Superintendent Donald Denton (DD1 to DD8), now retired.

The reference numbers are ones that I have given each document for ease of identification.
The documents from Chief Superintendent Denton’s file are merely a sample from a section
of the file marked "Original Copies of Requests for Recollections WMP." The file also
contains handwritten lists of statements sent to Peter Metcalf for vetting and handwritten
lists of statements sent to the West Midlands Police Enquiry Team. In addition the
responses from Peter Metcalf, Solicitor at Hammond Suddards are only a sample from a 3
inch thick file of responses regarding statements of officers.
