                                                  2 0 SEP 1989

2.9.AH
                                            cc Mr Cogbill, C4
                                               Mr Cook, C4
                                               Mr Mould, G2
                                               Mr Osborne, LAB
                                               Miss Wooldridge, F2
                                               Ms Jago, F8



Mr Goddard


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


As requested I attach a draft submission in preparation for our
meeting with Mr Lloyd next Tuesday (26 September), reporting on
progress with DOE and recommending advice on Home Office points
for consideration.   I am grateful for Ms Jago's assistance.


Are C4 content with the offence/defence passages, please (see
paragraphs 18 to 24)?


Does Mr Mould wish to add anything on his area of responsibility?


I apologise I have not replied to Miss Wooldridge's earlier
enquiry as to the outcome of the Home Office meeting on
15 August. A copy of the note of that meeting is attached to her
copy.   Paragraphs 25 and 26 report what I think is a
satisfactory outcome.


You told me you have spoken to Mr Osborne who confirmed that
Counsel's proposed 2(1) defence did not open a loophole (I was
anxious that 'lawful authority' might excuse the turnstile
operator admitting someone who knowingly entered on a borrowed
card while disqualified). You have asked that 'explanation' in
Clause 15(6) should be in writing.


I remain unclear as to who thought up DOE's suggestion (in
Mr Russel's letter of 6 September to Counsel) of a power for the
FLA to impose 'away bans'.   Since Mr Kinghan and Mr Lee seem
equally unclear perhaps it was Mr Russel.   Whatever, there has
been no definitive analysis on whether an away ban should
restrict entry to a ground (a 'Luton' type ban) or fey supporters
with a particular affiliation (a 'Leeds' type ban) - or both.
Nor has there been much clarity of vision (especially by DOE) on
the impact this should have on offences in Part I of the Bill.


You point out that without the 2(1) offence an away ban might be
ineffective.   On the other hand it seems hard to pin an offence
on a bona fide spectator who has carefully joined the scheme and
is unaware of the additional restriction.   I gather you discussed
this with Mr Lee earlier today.   The further point I have
suggested to Mr Lee is that the right sanction to underpin an
away ban is perhaps the Clause 10(10) offence.   That would work
so that an authorised member of the scheme breaking an away ban
would not commit an offence but the club (who would be well aware
of the restriction) would.   He will reflect on that.




                                                   F J SMITH
                                                   F8 Division
19 September 1989
From        J L Goddard                        cc   Mr   Storr
            F8 Division                             Ms   Nicholson
            Ext 3314                                Mr   Boys Smith
                September 1989                      Mr   Turney
                                                    Mr   Bolton
                                                    Mr   Osborne
                                                    Mr   Lidington

Ms Rex



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: COMMITTEE ISSUES

During the Commons Committee proceedings, Mr Hogg gave a number
of undertakings to consider further amendment to the Bill at
Report Stage.    The purpose of this submission is to acquaint Mr
Lloyd with each case made for amendment, and to seek agreement to
the proposed action.    In addition the submission reports on
progress with DoE following concerns expressed by Mr Hogg that
the criminal offences in Part I should not be 'absolute'     (ie
should contain defences).


2.     We will meet Mr Lloyd on Tuesday 26 September and can
discuss any of these points with him then.    You will recall that
Mr Smith submitted a general introductory brief on football on 11
August.


ISSUES FOR HOME OFFICE CONSIDERATION


Minimum period in which initial reporting should take place


3.     Clause 16(2)(a) stipulates that all those subject to a
restriction order should report initially to a police station
specified by the court, within 5 days of the making of the order.
Failure to comply with this duty will constitute an offence,
punishable by up to one month's imprisonment or a level 3 fine
(£400).


4.     Opposition Committee members advocated a relaxation of this
minimum period to take into account any obligations which would
prevent the reportee’s attendance at a police station.     In
Committee Mr Hogg expressed some sympathy with this view,
suggesting that it might be appropriate for the presumption of a
five day period to be maintained, but for a power to be
introduced to enable the court to extend that period, on
application, to a maximum of 28 days, should special
circumstances apply.


5.   An amendment to the existing provision is not strictly
necessary since the duty to report is not intended to be
burdensome and it is important that an order has effect quickly.
The court will specify a police station most convenient to the
reportee's place of residence, and there is good coverage of
police stations open 24 hours per day. Furthermore, the offence
of failing to report is already provided with a defence of
reasonable excuse.     Nevertheless, a small concession here may
make a worthwhile gesture since we recommend (more strongly) to
resist the other points, below.     If Mr Lloyd is content an
amendment could be offered at Report enabling the court when
imposing the restriction order to allow the offender up to 10
days to report initially (twice the standard period) if special
circumstances justified that.     We would not particularly
recommend a more generous concession since the Government earlier
narrowed this standard period to 5 days from 28 days as in the
Bill when originally introduced.


Minimum period in which initial reporting should take place
following discharge from prison


     Clause 16(3) applies the same minimum period of 5 days to
those reporting for the first time following a period of
imprisonment.   An Opposition Committee member (Ted Rowlands,
Merthyr-Tydfil and Rhymney) sought the same level of flexibility
for these casies as previously discussed; Mr Hogg displayed less
sympathy for this proposition.


7.   This case is even weaker since those just discharged from
prison are perhaps less likely to have commitments which would
preclude them from attending a police station within the
prescribed period.   The defence of 'reasonable excuse' applies
equally in these circumstances.    But it is the practical aspect
which presents a real difficulty: the offender would have no
opportunity to apply to the court for an extension of the 5-day
period.


8.    It is therefore proposed that this amendment is resisted.


Place of residence as criteria for making a restriction order


9.    Mr Hogg expressed some unease privately about the
possibility of a court making a restriction order against a
foreign visitor.   Although it is considered right that anyone
spending time in this country should be subject to the full
weight of our law, it would be worthless to imposean order on a
foreign visitor who could not be expected     to comply with    its
requirements for a reasonable length of time, if at     all.


10.   It would be possible to guard against such instances by
expanding the test in Clause 15(2) which the court must apply to
each case before deciding to make an order.    The court could be
asked to give specific consideration to the period in which the
person is likely to be in the jurisdiction if they are not
ordinarily resident in England and Wales.      However, this    would
serve to complicate the provision and may     also open up debate on
a potentially contentious area.   Moreover, Clause 15(2) already
provides flexibility and discretion for the courts.


11.   It is therefore also proposed that this amendment is
resisted.
                                                        O




Minimum notice of reguirement to report


12. In Committee Mr Hogg agreed to consider introducing a
 • •       •                                  0
minimum period of notice each time an offender is required to
report on the occasion of a key match being played abroad.      The
arguments in favour of the proposition are attractive but there
are practical difficulties attached to the application of a rigid
timescale.   The fixture list is generally available well in
advance but it is not unusual to have a match rescheduled at
short notice and there are inherent difficulties with competition
series when the identity of the teams playing in the finals is
unknown until the qualifying matches have been played.    A degree
of flexibility must be preserved.


13.   It is proposed that no amendment be made to the Bill but
that guidance to the enforcing authority to be issued by the
Secretary of State should include an instruction that the
enforcing authority should give at least 14 day's notice of the
requirement to report whenever practical.


Extension of relevant offences in Schedule 1


14.   Opposition Committee members tabled an amendment to extend
the relevant offences detailed in Schedule 1 to include all
alcohol-related offences.   Mr Moynihan resisted the amendment on
the grounds that many such offences would have no relevance to
football hooliganism.   However, he undertook to look again at the
matter.


15.   It is a potential anomaly that, as the Bill stands, those
convicted of being drunk on a football special coach or train
contrary to section 1 of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985 would be automatically disqualified from the
membership scheme and would be liable to be considered for a
restriction order, but those convicted of drunkenness while
making their way to a match on foot would not.


16.   However, the existing arrangements have the advantage of
clarity as they are linked to the specific offences created to
deal with alcohol in relation to football.   The alternative
proposition - which the Opposition would find less attractive -
would be to broaden the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc)
Act to cover all journeys to or from a match.    That has not been
considered necessary, and we recommend the proposal to amend
Schedule 1 is resisted.


17.   Since Schedule 1 applies equally to Parts I and II of the
Bill, such a change would anyway need the agreement of DoE
Ministers.
ISSUES FOR DOE CONSIDERATION


Defences to Part I Offences


18.   Mr Hogg had raised concerns at the lack of a defence to the
criminal offence in Clause 2(1) of the Bill (the offence of
unlawful entry under the membership Scheme, eg by a disqualified
person).    An offence devoid of any defences is termed an
'absolute' offence.    The most serious objection to the Clause
2(1) offence being absolute was (post-Hillsborough) that the
police or club might rush people through turnstiles in an
emergency without inspecting their membership cards.     It would be
unfair then to prosecute someone caught up in the crowd for
failing to be a member of the scheme - he or she might not      even
have been trying to enter the ground.


19.   That objection   has now been overcome as DoE have been
persuaded to accept    the defence of acting on lawful authority.
An amendment is being drafted accordingly.


20.   The lesser objection that someone such as a foreign visitor
might - conceivably - be unaware of the requirement to have a
card, fail to see warning signs and not be challenged by the
turnstile operator, has to be weighed against the risk of opening
a loop hole for challenges by those deliberately cheating the
scheme.    Genuinely inappropriate cases might well not be
prosecuted even if technically within the letter of the offence.
Criminal department (C4 Division) are content to go along with
DoE's very strong preference not to include such a defence.


21.   Clause 9 and 10 offences relate to conduct by responsible
persons in a club admitting spectators: Clause 9(1) in relation
to operating with no license at all, Clause 10(10) in relation to
breach of license conditions.    Defences are already provided, but
their adequacy hinged on the interpretation of 'responsible
person' in Clause 1(8).


22.   If that term referred only to supervisory management of the
club, the offences and defences were correct.   But if
'responsible person' extended to include eg all turnstile
operators, other defences were necessary (eg to excuse the
turnstile operator working in good faith, for a club that has
failed to obtain a license).


23.   We have confirmed that DoE intend responsible person to mean
the tighter definition only, and that the drafting of Clause 1(8)
is in lawyer's opinion consistent with that.


24.   I therefore consider that Mr Hogg's concerns on defences to
Part I offences have been fully met and invite Ministers to
agree.


Police intervention in an emergency


25.   We have consistently argued in Parliament and with DoE, from
before Hillsborough, that the police have common law powers to
take action intended to save life (etc) and that it would be
undesirable to create a new legal power under the Football
Spectators Bill to enable the police to suspend the membership
Scheme in an emergency.   (Those supporting such a move have in
mind congestion outside turnstiles, potentially lethal as at
Hillsborough, caused by delays through membership checking.)      In
particular we oppose total suspension of the scheme as this
sweeps away, inter alia, the criminal offence of unlawful entry
in Clause 2(1).


26.   We are pleased to report that Counsel have replied to DoE's
latest letter firmly endorsing the right way of easing membership
checks in any emergency as being by provision in the Scheme not
the Bill.


Awav bans


27.   Latest DoE correspondence with Parliamentary Counsel
suggests a new provision allowing the Football Licensing
Authority to prohibit 'away' supporters, perhaps from a
particular source club or at a particular destination ground.
The idea has attractions but we await further clarification - and
consultation - by DoE.   We are unclear how this proposal if
invoked would impact on the offences in Part I (eg if an
authorised member of the Scheme tries to enter a ground in breach
of an 'away' restriction).   We will report on progress.




                                         J L GODDARD
