    I.          Wfi/tKv


©         ?l,         t e w c    r       tvvvii
                                                                             LONDONBOROUGHOF
                                                                            RICHMOND UPON THAMES
                  1}— "jo
                                                                             Department of Technical Services
     0 > o jtt^       (Kt^       Ui<w-         U-3C^ U                       Regal House, London Road,
                                                                            Twickenham, TW13QB
                                                                           Telephone: 018911411
    Our ref:      B     C    /       D     B      /   S    P    ^
                                                                           D irect dial:

                                                                           BUILDING CONTROL
                        vaa^                   <ru*> k/        £\z>i—
                                                                    )      D. Baker - Extn.7347
                        Twku iO ^ l c v / ' ,
    The Secretary
    The Home Office
    Queen Anne's Gate
                                          PI          Cj   PI-, IT -evicLu\«
    Room 662
    London
    SW1H 9AT                                                        R tW

                                                                           1st September, 1989
                                                                    5
    Dear Sir,

    Hillsborough Inquiry - LFCDA Submission
    Twickenham RFU

    I refer to the Formal Submission of the LFCDA to the Inquiry by the Right
    Honourable Lord Justice Taylor into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, a
    copy of which was received at this office on 19th July, 1989.

    It is regrettable that this copy document came into my possession too
    late for the Council to make representations to the Inquiry in response
    to a specific criticism made in connection with means of escape
    provisions at the above stadium. However, after some consideration, I
    feel it would be appropriate to comment on the citing of this Borough as
    an example of "difficulties being encountered by the LFCDA" (paragraph
    4.1.7(b) refers).

    In attempting to summarise the situation in order to illustrate their
    "difficulties", I feel that the Brigade have allowed the reader to form
    an incorrect opinion of the actions of this Council.  I would criticise
    the text of their submission principally in their assertion that the
    Borough "have not reacted to these comments" ("these comments" being that
    the means of escape from the upper tier of the West Stand are considered
    by the LFCDA to be inadequate).

    That the reaction of the Borough to their comments has not been to the
    complete satisfaction of the LFCDA is not disputed here. However, my
    records show that correspondence between the LFCDA, the RFU and the
    Council in respect of this particular matter reveal that the Council have
    indeed taken steps to find a solution to this problem to the satisfaction
    of all parties concerned.  I would not wish to detail here the
    documentary history relating to means of escape from the West Stand,
    suffice to say that formal consultations have taken place in connection




                                                                            M.S. Hebron BSc CEng MICE
                                                                            D irector o f Technical Services



         Architecture Engineering Planning Surveying Works and Services
with proposals put forward by the RFU and the Brigade have, as a
consequence, accepted an arrangement for effecting adequate means of
escape from the Lower Tier of this stand which does not require the
provision of new external staircases (this was part of their original
recommendations in respect of the West Stand).

The Brigade still feel that the Upper Tier arrangements cannot be
satisfactorily altered without the provision of new stairs and (albeit
subsequent to the date of the LFCDA's submission to the Inquiry) the RFU
have now provided drawings showing new staircases to the extreme ends of
the stand, which should overcome this problem. The Council have, of
course, consulted the LFCDA in connection with these latest proposals and
their comments are awaited.

I am concerned that a submission has been made to the Inquiry to the
effect that this Council has not ’’reacted’’ to comments of the LFCDA and
would be pleased, even at this late stage, for an opportunity to detail
fully the actions of this Council in this particular matter should you
consider it to be appropriate.  I should be pleased if you would,
therefore, advise whether, and if so how, any formal representations may
now be made.

I have, as a matter of courtesy, forwarded a copy of this letter to the
LFCDA.

Yours faithfully,




Chief Planning Officer




cc.   Mr. G.D. Clarkson
      Chief Fire Officer and Chief Executive
      LFCDA
      Queensborough House
      12-18 Albert Embankment
      SE1 7TJ




WP0856A
