          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 528
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028



D G Richards Esq                                               Your reference:
Chairman
Sheffield Wednesday FC                                         Our reference:
Hillsborough
SHEFFIELD S6 1SW                                               Date:               July 1997




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

As I expect you know, I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny o f
possible fresh evidence relating to the disaster at Hillsborough Football Stadium in April
1989.

It might be helpful if I explain that the objective o f my scrutiny is to establish whether there
is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome o f any o f the
proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end o f the year.

If your Club knows o f evidence which was not available at the Inquiry conducted by Lord
Taylor o f Gosforth or at the Inquests, and which might have affected their outcome or the
decisions of the authorities in relation to prosecution or police disciplinary proceedings, I
should be grateful if you would let me have it by 1 September. It would be helpful if you
could first contact my Secretariat at the address above.

They will be happy to discuss possible arrangements with you if you wish. Please note that
the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify you o f our
permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.

I have sent similar letters to the chief executives o f the Football Association and the
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest clubs. I have also written to the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, to the South Yorkshire police, and to others with an interest in the matters
which I am examining.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
