                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000


                  FEP/89 3 5 /4 8 /8 8
Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
       Chief Officers of Police
       Chief Fire Officers
       Chief Ambulance Officers

                                                       4 August 1989




       Dear Sir/Madam

       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989
       INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
       Introduction
       The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
       on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
       attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.
       2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
       contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
       without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
       recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.
        Government response
        3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
        Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
        with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
        Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations

4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.

5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; the remaining 15 are those which,
although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
put into effect. The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds

6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations. If there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.
The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
Football clubs

8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.
Resource implications

9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.
Other
10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).
11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.
                            Yours faithfully




                            A H TURNEY
                            Fire and Emergency Planning Department
E.R.



       Association of County Councils
       Association of Metropolitan Authorities
       London Boroughs Association
       Association of London Authorities
       Association of District Councils
       Welsh Counties Association
       Association of Chief Police Officers
       Clerks to Police Authorities
       Regional Managers, Health Authorities
       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
       National Association of Fire Officers
       Fire Brigades Union
       Police Federation
       Police Superintendents' Association
       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales
       Football League

       Football Trust
       Football Grounds Improvement Trust
       Rugby Football Union
       Welsh Rugby Football Union
       Rugby Football League
       Speedway Control Board
       Cricket Council
       Jockey Club
       National Greyhound Racing Club
Lawn Tennis Association
All England Tennis and Croquet Club

Royal and Ancient Golf Club
RAC Motor Sports Association
British Board of Amateur Athletics
Hockey Association
British Show Jumping Association
National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
Football Supporters Association
St Johns Ambulance
Sports Councils for England and Wales
Central Council for Physical Recreation
