E.R
                                     x   GQN F ID B HT -I M r-




      NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY 4 APRIL WITH REPRESENTATIVES
      OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION (FA) AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE (FL)



      P r e s e n t : Lord Ferrers        Mr F Millichip - Chairman      }
                      Mr Goddard          Mr R Kelly - Chief Executive   }
                      Mr Bolton           Mr A Titcombe - Head of        } FA
                                            Competitions and Regulations}
                  Mr Mould
                  Mr Taylor               Mr W Fox - President                       }
                  Miss Nicholson          Mr A Sandford - Chief Executive            } FL
                                          Mr J Dent - Secretary                      }




      Lord Ferrers opened the meeting by first of all apologising on
      behalf of the Home Secretary, (who the delegation had expected to
      meet with) for not being able to meet with them this afternoon.
      Mr Millichip said that he and his colleagues fully appreciated the
      pressures placed on the Home Secretary's diary.  They were
      delighted to be able to meet with Lord Ferrers.

      2.     Mr Kelly referred to Mr Millichip's letter of 19 February and
      said that he hoped its contents had indicated the FA's and the
      F L 's joint desire to bring in the recommendations made in
      Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report following Hillsborough.    Their
      views on Lord Justice Taylor's report had been referred to in
      their correspondence and it was suggested that those views should
      form the agenda for today's meeting.


      Football Licensing Authority           (FLA) and Seating

      3.   Lord Ferrers explained that the FLA would be set up on 1 June
      and that it was the intention that it would be up and running as
      soon as was reasonably possible thereafter.  It would, it was
      proposed, comprise of a Chairman and 4 to 8 members who would have
      background in such areas as the police, the fire service and
      engineering.  Although it was the original intention for the FLA
      to be set up by the Department of the Environment it was now
      likely that it would be a Home Office responsibility.

      4.   Mr Millichip said that the FA and the FL had always taken the
      view that local authorities were responsible for safety.
      Nevertheless in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's Report the FA
      and the FL felt it right that they should play a constructive role


                                                                 /even t h o u g h ....

                                                   1
                                 I j/y -M s "
                           CONFIDENTIAL




even though they had no statutory powers.        Lord Ferrers welcomed
this responsible approach.

5.   Mr Fox was concerned that the FLA would not be in place
before 1 June and that it would not actually be up and running
immediately because fundamental decisions by the clubs had to be
taken during the close season, especially on seating.  Without any
guidelines the difficulty was that the types of seats which the
clubs would be putting in place and the associated work, might be
considered unsuitable.  It was, Mr Fox said, essential that clubs
got it right otherwise it could be an extremely expensive
operation to put right.  He was reminded by Mr Mould that building
work would need to comply with the requirements of Building
Regulations.

6.   Mr Fox asked whether the time requirement for seating to be
implemented in the first year was to be absolutely rigid and, for
example, whether if a club were in the process of building a new
stadium, they would be expected to reduce standing in their
existing ground during, say, construction time which could take 3
years.   Mr Fox felt this would be unreasonable.  Lord Ferrers, in
reply said that clearly the existing stadiums would have to have
adequate safety measures in place, but h e felt some flexibility
might be afforded where it was clear that in building a new
stadium a club involved were achieving the objective of providing
all seated accommodation within the expected timescale.   He could
not, however, give an assurance at this stage that any such
flexibility could be as wide as that suggested by Mr Fox.

7.   Mr Sandford said that the FL were not asking for any
relaxation of the schedule for implementing all seating in normal
circumstances but only in the sort of cases which Mr Fox had
raised.  Mr Millichip said he did not believe all seater-stadia to
be the panacea to all the problems within football but he
appreciated why it was considered to be necessary.


New Offences

8.   Mr Millichip said that he would like to think it possible
that the types of behaviour which Lord Justice Taylor had referred
to in his report, eg, obscene chanting and racist abuse would be
considered by the Government with a view to making it a criminal
offence.  Lord Ferrers replied that the behaviour referred to by
Lord Justice Taylor, ie, invading the pitch without reasonable
excuse and coin throwing, were already caught in general terms by
the Public Order Act 1986.  The difficulty in charging individuals



                                                /for such offences.
E.R
                                 ■CONFIDENTIAL   /




      for such offences was that when they did occur they could involve
      say 100 or so people at a time.  It was therefore sometimes
      difficult for the police to make the right decision as to what to
      do.  In some cases if the police did try to do something about a
      particular incident the result could be that the situation was
      exacerbated.  Lord Justice Taylor's idea was entirely correct but
      the application of it was rather more difficult.

      9.   Mr Millichip mentioned that when he had been called to No 10,
      following the troubles at the European Championships, he had
      complained to the Prime Minster that young inexperienced
      prosecution barristers were not bringing to the attention of the
      magistrates, when dealing with football related offences, the
      options which were available to them when dealing with such
      offenders.  The result of this was that those who had committed
      offences were leaving the courts without being punished and
      heading straight back to football.


      Financial Provision

      10.  Mr Fox said that all of football were delighted with the
      Chancellor's budget announcement which reduced the pools betting
      tax.  For their part the aim was to redistribute the money which
      they put into football, from television rights; to impose a 5%
      transfer levy; and to allocate the money from the FA into ground
      improvements.   This information was not yet public and was given
      in confidence.   Lord Ferrers congratulated them on their efforts
      in this regard.


      Planning Permission

      11.  Rather than put their concerns to the Home Office on this
      issue Lord Ferrers advised the delegation that this was a matter
      which Mr Moynihan had proposed to deal with at the meeting.   But
      like the Home Secretary he had been at the last minute unable to
      attend.  Mr Moynihan had asked Lord Ferrers to say that his office
      would be in touch with the FA and the FL to set up a separate
      meeting. It was agreed that this would be more suitable.


      Inter-Departmental Working Group

      12.  Mr Sandford asked whether it would be possible to set up an
      inter-departmental working group.  The reason for this request was
      that the FL found themselves having to negotiate with different
      Departments at different buildings and it wasn't easy for them to

                                                     /do t h i s ....


                                         3
E.R                                         ^uvV^'fn*oUs



      do this.  Lord Ferrers was cautious about this idea but he agreed
      to give it further thought.

      13.  Lord Ferrers in concluding the meeting thanked the FA and the
      FL for having explained those matters of concern to them so
      clearly.  There were one or two matters which needed further
      thought from his officials and they would be in touch about this.




                                  B ARBARA NICHOLSON (Miss)
                                 Assistant Private Secretary


      9 April 1990

      Private Office,     QAG.




      cc   Ms   Dent
           Mr   Turney
           Mr   Goddard
           Mr   Bolton
           Mr   Mower
           Mr   Mould
           Mr   Taylor




                                              4
