             Sir David Knox encloses a letter from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
             Support Group.

             A copy of Mr Hammond’s letter has been sent to all Members of Parliament, and this is one of
             a number of resulting Minister’s Cases.

                                         ? To P/S of M of S as within




                                                                               MWard
                                                                               29 January 1997




                                       m in is t e r o f   STATE w rote
                                                                          as within
                                                                                             04 FtB 1997




CODE 18 77
                       The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H   ome   O   ffice
                                                     QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                     LONDON SW1H9AT

                                                           04 FEB ISS?i
Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/17
           PO 1496/97




Thank you for your letter of 13 January to Tom Sackville, enclosing
one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to him by
the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                             DAVID MACLEAN

Sir David Knox MP
                        The Rt Hon David Maclean MP    H   ome   O   ffice
                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                      LONDON SW1H9AT

                                                           04 FEB 18.87,-
 Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/17
            PO 1496/97




Thank you for your letter of 13 January to Tom Sackville, enclosing
one from Mr Phil Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken
to consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough, and the representations which have been made to him by
the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would
need to be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do
so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that
terrible day.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether
there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether that
evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the
Home Secretary with a detailed report of all the points raised by
the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he will reach a
decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been
able to consider all the issues.




                              DAVID MACLEAN

Sir David Knox MP
Thank you for your letter of 13 Januaryyto Tom Sackville, enclosing one from Mr Phil
Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


As you and Mr Hammond are aware, the Home Secretary has undertaken to consider carefully
the points which were made in the programme Hillsborough, and the representations which
have been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has emphasised that he
would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it
would be in the public interest to do so and that it would stand a chance of providing a better
understanding than there is at present of what happened on that terrible day.


In coming to his decision the Home Secretary will consider whether there is any new evidence;
he will also consider whether that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the
verdict of the juiy would have been different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide the Home Secretary with a
detailed report of all the points raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised
that he will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as he has been able to
consider all the issues.
                    Divisional File Rcferenco   PuOl^l- 5|2|gD       I I'-h
HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

Addressed]
 N ame    j Cr                      M s.?
 Address                   Reference
 Tick on* box
                House of Commons
      □         House of Lords
      □         Other - Insert full postal address




L e tte r drafted for Signature by          ________ _______ _

                 Wvck^W ^__________             (Name of Signatory


Enclosures]




Copies to be sent to|




                                     ( Full addresses. If necessary.
                     FROM: SIR DAVID KNOX MP




                      HOUSE OF COMMONS                  <£>    ff)
                         L O N D O N SW1A OAA

Tom Sackville Esq MP                            -r 2   ) C >
Parliamentary Under Secretary of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London      SW1H 9AT                               13th January 1997




I enclose herewith a letter which I have received from Mr P Hammond,
Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.      I should be
grateful if you would advise me about the points which he makes.
                                                                       v^ ° x
                                                                      * ,            *


      V-'
        Jt/ppO?-                                                          Jt/ppO^
                             H illsborough Fam ily Support Group
       All Members of Parliament.


                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - JUSTICE CAMPAIGN


       Sir David Knox M.P


       I am writing to ask for your support for the campaign mounted by
       the Hillsborough Family Support Group for the justice and
       accountability which we believe has so far been denied to us by

•      the complete failure of the judicial system in the aftermath of
       the Hillsborough Disaster.

       You should be aware that following the broadcast on Independent
       Television on December 5th 1996 of the drama/documentary
       "Hillsborough", the Home Secretary is presently considering
       whether, on the basis of the new and unused evidence which
       emerged from the programme, there are grounds for him to order a
       fresh Inquiry into the Disaster. Mr Howard in fact spoke
       personally in the House of Commons adjournment debate which was
       held about Hillsborough on 17th December, 1996 and he later met
       privately with the many family members who had travelled to
       London to be present at the debate.

       The Hillsborough Family Support Group is hopeful that the Home
       secretary will order a fresh inquiry, particularly in the light
       not only of the new evidence but also of overwhelming public
       support we have received - people from all walks of life from
       right across Britain have written to us and telephoned to express
       their outrage and anger at the treatment of bereaved families.
       However, regardless of the decision of Mr Howard, the families
       have also separately instigated the following legal actions to
       take forward our quest for justice

       i) a complaint to the Director of Public Prosecutions seeking a
       criminal investigation into possible misconduct in the way
       evidence was or was not presented to the Inquest jury. This
       action is based on the evidence which has now come to light of
       video- technician, Roger Houldsworth, who was not called as a
       witness to either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest and whose
       existence was not known to the families until the TV programme
       was made. The new evidence directly contradicts what some South
       Yorkshire police officers told the jury and Taylor inquiry.

       ii) an application to the Attorney General under section 13 of
       the coroners act asking the High Court to consider quashing the
       inquest verdict and ordering a fresh inquest.


    CHAIRMAN                              SECRETARY          _        TREASURER
    T. Hicks                             p. Hammond                   Mrs. J. Traynor
    7 Moor Lane                          21 Rosemont Road             43 Gorsefield Road
    Grassington                          Liverpool                    Birkenhead
    Nr. Skipton BD23 5BD                 L17 6BX                      Merseyside
    Tel: 0756-752345                     Tel: 051-724 5771            Tel: 051-652 7503
Liverpool City Council, at an extraordinary meeting held on 19th December 1996, have
already pledged their unanimous support to the families in our campaign. With the
assistance of the City Council, the campaign is now being taken out across the country
where it is our intention to seek the support of local authorities in all areas of Britain in
response to the massive public disquiet which has emanated from the television
programme (the "Daily Mirror", for example, has received a huge response to the
petition it launched in december, on behalf of the families, supporting the call for a new
inquest into the Disaster.) The response to the programme clearly indicates this is a
matter of public intrest and should be dealt with accordingly.

The Bereaved families of Hillsborough will forever be in debt to writer Jimmy McGovern
and to Granada Television for bringing the tale of our fight for justice into homes and
consciences of the British people. However, in some ways the story told on television
could not truly reflect the scale of what we have been made to endure by having the
absolute grief of losing our loved ones compounded by what can only be described as
the biggest farce and cover up in British legal history. As if this was not enough of a
burden, the families, despite the unequivocal findings of the Taylor Inquiry, have also
had to fight to counter a concerted and seemingly intentional campaign by certain public
and media figures to scar the reputation and memories of our loved ones by blaming
them, and their fellow supporters, for causing the Disaster.

The "Hillsborough" television programme seems at last to have washed away the
cartload of lies about the Disaster which have stood as a barrier to the reaching of a fair
and just conclusion about the needless deaths of 96 people. On behalf of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group I would now urge you to help us go one step further
and establish as a matter of public record for all time the truth of what did happen on
that dreadful day of 15th April 1989. Only if that can be done may the bereaved families
be able to put our loved ones finally to rest.

Yours faithfully




Phil Hammond
Secretary - Hillsborough Family Support Group.
