                           The Rt Hon David Maclean MP   q u een anne s gate

                                                          LONDON SW 1H9AT


                                                         0 5 MAR 1327
    Our Ref:   PW/97 5/2180/36
               PO 3489/97




    Thank you for your letter of 10 February to the Home Secretary,
    about the consideration of issues arising from the "Hillsborough"
    programme. Mr Eric Martlew MP has also written to the
    Home Secretary on your behalf, and I am sending a copy of this
    letter to him. I hope you will accept this as a reply to both
W   letters.

    You express concern that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
*   Police was asked to provide the Home Secretary with a report of the
w   points raised by the programme. Mr Wells was formerly a Deputy
    Assistant Commissioner with the Metropolitan Police and had no
    connection with South Yorkshire Police at the time of the
    Hillsborough disaster. The Home Secretary therefore had no
    hesitation in inviting him to comment on whether, in his opinion,
    there was any new evidence.

    On a separate matter, you also suggest in your letter that
    South Yorkshire Police sought a High Court Injunction to ban the
    screening of the programme. My officials have established that no
    such attempt was made by South Yorkshire Police to prevent the
    programme being broadcast.

    The Home Secretary is giving the many representations he has
    received his full consideration; he is examining the questions
    raised in the Granada programme as well as considering copies of
    the video surveillance tapes used at the ground that day which have
    been supplied by South Yorkshire Police.

    I appreciate that this is a very difficult time for you and for all
    the bereaved families, and my thoughts are with you. There are a
    great many issues for the Home Secretary to consider, but he hopes
    to be able to announce his final decision as soon as possible.




                                 DAVID MACLEAN

    Mrs C A Ellis
                             CC       rvr-
                                      tv     Bed (S^ctK.
                                      k-     poc>p^   .

                                             ^9 = 7 > -oE fc

  10 February 1997                   us.     u j l )& * £ -
                                                                                                    Mrs C A Ellis
                         Al<lJ             r t \ c j b o o ^ A<-L_ OPfO

 Michael Howard
 Home Secretary
 Queen Anne's Gate             (/V
 LONDON SW1H9AT




                                                                        /
                                                                   2.

 Dear Home Secretary

 I am in receipt of your letter dated 4 February. Your first sentence is wrong in two parts. You did not receive
 one communication from me but two. I was not asking you as you put a "desire to reach a better
 understanding of how your father died" - 1 know how he died, what we are demanding of you is that a fully
 gfopendent Inquiry is established as a vital step towards justice. I and all the relatives of those killed and
 injured will not stop until this has been won.

In your letter you make no mention of the fact that you did not see the Hillsborough Programme an
admission you made in the presence of journalists, on Carlisle Railway Station the morning a fte r’the
programme had been on Television. It could have only been because of our pressure that you thought you
had better see -le, if you did. The Hillsborough programme was well researched in detail. Both legal and
other experts had no doubts about the authenticity of the facts revealed and for it to be shown on TV Not a
single Writ_haa been served on J McGovern and the TV, to challenge its validity. The South Yorkshire Police
sought an Injunction^ prevent the programme being shown and now you write that you are going to rely
upon the very same Police Force to report to you before you reach a decision. After reading that from you I
findyour comment that you found the programme "deeply moving and harrowing", most hollow - to put it


My elderly father was a fine upstanding husband and father, who was killed at Hillsborough and my lovely
brother who was with him was injured. In my father's memory I will campaign, with others for justice to be
achieved, as indeed thousands of us will. The highly competent former Lord Chief Justice Taylor through his
                          pamstaking Inquiry, of the whole affair, the conclusions of which were highly critical
of the South Yorkshire Police conduct and indeed mismanagement of the whole affair. You yourself are a
h n t^ fn ir y                          ^     ^ Professionalism should acquire no one to lecture you that
both following Lord Taylor s Inquiry and the outstanding TV programme by J McGovern in no way could or
should you allow the South Yorkshire Police to have the final say as to whether or not an Independent Public
Inquiry be held - overtly independent to the degree that there is no bias whatsoever.

That I should have to lecture a Home Secretary on this obviously vital criteria is in itself a m atter of serious
concern •

Let me once more tell you - we shall not rest until JUSTICE has been established. Copy of this letter is
going to our MP E MARTLEW who has supported us throughout.
Yours sincerely
                                                                                 RECEIVED BY
                                                                                       13 FEB 1997
                                                                                HOME SECRETARY
C A Ellis
ma/letters/february97/HowardMP
