                                               Q-C                      •           f <\
                                                                   .        '       (    >}
                                                                       /x'Z'7&?
                                         cc:       Miss Edwards - LAB
                                                   Mr Bolton - G2
                                                   Mr Mould - G2
                                                   Mr Waghorn - FI
                                                   Ms Jago - F8

Mr Brown                                       V                                U>3fc-
G2 Division
                                                   UU©i^cu-J*_U>Q_C M pw uL tfcUs
TAYLOR:   RECOMMENDATION 4

     My reply to your note to me of 31 August has been delayed byc*»wuz_
my absence on leave. Unfortunately the solicitors' letter of
30 August raises a number of difficult issues, not least of i n. .
handling.

     2.   Taking your final question first, the chief constable^^
would, at least in theory, be personally liable under the    u-fcuvjuJL
agreement. Section 48 of the Police Act 1964 (which concerns F T)
liability for the torts of constables) does not apply to the
chief officer and, in any event, liability here would be        0>fl
contractual. However, in practice, the chief constable could
reasonably expect the police authority to indemnify him for any
damages (unless he acted in some extraordinary way).                 f<f/n
      3.   I have not considered the question whether there is
sufficient "consideration" for the agreement to be enforceable
unless it were made under seal. But, in any event, I think we
must avoid, so far as possible, the possibility of contractual /
restraints on the way a chief officer deploys the members of hisOVw**^
police force. I therefore agree with you that it would be better '
to have an exchange of correspondence limited to who does what
inside a ground. However, I do not think that that should
subsequently be incorporated in a safety certificate. The need
for consultation means that a safety certificate cannot be
changed quickly. Such a change might be necessary if other
operational requirements means that a chief officer cannot supply
the requisite number of constables on a particular day. But, in
any event, I would see such terms in a safety certificate as a
fetter on the discretion a chief officer has (and should have) as
to the deployment of his force. In this context I would envisage
a condition included in a safety certificate in pursuance of
section 2(2A) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as
inserted by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987) as saying no more than that there should be such number of
members of a police force present at a sports grounds as the   r ■/\
chief officer shall determine.                                 (#*’’
                                                                   **'
     4.   The wording of recommendation 4 in the Taylor Report is
distinctly unfortunate. The use of the word "agreement" can be
taken to suggest a more formal arrangement than the one that you
have in mind. Worse still, the reference to "agreed in advance
in writing" at the end of the recommendation carries the
implication that the club could veto any notice from the chief
constable reducing the number of constables to be present on a
particular occasion or all subsequent occasions. Such a veto
would, of course, be unacceptable. However, our reservations
about this recommendation will almost inevitably be seen as an
attempt to water down its contents.

     5.^ Nevertheless I think we must adhere to the principle
that chief officers simply state in writing the functions within
grounds that members of their forces will discharge and that they   /
should be free to revise this as circumstances require. The
danger of written agreements is that the police would be
contracting out their services (rather like Securicor). It is
important that when special police services are supplied, payment
is claimed under section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964 rather than
under some contractual arrangement (cf. Harris v. Sheffield
United [1987] 2 All ER 838). Otherwise the chief officer might
be sued for breach of contract.

     6.   Whilst in general the Home Office would not seek to
interfere in arrangements between clubs and police forces, I
think the issues here are too fundamental to simply sit back and
let them reach a wholly inappropriate agreement. Since the issue
will arise with other forces, you may wish to consider whether
there is a case for issuing guidance.                           y

     7.   The draft agreement submitted is in any event much too
sweeping. Paragraph 6, for example, concerns arrangements
outside the ground. The police have a general duty to keep order
in public places and it is not appropriate to superimpose a      .
further contractual duty. Paragraph 2 is much too sweeping since
some of the recommendations referred to cover matters that are
not the direct concern of the police. In any event the
recommendations are not drafted in such a way as to be converted
into legal obligations. Paragraph 9 requires the police to be
involved in stewarding if a request to do so is made in a
reasonable manner by the club. This list of criticisms of the
draft agreement is not exhaustive.




                                                     R J CLAYTON
                                          Legal Adviser's Branch
13 September 1989
