                                                                   CS-    H r~\ k
                                                                                    (3
E.R.
 illoTI OF MEETING HELD ON 7 SEPTEMBER 1989

   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH

   Present:         Home Secretary
                    Mr Whalley
                    Mr Bolton
                    Mr Goddard
                    Mr Mower
                    Mr Lidington
                    Mr Yeo
                    Miss Bannister



         The meeting had bjfeen called to discuss compliance with the Taylor
   interim report, following reports in the press that the Government, clubs and
   authorities ha^failed to respond publicly to the interim recommendations.
   The meeting had before it Mr Bolton's submission of 21 August, my note of 30
   August and Mr Bolton1s two submissions of 1 September about the letter from
   Mr Roy Edey and the Hillsborough interim report.

   2.    The Home Secretary said that he had felt vulnerable at the start of the
   football season becausel"®f the reports in the press, letters in "The Times"
   from Mr Edey and Mr GraySon, and anecdotes that the clubs were not able or
   willing to complete all tjie interim recommendations in time. He thought that
   the Government remained vui'tterable to severe criticism if something went
   wrong. He was grateful for Hr Bolton1s submission of 1 September on the
   compliance with the interim recommendations, which suggested that there was
   a willingness but practical difficulties'' m d prevented compliance in all
   cases. He asked Mr Bolton how the information had been obtained.

   3.      Mr Bolton explained that information was obtained essentially in three
   ways:

              (i)   on compliance with recommendations to the fire
                    service, direct from the fire service;

             (ii)   on recommendations concerning the police, HMCIC had
                    asked ACPO to do a survey and they had reported
                    back;

            (iii)   information had been gleaned by a large number of
                    telephone enquiries.

   This allowed officials to build up an accurate general picture of compliance
   as far as the police and fire services were concerned, but there was no means
   of checking which local authorities had complied to the letter. This was
   because there was no ^supervision of local authorities compliance ' «J(«t was
   expected that Lord Justice Taylor would deal with this point in his final
   report. If the Home Secretary had to answer to Parliament for compliance
   with the recommendations, he would have to base his answer on the information
   in Mr Bolton1s submission.


                                            1.
WRITTEN AGREEMENTS

4.    The Home Secretary said he understood that there was some reluctance to
draft agreements because of legal worries. Officials had been sent a copy of
a draft agreement between the South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club by the Chief Constable's legal advisers for guidance.         It
seemed sensible, but the Chief Constable had been warned that he nr\(^K<rbe
personally liable for any infringements.      Officials awaited Home Office
lawyers' advice, but the intention of the Taylor recommendation had been that
the agreement should be operationally clear and not legally binding.       The
Home Secretary asked whether it was for the police or for the football clubs
to take the initiative on drawing up these agreements. Mr Goddard said that
he was seeing Mr Anderton later and would say that the Home Secretary was
anxious for the police to make sure that such agreements were drawn up
properly. The Home Secretary was grateful.

OPEN GATES

5.   The Home Secretary noted that there were physical difficulties at some
grounds in complying with the recommendation, for instance,Millwall.    The
clubslwoula if necessary have to argue their case.

CUTTING EQUIPMENT

6.   It was noted that this problem was being resolved.

TERRACE CAPACITY

7.   It was noted that the Green Guide formula itself was             fairly
conservative, and the Taylor report recommended a further safety margin on
top of this of 15%.     This was causing difficulties, especially outside
grounds. However, of the 11 games delayed in the first week of the season,
10 had been identified by officials as almost all mid-week games where there
was more difficulty in starting matches on time anyway. There did not seem
to be any particular problems except that the police were being
understandably cautious post-Taylor. Mr Bolton said that the terraces might
look empty to supporters because people tended to bunch up towards the front
and this would encourage people to try and get in. Mr Whalley said that Lord
Justice Taylor himself had experienced the Green Guide recommended figure of
54 and found it tight.    At Hillsborough the figure had not been properly
imposed and those controlling the crowd had not taken into account all the
relevant factors. He was very concerned about the situation. Mr Lidington
said that Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation on this point was very
specific and the Government would rightly face strong criticism if it became
known that it had been ignored.   Some action should be taken against local
authorities who were not imposing the recommendation.     The Home Secretary
agreed, and said that officials should wri^eto^c^l^autJiorities who had
decided not to insist on the 15% reduction anH^¥oY3 tlieDackground to Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendation. Mr Mower said that if any local authority
still refused there would be a case for the Home Secretary to make this
known
'RECOMMENDATIONS 19, 26 AND 42

8.    It was thought that problems in relations to these recommendations
could be solved.

PUBLICITY

9.    The Home Secretary turned to the letters in "The Times" from Mr Edey
and Mr Grayson. He said that in general when serious accusations were made
he thought that they needed to be answered. He recognised that the moment
had passed for a letter to "The Times", although clearly Mr Edey needed a
reply to his letter to the Home Secretary. He thought there might be a case
for a Written Answer when Parliament resumed to give an account of what the
Government was doing and why the accusations made were incorrect. However,
he did not want to leave the matter unanswered publicly until the spillover
began. After further discussion, the Home Secretary decided that he would
like to write a letter to an interested MP in the form of a response to a
query about what was being done to implement the interim recommendations.
This letter would be given to the press.    He asked Mr Yeo if he would see
whether Mr Carlisle MP would be content to receive such a letter. Officials
should then submit a suitable draft to be sent
            (NOTE: Mr Yeo has confirmed that Mr Carlisle would be content to
receive such a letter and would be grateful to be informed before the letter
was given to the press. I should be grateful if Mr Bolton could provide a
suitable draft tQoj

9.    As to Mr Edey's letter, it was noted that he was a persistent
correspondent with the Hillsborough enquiry and his interest stemmed from the
deaths of the Hicks girls.     The Home Secretary said that Mr Edey should
receive a Private Secretary reply to his letter. No doubt he would seek to
publicise the reply and he requested that Legal Advisers should check the
letter before it was sent.   (I should be grateful if Mr Bolton could let me
know of any amendments, and when the letter can be sent).




Private Office                       MISS C J BANNISTER
12 September 1989                    Private Secretary
 Ms Adams
 Ms Craig
 Ms Rex
Mr Yates
Mr Chilcot
Mr Moriarty
Mr Turney
Mr Boys Smith
HMCIC
HMCIFS . _ ,, ^
        <vc -BoUcorv
Mr Goddard
Mr Whalley
Mr Mower
Mr Haslam
Mr Mould
Mr Lidington
Mr Yeo
