                  Lancashire County Cricket Club
                                         PATRON: HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN

ourRef. 1                ’'                        ^            ' jV> -                        Old Trafford
YourRef-  S                                      J jtlL             7                          Manchester
                                                 am                               ^ H®               M16 0PX
                                                                   ( hZ -               r<^ ~ t j ^ l- 8 4 8 7021
         The Rt. Hon. Colin B. Moynihan                                       d\       y\               / l )
         Minister for Sport                                                    *       )
         Department of the Environment
         2 Marsham Street
         London SW1P 3EB                                              <


         25th April 1989


    _JJaar Minister
              .   ■ ■     ■



         Safety at Sports Grounds

          In the wake of the recent disaster at Hillsborough I write to
          enquire if you have considered any legislation concerning the
          availability of tickets on the dav of a m a i~r;h o n t - s i rte a particular
         _ground.   I am sure you are aware that when significant numbers of
          spectators arrive at a venue without tickets it is potentially a
          dangerous situation as perhaps was the case on that fateful
          Saturday.   I have long held the view that there should be
          legislation against the selling of tickets in such cTwav as it
          also provides an opportunity for forgeries to be sold further
          endangering safety particularly at capacity matches.

         In our own case here at Old Trafford we did experience forgeries
         and illegal entry some years ago on a capacity match when England
         played Australia and West Indies and the situation was extremely
         uncomfortable all be it not critical in terms of danger to life.
         The question is obviously a complex one and no easy answer will be
         found but I do feel serious consideration should be given to this
         matter and would be pleased to elaborate further if necessary.

         I was in fact a spectator at the match at Hillsborough and feel I
         would like to offer one or two comments to the enquiry panel and
         perhaps you would therefore pass the enclosed copy of this letter
         to the appropriate department for whatever action you feel is
         necessary.

         Perhaps finally I could extend an invitation for you to attend our
         forthcoming Texaco Trophy match between England and Australia on
         Thursday, 25th May which is already a sell out and therefore a
         capacity crowd guaranteed. It would therefore be an ideal
         opportunity to view our facilities and^arrangements on a day when
         everyone will be tested to the full.

y        sWith kind regards.
          o'tjrs sincerely


     i
         C D HASSELL
         Secretary                                                                                       Enc.
            D. HASSBLL    Marketing Manager: J. CUMBES       Assistant Secretaries: R. WARBURTON & Miss R. B. FITZGIBBON
                                Fax:061-848 9021         Cricket Call: 0898 12 14 69
