                                  CONFIDENTIAL



                                                      «    kl I
                                                      2 7 JUL 1989

NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 25 JULY 1989


HILLSBOROUGH:   PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S INTERIM REPORT


Present:    Home Secretary
            Lord Ferrers
            Sir Clive Whitmore
            Mr Chilcot
            Mr Moriarty
            HMCIC
            Mr W a m e
            Mr Goddard
            Mr Whalley
            Mr Mold
            Mr Gilbert
            Mr Lidington
            Miss Bannister


      The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the handling in Whitehall
of publication of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report.   Mr Whalley said
that Lord Justice Taylor hoped to present the interim report to the Home
Secretary on 1 August, with a view to publication on 4 August, before the
new football season began on 19 August.

SCOPE OF THE INTERIM REPORT

2.    Mr Whalley said that the report would comprise:       an analysis of the
events in sequential detail;     the reasons for the events;      conclusions;
and   recommendations.    The   analysis   would   be   definitive,    but   the
recommendations would be interim and a further set of recommendations would
be made in the final report. The interim recommendations would be based on
evidence so far considered and the report would not cover longer term
questions   such   as   all—seater    stadia,    financial    questions    about
restructuring of grounds, football membership scheme     or grounds other than
football grounds.   The report would state that the recommendations should
be implemented forthwith, but Lord Justice Taylor was minded to leave it to
Ministers and other responsible parties to decide precisely when they
should be implemented.   However, the interim report was being produced in
order that action could be taken before the start of the new season.

PRIOR DISCLOSURE OF REPORT

3.    It was noted that the South Yorkshire Police were likely to be heavily
criticised in the report and HMCIC said that Mr Wright wanted to have sight
of the report a day or two before publication andfteiilist the help of the
Home Office in preparing his reaction.   The Home Secretary thought that at
first sight this seemed reasonable, but it was noted that the police were
only one of nine parties granted representation at the oral hearings, the
others being the Football Supporters' Association, Sheffield City Council,




                                      1.


                                 CONFIDENTIAL
                                 CONFIDENTIAL


                                       2


South   Yorkshire   Fire  and  Civil  Defence  Authority,      South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, the
Football Association and Dr Wilfred Eastwood,        the Club’s consultant
engineer.   Few were expected to escape some form of censure.        It would be
difficult to justify giving the police prior w a m i n g W k ' U . excluding the
other interested parties. Allowing advance disclosure of the report to the
police, and possibly to other interested parties, might lead to a delay in
publication and there would, of course, be a severe risk of leaks.

HANDLING

4.     It was agreed that as soon as the report was received the Ministers
of the Departments involved would need to decide whether publication should
go ahead as planned on 4 August; what the Government’s initialfifeouTd be;
what immediate action should be taken on the recommendations and whether
there should be prior disclosure of the report to any of the interested
parties. There would be no time to obtain a considered view from colleagues
on the report's recommendations before the Recess.      It was agreed that
preparations should be made for publication on 4 August, but that it should
be possible to hold publication up if necessary.  There should be a meeting
of officials of all the interested Departments and HMCIC, followed by a
Ministerial meeting as soon as possible after the report was r e c e i v e d ® ^
before the£.aate of publication.  It was noted that Lord Justice Taylor had
not yet decided whether he would hold a press conference on publication
himself.




                                                     { L 'L H J L , f 3   o   U A s ^J?\<1
Private Office                                   MISS C J BANNISTER
26.7.1989.                                       Private Secretary


c .c .   Ms Adams
         Mr Yates
         Mr Chilcot
         Mr Moriarty
         HMCIC
         " “      ‘ ‘ h




         Mr   Mould
         Mr   Mower
         Mr   Gilbert
         Mr   Lidington




                                 CONFIDENTIAL
