                                        cc:   Miss Bannister
                                              Mr Chilcot
                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                              Mr Turney
                                              Mr Mower
                                              Mr Addison
                                              Mr Goddard
                                              Mr Le Vay
                                              Mr Nagler
                                              Mr Whalley-^"
                                              Mr Lidington
                                              Mr Godfrey


From:      Antony Townsend
           F9 Division
           2 August 1989



Ms Adams


METROPOLITAN POLICE CHARGES FOR FOOTBALL MATCHES


You asked for advice on Mr Moynihan's letter of 31 July.

2.   A draft reply, explaining the reasons for phasing the
increases is attached.




                                              ANTONY /TOWNSEND
DRAFT

Colin Moynihan Esq
Department of the Environment
2 Marsham Street
London SW1P 3EB



METROPOLITAN POLICE CHARGES FOR FOOTBALL MATCHES


Thank you for your letter of 31 July.     I am grateful to you for
responding so swiftly to my letter of 28 July.


The Metropolitan Police are to-day announcing the decision to
increase the charges.     The announcement will be low-key - a word
with the Evening Standard - and will not go into details about
the increases for each club.     The police will also be informing
the FA, the League and of course, the clubs themselves.


The Home Secretary and I considered carefully your suggestion
that the increases should be made in one go, rather than phased.
The Metropolitan Police Policy Committee were strongly of the
view that phasing would be preferable, given the size of some of
the increases.     Since they formed that view, increases in police
pay and rent allowance have been agreed which will - irrespective
of the proposed changes to the contracts - increase the cost to
the clubs by about 17%.


For these reasons, and because of the haste with which the
increased charges will have to be introduced, we decided to go
for the phased approach.    The decision to increase charges is one
for the Home Secretary, as Police Authority, so we shall be able
to time the announcement of the further increase in the light of
developments.• We need not wait until August 1990.


Since most MPs are' now away for the recess, I decided against
writing to them.
