         THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
         Room 1106
         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AT
         Direct Line: 0171 273 2512 Fax: 2007


The Chief Constable                                                 O ur reference: PW /97 110/145/5
West Midlands Police
PO Box 52 Lloyd House                                               Your reference:
Colmore Circus
BIRM INGHAM B4 6N Q                                                 Date: 13 O ctober 1997




       In the course of my scrutiny I am trying to trace exactly what video material was made available
to the West Midlands Police for the purpose of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquest. I am concerned
primarily w ith the material provided by the South Yorkshire Police. I understand the position to be as
follows:

1.     Tw o tape recordings were made of scenes shown by the police C CTV cameras. O ne of these
tapes TB1 began at about 12 noon and finished at 15.04. The other TB2 started at the same tim e and
finished at 15.34. I have seen copies of these tapes provided to me by South Yorkshire Police. South
Yorkshire Police also compiled a schedule of TB1 and TB2 for the purpose of Lord T aylor’s Inquiry.

2.    There were two further tapes made by the video monitors in the police control room running
from 15.35 till about 17.20. I have not so far seen these.

3.     There were untimed colour tapes taken by the Police Underwater team. These included scenes
in the tem porary m ortuary and scenes of the pitch after the disaster.

4.    There was a considerable amount of video material provided by the BBC both from fixed
cameras in the ground and mobile cameramen.

5.     There was material provided by the club from their CCTV monitors, in particular from a
camera which showed turnstiles A-G.

       I understand that West Midland Police made a compilation tape from some of this material,
which was shown to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and also the Inquest Jury. I have seen this. In so far as it is
relevant it shows scenes of Leppings Lane and the turnstiles at that end and the opening of gate C.
These scenes are taken from two different cameras. I believe one is the police camera 1 m ounted on the
West Stand; the other is the Club camera that monitored turnstiles A-G. These are black and white.
There are colour scenes both in Leppings Lane outside the turnstiles and inside the ground showing the
build up of the crowd. I would be grateful if you could indicate the source of these, w hether BBC or
police. There is a short sequence at 15.02 taken by camera 5 which shows fans climbing over the
perimeter fence of pen 3. There are more colour scenes inside the ground after 15.00.



                                                   1
        It w ould help me if you could indicate the source of the various parts of the compilation tape,
other than that which were obviously taken later to explain the layout of the ground.

        TB1 shows scenes taken by camera 5 (the one mounted near the police control box) betw een 12
noon and 14.22. The earlier shots are all with the camera in a fixed position, they are mainly of the
West Stand. Those between 14.18 and 14.22 are apparently of a group of people in pen 2. T hey
indicate that the camera swivelled and zoomed. There are no recorded shots from the camera between
about 14.22 and 15.02. In his Interim Report L ord Taylor found that all the police C C T V cameras
were operating correctly.

        It has been suggested to me that the compilation tape ought to have included scenes recorded
from camera 5 prior to 15.02, specifically those between 14.18 and 14.22. Indeed it is suggested th at the
police deliberately did not include these scenes because they demonstrate that the condition o f the
terraces could be seen from camera 5. I have not found this suggestion particularly easy to follow since
it seems to have been common ground both throughout the Inquiry and Inquest that the police had a
good view of the terraces from the windows of the control box. Nevertheless it would assist if you
could let me know on what basis the material was selected to make up the compilation tape and why
no shots from camera 5 were included before 15.02.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




                                                     2
