                Sou th Yorkshire

             POLICE
             JUSTICE       with    COURAGE                          S      i    /    ^




Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                         23 Juty 1997
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




       V-^rvi   ,


THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: SCRUTINY OF MATERIAL

Thank you very much indeed for your recent letter, which I received on 21 July, with its
helpful information and suggestion.

Its arrival coincided with the finalisation o f a letter which I had just written to you, stimulated
by your news release on 14 July.

I will take the opportunity, in this slightly amended letter, if I may, to deal with my original
points and your own.

I was very interested to hear from the Home Secretary that he had decided to place in your
hands the task o f reviewing material associated with the Hillsborough Disaster. Whatever
your final decision, you will be aware o f strongly polarised views on the desirability o f a full
new public inquiry. The combination o f your judicial independence and your seniority within
the Court o f Appeal will be invaluable in underwriting the integrity o f the process o f scrutiny.

Reading your recent press release, I see that you have declared your intention to visit the
families in Merseyside, with their legal representatives.

I wonder if you would think it helpful if you were to visit other parties as well, not only for the
obvious advantage o f transparent even-handedness, but for very practical purposes, too.

For example, I would very much like to brief you personally on the stance which I have taken
towards the awful consequences o f the 1989 events, since arriving to take command o f the
Force in 1990. The very basis o f this stance is a frank acknowledgement o f the errors which
can be attributed to the South Yorkshire Police.

Needless to say, I wouldn't dream o f canvassing you on the question o f the material to be
placed before you in the more formal part o f your scrutiny.



            Police Headquarters
            Snig Hill                                                    Direct line: 0114 2523400
            Sheffield S3 8LY                                              Direct fax: 0114 2523481
                                                                        Switchboard: 0114 2202020
            Tel: 0114 276 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                                               2


It is my firm belief that all the evidence held by the South Yorkshire Police was made available
to earlier appropriate authorities with an interest in discerning the causes o f the disaster.
However, the publicity surrounding the Home Secretary's latest decision has stimulated a
number o f approaches to our Force on different themes. Rather than making assumptions
about your interest or otherwise in these offers or enquiries, I have asked Assistant Chief
Constable Ian Daines to forward them to your secretary, M r Bone.

We will, o f course, make available to you and to your secretarial support team any
documentation you need to pursue your scrutiny and which is under our control. The total
material which we house is stored in a room some 15 feet square. All four walls are full from
floor to ceiling with, in addition, a central column (allowing a barely reasonable amount of
access) which also reaches from floor to ceiling. It probably amounts to around two tons in
weight. I describe it in this way only to give you some impression, at a distance, o f its scale
and volume.

Ian Daines has already spoken to M r Bone, offering him (and yourself, should you wish it)
ready access. I will be happy to meet your request for information about the nature o f these
documents by 4 August and will try to make it as digestible as possible.

On Saturday 26 July, a small number o f officers will be going to the Hillsborough Stadium to
re-familiarise ourselves, or in the case o f some officers, to acquaint themselves for the first
time, with the reconfigured ground. Some features remain intact (particularly outside the
ground) following alterations pursuant to the late Lord Chief Justice Taylor's 1989
recommendations but others are, thankfully, very different.

I tell you this only so that you are aware o f our intentions and, if you were so minded, to
mention such a facility (willingly provided by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club) to the
Merseyside families when you meet them.

This is one o f the other "practical purposes" to which I referred earlier, should you
contemplate visiting other parties.

W hatever your decisions in these matters, you may be assured o f my fullest co-operation.




Richard Wells
