From: Peter Edmundson                             cc Mr Michael
      Operational Policing                           Mr O’Brien
       Policy Unit                                   Mr Howarth
      Room 527, QAG                                  Permanent Secretary
      S 273 - 2621                                   Mr Boys Smith
      9 December, 1997                               Mr Pugh
                                                     Mr Clifford
                                                     Mr Granatt
                                                     Mr Warner
                                                     Mr Owen
Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY: MEETING WITH LORD JUSTICE STUART-
SMITH ON THURSDAY 11 DECEMBER


You are due to meet Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on Thursday 11 December at
14.35 to discuss questions about the publication of submissions and other
evidence from the scrutiny as it nears completion. You may also wish to take
the opportunity to ask the Judge when he expects to give you his report and
to discuss some of the issues which he has been examining.

The main issues to raise are:

• The Judge’s timetable for submitting his report.


• Whether anyone criticised in the report will have the opportunity to
  comment on the relevant draft passages before submission of the final
  report (in line with the Salmon principles).


• Whether the Judge thinks it likely that he will recommend that any
  evidence considered by the scrutiny should not be published by you.


• Whether the scrutiny intends to examine all the police statements which
  appear to have been amended before their submission to the original
  Taylor inquiry.


Timing of the report

2.      The Judge indicated in his recent letter to you that he expects to
complete the report by the end of the year, although it is still not clear whether
this will be before or after Christmas. This followed representations from the
Family Support Group for the scrutiny’s timescale to be extended because of
delays which the Group claimed to have experienced in obtaining material



:: odma\meridio\edrm#90196# 1
from South Yorkshire Police. It would be helpful to know precisely more when
he anticipates submitting his report.


Salmon principles

3.       You may wish to ask Lord Justice Stuart-Smith whether, if the report
will criticise individuals, they will have an opportunity to see and comment on
the relevant passages in draft, in line with the Salmon principles. This, of
course, has implications for the timing of the submission of the final report
and its publication.


Amended police statements

4.      We understand the scrutiny has discovered that some of the
statements provided by police officers following the tragedy were reviewed by
the force and the officers asked to rewrite them before submission to the
Taylor Inquiry. This was supposedly done to remove opinion but it is open to
question whether such editing was appropriate. Some criticisms of senior
officers are also apparently missing from the rewritten statements. The
scrutiny has recently uncovered about 200 more such statements. The Judge
may decide that there is nothing to be gained from going through every one of
these statements. You may wish to urge him to do so, so that the
thoroughness of the scrutiny cannot be called into question at a later date.


Publication of submissions and other evidence

5.           In your statement announcing the scrutiny, you said:

             “.... the right hon Gentleman (Brian Mawhinney) asked whether in
             addition to our publishing the advice that I receive from Lord Justice
             Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him.
             My answer to the right hon Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my
             best to ensure that that is the case, but there may be good reasons -
             for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings - why
             such evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is
             published. However, if evidence is to be unpublished, I shall make that
             clear at the time.”

You later wrote to the Judge stating that it was your intention to make
available publicly the documentary evidence which he considered, probably
by placing a copy in the Library of the House of Commons. You also asked
that if there was material which the Judge considered should not be
disclosed, either because of its potential impact on any proceedings which
might follow or for other public interest reasons, he should identify such
material and his reasons for not recommending disclosure when he reports.




:: odma\meridio\edrm#90196# 1
6.     We are aware that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers that the
transcripts of his private meetings with relatives and witnesses should not be
disclosed, although a summary of relevant evidence may be included in his
report. The BBC has also yet to agree to its video tapes of the tragedy being
placed in the public domain.

7.       You might also ask Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to indicate whether there
is likely to be any other material which should not be disclosed and the
reasons for his recommendation and to confirm that his final report will be
submitted with his advice on what evidence should not be disclosed. The
decision on disclosure, though, is ultimately for you. You have appointed Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct this scrutiny and on its completion, the papers
will be the property of the Home Office.


Other relevant matters - (These need not be raised with the Judge)

8.      Trevor Hicks of the Family Support Group wrote to you recently to
express concern about the terms of reference for the scrutiny, including the
definition of 'new evidence’ - Mr Pugh’s submission of 5 December refers. Mr
Hicks argued that the Judge was wrong to restrict himself to 'new evidence’
which could have affected the outcome of the Taylor inquiry and other
proceedings. Our view is that the purpose of the scrutiny has always been to
establish whether there was any material evidence, not simply new evidence,
which would justify establishing a new public inquiry, approving the referral of
the inquest verdict back to the High Court or reviewing the possibility of
criminal or disciplinary proceedings.


9.     Another key issue for the families is the decision of the Coroner not to
hear evidence about events after 3.15 pm on the day of the disaster. The
families have argued that this was an arbitrary cut-off point and prevented any
examination of the response of the emergency and hospital services to the
disaster. The Coroner’s decision was based on the findings of the Home
Office pathologist that the victims were effectively dead by 3.15 and could not
be resuscitated. We understand that the scrutiny has considered whether
there is fresh evidence which bears on that decision.




                                                Peter Edmundson




::odma\meridio\edrm#90196#1
From: Paul Pugh                      cc: Mr Michael            Mr Middleton
      Head of Operational                Mr O’Brien            Mr Bailey
      Policing Policy Unit               Mr Howarth            Mr Warner
      Room 529                           Sir Richard Wilson    Mr Owen
      Queen Anne’s Gate                  Mr Boys Smith         Mr Clifford
      © 0171-273-3141                    Mr Granatt
      5 December 1997




Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH: FURTHER CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE FAMILY
SUPPORT GROUP


Issue


Letter (attached) from Mr Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, about the terms of reference for the Scrutiny.


Timing


2.         An early reply would be helpful.


Summary


3.         Mr Hicks sets out at length concerns about the way in which the terms of
reference for the scrutiny seem to be being interpreted. Underlying the concerns is
the Support Group’s sense that the scrutiny is not coming to the conclusions which
they would like, and a veiled threat that they will decry the whole exercise if the
outcome is unwelcome. They feel that too much of the burden is being put on them
to produce new evidence which would have affected the outcome of any of the
previous proceedings. Answers can be given to some of their concerns about the
nature and purpose of the scrutiny, but it is not likely to overturn the outcomes of
previous proceedings in the ways which they seek.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90236# 1
Recommendation


4.       A draft reply to Mr Hicks is attached.


Consideration


5.       The concerns of the Support Group are difficult to capture concisely, but they
come down to five broad issues:


          (i)         They question whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has the power to
                      overturn the findings of the Divisional Court or order a fresh hearing.


          (ii)        Their understanding of what constitutes new evidence is different from
                      that of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


          (iii)       They believe that the CPS have closed minds about the possibility of
                      further proceedings.


          (iv)        They ask whether a limited form of public inquiry might be possible,
                      acknowledging that a full inquiry starting from scratch like the Taylor
                       Inquiry would not be right.


           (v)        They feel that they are being asked to prove too much too quickly and
                      without access to all the information.


(})       Powers o f the Scrutiny


6.        In 1993 the Divisional Court considered and refused judicial review of the
verdict of the inquests.            Although Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is a Lord Justice of
Appeal, he is not acting in his formal judicial capacity in carrying out this scrutiny and
has no power to overturn the decision of the court. Nothing other than a decision of
a higher court could do that.




;:odma\meridio\edrm#90236# 1
7.         Mr Hicks suggests that that gives the families no hope of overturning the
inquest verdicts, which they regard as so unsatisfactory. Their particular concern is
the decision by the coroner to impose a 3.15pm cut off time in considering evidence.
One of the major issues which the judge is considering is whether there is fresh
evidence which bears on that decision - it is one of the central issues in the scrutiny.
Although he does not have the power directly to overturn the decision of the court he
is considering whether there are any grounds for the Attorney General to consent to
an application to the High Court for a new inquest. That would be the route by which
the Support Group’s objectives might be achieved.


(ii)       New evidence


8.         On the issue of what constitutes new evidence, it is inevitable with any major
disaster that over the years new information emerges which was not known at the
time. You made clear in announcing the Judge’s appointment that the purpose was
to establish whether there was any material evidence which was of such significance
that further inquiries would be justified or which would be relevant to the statutory
functions of the Attorney, the DPP or the Chief Constable.          In order to justify re­
opening the previous decisions, evidence would have to be material not simply new.
It will be for the judge to report whether in his view there is material evidence, but the
decision about the outcomes will rest with you and the others who have statutory
functions to perform.


(iii)       CPS views


9.         On the role of the CPS the support group are concerned that they have not
seen all the papers held by the DPP and are particularly unhappy about a letter
written from a chief crown prosecutor on the day you announced the scrutiny. ( A
copy of that letter is attached to Mr Hick’s letter.) That letter reiterates the point
which you made in your oral statement that the view of the DPP at that time was that
the material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings.
The letter goes on to stress that the CPS will consider very carefully anything which
emerges from the scrutiny. The letter was intended to be reassuring, but Mr Hicks



::odma\meridio\edrm#90236#l
seems to have interpreted it in the opposite sense. The CPS have not “closed” the
book on Hillsborough and would consider anything which might emerge.


(iv)      A limited inquiry


10.        On the issue of a limited inquiry, that is in effect what the scrutiny is intended
to be. Its purpose is to establish whether there are sufficient grounds for a wider-
reaching investigation. But Mr Hicks can be reassured that no possible outcome has
been ruled in or out.


(v)        “Burden o f proof”


11.       Their concern about what they call the burden of proof is perhaps the biggest
misunderstanding.              They seem to believe that it should be the purpose of the
scrutiny to act in effect as the families’ advocate, seeking out all possible areas
where some shred of new material might exist.               However, this would turn the
exercise on its head. The origins of the exercise lay in claims originally made a year
or so ago that there was new evidence which called into question the previous
findings. The scrutiny therefore started by asking anyone who believed that there
was new evidence to bring it forward for consideration. The judge has approached
the task by looking at what was alleged and following that up to establish the
substance of the claims. Given the extent to which Hillsborough has been examined
in previous proceedings, there would have to be some clear cause for overturning all
that. There is in that sense a burden of proof on those who remain unhappy about
the previous proceedings to show good cause why they should be set aside - there
does need to be some reasonable doubt that the previous outcomes were wrong.


12.        On timing, you announced the judge’s appointment at the end of June and he
requested written submissions by the beginning of September. Those submissions
were then used for the basis of discussions with the parties during October and
November. As you have made clear, it is open to the judge to take as long as he
likes, but to be fair to all those concerned it should not be allowed to drag out any
longer than necessary. At some point a line has to be drawn.



::odma\meridio\edrm#90236# 1
Handling


13.         It is difficult to be critical of the Family Support Group without appearing
insensitive - indeed it would be impossible to be publicly critical. Given what they
have suffered, it is entirely understandable that they should use every possible
means to further their case.              But I cannot     help feelingthat their current
correspondence is deliberately disingenuous on some issues and seeking to delay
the completion of the scrutiny. You may want to discuss this with Lord Justice Start-
Smith when you meet him on Thursday 11 December. We will put forward briefing
for the meeting under separate cover.


14.         Mr Hicks said that he has not released his letter to the media “at this time” but
it must be likely that he will do so and that your reply will similarly become public.




                                          PAUL PUGH




::odma\meri dio\e drm#90236# 1
              DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group




Thank you for your letter of 30 November about the terms of reference for the
Hillsborough Scrutiny. I am grateful to you for setting out your concerns, and I hope
I can provide some reassurance.


It is right that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has no formal powers to overturn the
decision of the Divisional Court. He is not sitting in a formal judicial capacity, and
only a higher court could in practice reverse the decision of another court. It is his
role, however, to draw to the attention of the Attorney General matters which would
be relevant to the Attorney’s statutory responsibilities.        That would include the
question of whether the Attorney should give his consent to an application for a new
inquest.        That would be the proper legal route by which an outcome different to that
in the Divisional Court might be achieved.


I cannot of course, at this stage say what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s views on that
issue will be nor what decision the Attorney General might subsequently take. I can
assurance you, however, that no outcome has been ruled out. After Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has reported, the decisions about any further action will be taken by me
and, in relation to their statutory responsibilities, by the Attorney General, the
Director of Public Prosecutions, or the Chief Constable.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is considering whether there is any evidence which, had it
been available, would have been material to the outcome of any of the previous
proceedings. With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time



::odma\meridio\edrm#90236#l
some new information may become available which was not known at the relevant
time, but that does not always mean that the previous outcomes would have been
any different. We have to be careful that any re-opening of previous proceedings is
merited, and therefore that any new information is not simply new, but also material.
I do not think that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is looking for any particular party to
prove a case. His purpose is to consider any claims or evidence which interested
parties wish to put before him and to form an impartial view about whether any of
that calls into question what has gone before.      He has made clear that he will look
equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, whether that information
comes from individuals or official bodies. I know that the 3.15pm cut off time, which
is of such concern to you, is one of the main issues which he has been considering.


I am sorry that you were unhappy with the letter of 30 June from a chief crown
prosecutor. What she says in that letter about the material so far presented simply
reflects what I said in my oral statement at the House. I think that the letter was
intended to assure you that the CPS would consider very carefully anything which
might emerge from the scrutiny. It is unfortunate that it gave the wrong impression,
but what Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might say will certainly not be limited by the view
of the CPS at that time.


As you know, I believe that the present police disciplinary procedures are
unsatisfactory for a number of reasons.       The disciplinary system is currently the
subject of an inquiry by the House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee.
We expect them to report in the New Year.


As I stressed in my letter of 4 December, the management of the scrutiny is entirely
a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and the timescale is a matter for him to
decide. What happens after he reports will be a matter for me, and for those who
have specific statutory responsibilities to discharge.




;:odma\meridio\edrm#90236#l
