 From: Peter Edmundson                                  cc     Mr Michael
       Room 527                                                Mr O’Brien
       Operational Policing Policy Unit                        Mr Howarth
       Queen Anne’s Gate                                       Permanent Secretary
       0171 273 2621                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Granatt
         22 July 1997                                          Mr Pugh
                                                               Mr Bone o/r
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen
 Home Secretary




 HILLSBOROUGH: LETTER FROM LORD JUSTICE STUART SMITH


Issue

How to respond to the letter of 17 July from Lord Justice Stuart Smith.


Timing

2.     Routine, although it would be a courtesy to reply to Lord Justice Stuart Smith
before he goes on leave at the end of this week.


Summary

3.    Following comments made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith that submissions
made to him will not be made public, you wrote to him on 15 July pointing out that
you had given a commitment to publish his report and as far as possible make public
documentary evidence considered by him. His reply to your letter is satisfactory.


Recommendation

4.      That you write to Lord Justice Stuart Smith as in the attached draft.


Consideration

5.     You have given an undertaking that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report will be
published together with as much as possible of the documentary evidence considered
by him, during the course of his scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart Smith however,
subsequently given the impression that the submissions he received would not be
made public and that all he would submit to you would be his report. In your letter of


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO26MA.DOC
15 July to him you agreed that records of meetings which he holds in private with no
cross examination of witnesses, should not generally be disclosed and that he would
include relevant oral evidence in summary form in his report. You noted that there
may be some material which would not be right to disclose because of its potential
impact on any proceedings which might follow from the scrutiny, or because it was of
a personal nature, or further reasons of public interest. You asked Lord Justice Stuart
Smith to identify any documentary material which he believes should not be disclosed
and his reasons for recommending it should remain private. Lord Justice Stuart Smith
agrees this approach.


Handling

6.      There are no handling issues.




                                                            PETER EDMUNDSON




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PE0026MA.DOC
 DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


 The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart Smith
 Royal Courts of Justice
 Strand
 LONDON WC2A2LL




HILLSBOROUGH




Thank you for your helpful letter of 17 July. I shall seek to publish as much

documentary evidence considered by you during the course of the scrutiny as possible

and I note that you will let me know if there are any documents which you consider it

would not be in the public interest to publish.



I am grateful to you for keeping me informed o f the work you have already been able

to carry out on this scrutiny.



May I take this opportunity to wish you a pleasant leave.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO26MA.DOC
