                                                cc   Mrs Sadler


Miss Goose



TAYLOR REPORT : ATTENDANCE CENTRES


In Chapter 11 of his report on the Hillsborough disaster Lord
Justice Taylor recommended that consideration be given to
implementing his (rather imprecise) suggestions for extending the
arrangements for attendance centre orders to cater specifically
for people convicted of football-related offences. As I read
them, the suggestions are broadly that:

     (a)     attendance centre orders should, in suitable cases, be
             linked with exclusion orders under the Public Order Act
             1986 for those convicted of football-related offences;

     (b)     in such cases, the upper age limit of 21 for attendance
             centre orders should be removed;

     (c)     for such offenders, attendance should be required on a
             weekly basis throughout the football season to coincide
             with football matches;

     (d)     for such offenders, the maximum length of orders could
             be extended to 72 hours, to be served in two-hourly
             sessions.

As you know, we have sought the views of the officers in charge of
the senior centres on the suggestions. Many have responded with
helpful comments. Not surprisingly their views are mixed.    A few
are unreservedly in favour of extending the attendance centre
arrangements in the way proposed. Many more have some sympathy
with the underlying idea and would be willing to take on the
additional responsibilities but have pointed to the great
practical difficulties and resource implications.

             Separate regimes (and possibly segregated facilities)
             would be needed for "football" attenders.

             Attenders over 21 would need to be separated from
             younger attenders.

             Opening hours would have to be enormously extended (as,
             I would add, would the size of the network).

             Saturday openings would be inadequate to deal with the
             "problem" since increasing numbers of matches take place
             on other days.

             More and better trained staff and better facilities
             would be needed.
          There may be problems (outside the centre if not inside)
          with rival fans attending the same centre.

          Most important of all, the arrangements for dealing with
          non-attendance would have to be immeasurably improved.
          (Almost all made this comment.)

There was similar feed-back from the recent Southern Region
conference.

Leaving aside the practical difficulties (but not belittling them
since they are clearly very significant) I have serious
reservations about the suggestions.  I do not think it is
necessary to tie exclusion orders to attendance centre orders.
All Taylor LJ is seeking to achieve is to require excluded people
to be somewhere else when a football match starts (and possibly
also finishes). He is not really interested in the work that is
done at centres with attenders. That being the case, would it not
be simpler, and a great deal cheaper, to require excluded people
to report at, say, a police station at the time at which matches
are due to begin and likely to end?

I am strongly opposed to extending the availability of attendance
centre orders to people aged 21 and over.   The objective of work
done with attenders is rather more than to keep them out of
circulation for a short period.  It is also to help equip them, in
some small measure, to "lead better lives in the future".   I do
not believe that the sort of regimes that attendance centres are
currently able to offer are at all suited to older people.
Physical education and learning handicrafts or first aid are all
very well for teenagers still at school or recently out of it, but
something more is needed for adults, especially cynical, hardened
hooligans.  In my opinion, we should have to devise a regime that
was either exclusively punitive (which I would not favour) or was
more in keeping with the requirements of the clientele. The
latter approach would mean doing the sort of things that the
probation service do in day centres. Clearly, attendance centre
staff are not equipped to tackle that sort of work; nor, I
believe, are attendance centres the right place to do it.

This leads me on to the practical considerations. No doubt
appropriate regimes for younger football attenders could be
devised; segregated facilities could be provided if they were felt
to be necessary; reviewed opening hours could be drawn up; and the
many other "management" reforms needed could be put in place. But
none of this could be done except at great cost. As many of the
officers in charge whom I met at the recent conference told me, we
are getting attendance centres on the cheap.  It requires no great
insight to see that it is a very amateurish operation: we use
borrowed premises and untrained staff with little structural back
up to provide an important sentencing disposal which is given to
many serious offenders.  To my mind there is little wonder that
absentee rates are so high in many senior centres.   (Junior rates
tend to be better, which bears out my view that the disposal is
more suited to young people.) A major expansion such as the
implementation of Taylor LJ's suggestions (even only for those
under 21) would mean, would have to be accompanied by a much
better resourced and more professional approach.   (I am
particularly concerned about the degree of disaffection that is
shown by officers in charge over a range of matters, but
especially over dealing with breaches.  I am convinced that, to
retain their confidence as well as that of the courts, we must do
something to improve the arrangements, whether or not we go ahead
with even a modified Taylor.)

All the foregoing begs the question whether there is sufficient
demand for extended arrangements for any age group. A measure
would be the number of exclusion orders made.  I do not have any
figures, but the Taylor report itself says (in paragraph 321) that
there is not much use of the relevant provision.  This is possibly
to do with difficulties in enforcing them, so it is not a good
guide.  If it was thought necessary, it might be possible to
identify "football related offences" and among them those which
might merit an exclusion order coupled with an attendance centre
order.  I would suggest that we should attempt to get some idea of
the numbers involved before making any positive recommendation to
ministers.

My conclusion on the basis of an initial, and rather superficial,
consideration of the matter is that Taylor LJ's suggestions are
not worth pursuing as he has put them forward.  I would rule out
any extension of arrangements to those aged 21 and over.  Subject
to further consideration of the numbers, there might be a case for
setting up a few pilot schemes to see how the suggestions (or
something like them) work with those under 21. We would have no
difficulty finding centres willing to participate.  But I am sure
that this would only be worth doing if the necessary resources and
support arrangements were provided. An alternative approach would
be to remind courts of the powers they already have to put an
exclusion order and an attendance centre order together, and to
accommodate the "football" attenders within the existing
arrangements. This would be one way of responding to the Taylor
report and might help boost the numbers. The difficulty is that
it would not overcome the regime problem which I believe is a real
one.

This is a hastily constructed note that I have prepared
immediately before going on leave.  I apologise for its
shortcomings but I hope that it brings out some of the issues.   I
imagine that you will wish to discuss it (always assuming that you
are not asked to reach a firm view before my return from leave).




                                                r}   G SUTTON
C1 Division
22 Mav 1990



SW264
