ROGER MORLEY         born on


1.          I am the Assistant Divisional Officer (Support Services) for

South         Yor kshire   Metropolitan    Ambulance    Service,   whose

headquarters are situate at Heather Close of Moorgate Road,

Rotherham.


2.          I joined the West Riding County Ambulance Service at Maltby

on the 14th August 1967 and have completed 21 years service.            I

attended the West Riding Training Course in 1968 and attained the

standard Miller qualification.            Since 1968 I have attended many

supervisory training and'Management courses including Block

release and Residential courses and the Trent Regional Health

Authority          First   Line   Supervisors   Course which is held at

Markfield in Leicestershire.


3    ^      £ have over 21 years experience of the Ambulance service and

 for 8 years          I was an Ambulanceman and one year as Leading

Ambulanceman at Maltby.             I then became liaison Officer and

 transferred to Rotherham from 1976 to 1977 when I was appointed

 Control Officer. In 1987, I was appointed Superintendent Officer

 responsible for standards and efficiency and on 1st March 1988 I

 was appointed Control Room Superintendent. On the 1st January

 1989         I was appointed Assistant Divisional      Officer    Support

 Services.


    4   ^    I was a duty Officer during the weekend 14th to 17th April
1989 and my duty commenced at 1700 on the 14th.   From that time I

was on call should the Ambulance headquarters need to contact a

Senior Officer that weekend.      I was not contacted on Friday

evening or early Saturday morning and I had arranged to attend

the H.Q. on Saturday morning to meet a British Telecommunication

Engineer, who was installing a telephone in my office.      I was

conscious of the Cup Semi-final and of the problems which the

movement of vehicles in the North Sheffield area might cause for

Ambulances caught up in any congestion as a result of the match

at Hillsborough.    I had been in Headquarters dealt with the

British Telecommunication Engineer and I was leaving the office

at 1130 hours just as Alan’Hopkins the Deputy Chief was arriving.

I had earlier arranged to meet Alan at a bridge which overlooked

the Ml motorway for the purpose of .evaluating- the amount of

traffic and any problems which may be caused by congestion in and

around the area of Hillsborough, and to assess potential problem

areas for the movement of Ambulances in that same area.    I spoke

to Alan Hopkins in the driveway to the Ambulance Headquarters and

arranged to meet him at about 1300.



5.   I returned to the Ambulance Headquarters at approximately

 1320 and Alan Hopkins was not there.   I went to the control room

 and asked where he was.   I was told Alan had gone out and I knew

where he would be.     I climbed into David Jones', Range Rover,

 which I had permission to use on Saturday the 14th April.       I

 drove the Range Rover to the Ml and saw that Alan Hopkins was
parked in his Escort on the bridge which overlooks the motorway

at the junction of Rotherway and Parkway.      I drove to where Alan

Hopkins was parked and I parked behind him, left the Range Rover

and spoke to him.     The time was now about 1330 or 1345 and he

commented to me that things were very quiet.       We remained on the

bridge over the Ml for a short time I then told Alan Hopkins that

I was going to drive into Sheffield.       He drove away and I drove

onto the Ml, travelled North and left the Motorway at junction 35

following the A269 into Chapletown.       I drove into Sheffield via

High Green and Ecclesfield calling at the Northern General

Hospital to check on the casualty department where I saw one of

our Vehicles "but otherwise the department was very quiet.



      I left ..the.Jxospi.tal-gKGunds and drove up. Berries. Road.^ASvJo

approached the -eod l saw two        Police vehicles     outside   the

Devonshire Arms Public house.         Fans were being directed down

Herries Road          towards the Sheffield Wednesday Hillsborough

ground.     The time was now approximately 1400 or 1415 and I

decided not to drive down Herries Road knowing that I might run

into problems because of the numbers of people attending the

 football match.


 7.   I knew there would be two Station Officers, Eason and Higgins

 inside the Hillsborough ground and my presence at the ground was

 not absolutely necessary as they were capable of overseeing the

 Ambulance in attendance. It was their job as Liaison Officers to
co-ordinate any problems outside the ground with the Police

inside it.      I was responsible as Duty Officer for the whole

County and I had to remain mobile and available to react to any

situation which may arise and require my presence and I drove

into the City centre and noticed that a lot of Police were on

duty.     I then drove down Sheffield Parkway and made my way home.



8.      At 1445 or 1450 I told my wife that I would return David's

Range Rover because I believed that at about that time in the

afternoon the vast majority of fans would be in the Hillsborough

ground.       I left   home   to   drive   to   th e   Headquarters   at

approximately 1450. ' The drive from home to the Headquarters

usually takes about 10 minutes.        I was in Moorgate Road at 1508

;when     Station^ Officer- Higgins, was radioed byi .controli who weose

asking why the Police wanted a fleet of Ambulances at Leppings

Lane.     I could only hear control on the radio in the Range Rover.

I could not hear the reply.        I was only a few hundred yards away

from the Ambulance Headquarters.        I pulled into the Headquarters

drive and was about to alight from the vehicle when Alan Hopkins

raced towards me and indicated he would drive and I should move

into the passenger seat and at the same time saying to me "We've

got some trouble at Hillsborough, I'll drive".



 9.     I do not remember exactly what Alan Hopkins said to me in the

Range Rover whilst driving at speed towards the Hillsborough

 Football ground, although I distinctly remember operating the
     siren and two tone horn whilst Alan concentrated on driving at

     speed via Sheffield Parkway, the City Centre and Penistone Road

     to the football ground.           I operated the radio and Alan told me to

     get onto control and tell             control   to clear    all   available

     vehicles,           in case there was a need to call Ambulances to the

     scene.        He wanted all available Ambulances to be clear of any

     existing            commitments   and to be ready to respond and those

     vehicles were to tell control as soon as they should become

     green.        Green is the code used to stand all available Ambulances

^    ready to respond to a request for assistance.              I heard control

     broadcast the message to all Symas ambulances              on the emergency

     channel 2 (Track 19 page 7).


     10 *      A H       the ambulances    are   controlled..by r?idio_f rom^ the.   ;

     ambulance H e a d q u a r t e r s and the control telephoned the other

      am b u l a n c e   stations to call upon any ambulances parked up but

      available and on call although not mobile.



£:    11.      I was aware that Alan Hopkins had been in the control room

      when telephone messages had been received although I cannot

      remember him telling me specifically what had been said, he

      obviously knew more about the situation we were approaching than

      I did and I recall there may have been             mention that there was a

      crowd control problem at Hillsborough ground.



       12.      During the last few hundred yards of the journey as we


                                                 5
approached the ground at speed Alan Hopkins said to me "Why are

the ambulances going to Leppings Lane, Leppings Lane is not the

collection point.        They should have been going to the First Aid

room at the gymnasium".


13.       We arrived at Hillsborough at 1523 (Track 19 page 10) and

followed two fire service vehicles along Penistone Road, one was

the Fire services incident control vehicle and the other a

tender.        I remember commenting on the fact that the Fire service

had their incident control vehicle on Penistone Road and that it

did not turn into the ground but continued on and passed the

entrance to "the Gymnasium presumably to attend the Leppings Lane

end.      However we turned into the ground and concertina gates were

opened to allow us in.                        -       »•     •*-•*


1 4   .   on   arrival I noticed a large number of Police Officers who

were waiting in the area to        the west of the north stand and at

 least six Police Officers were mounted on horse back waiting very

 close to the vehicular access point onto the pitch.         Alan and I

 alighted from the Range Rover.        Alan left me by the Range Rover

 and he went to speak to a officer and following a short exchange

 to the effect "Come on Alan lets get this sorted out", with that

\o£ficor       he ran down the vehicular access slope      and onto the

 pitch.        Alan had told me to stay with the vehicle and as he had

 disappeared onto the pitch.       I spoke to Duty controller            -

 at 1523       (Track 19 Page 10) and instructed him to pass on the
message that I required as many vehicles as possible to be made

available for Hillsborough including as many as possible from

other areas.


15.    I recall that ambulance Sierra 405 was parked in the

entrance to the ground off Penistone Road with its rear doors

wide open      with no cots and no staff and no one in attendance.

The whole area of the entrance off Penistone Road was bedlam at

the time.      Alan Hopkins returned and asked me to radio Control

and chase up the Majax vehicle.         I immediately relayed that

message by radio to                   the Duty Control Officer at the

Ambulance Control at ~1531 (Track 19 page 14).         I was told that

the Majax vehicle was already on its way.            I saw one of our

vehicles coming off the pitch having great difficulty getting -ra

clear exit through the narrow vehicular access way and the

Ambulance managed with difficulty to clear the obstacles and

leave the ground.


 16.   One     of   our   vehicles,   I believe   S . 407   had   greater

difficulties leaving the ground nearly jamming his vehicle on the

 gate post.      I considered this could become a serious problem.

 The area was in total chaos, people were running off the pitch

 looking into ambulances which were arriving, filling them up with

 casualties, some of whom were seriously injured and needed to be

 cleared from the ground immediately and some who were not so

 seriously injured who could probably be dealt with at the ground
or wait to be cleared. Priority was given to the more seriously

and critically injured.       There were a lot of police in the area

but no one appeared to be in control, coordinating the efforts

of the police force, the fire service or the ambulance service

and I decided I would organise my own priorities for clearing the

 seriously and critically injured. I also attempted to introduce a

 system for incoming and outgoing ambulances which would allow

 them to clear the area quickly without congesting the access/exit

 off and onto Penistone Road.          I got them to reverse into Gate 0

 in pairs


 17.     The "spectators,       some    of whom were     distraught      were

 physically manhandling me and around me there was                fighting

^■bStween the jsuppor,
                     t©irs;
                          '^|
                            J,
                             h:il’st vehi cles 'were rnoviriGf in "snd ou^^of

 the ground.     I could see a lot of people moving to the north

 stand carrying injured and dead people.



 18.    I was still trying to establish a casualty holding point in

 the north stand/Penistone area.            I was particularly concerned

  about the vehicles arriving and leaving from the Penistone Road

  access/exit.      I was also concerned about the distribution of

  equipment and my job was made extremely difficult because I was

  inundated with requests to help people, give advice, hand out

  equipment, direct able qualified volunteers to those areas where

  assistance was needed most, whilst trying to keep the ambulance

  flow as even and unhindered as possible.
19.       Alt hou gh    I cannot   recall   the time   I remember being

approached by two men who told me that they were qualified

doctors and volunteered their assistance.              I sent them to the

north stand gymnasium where I knew they could help casualties or

certify       t he     dead.   I w as   also   approached    by   several

Nottinghamshire Ambulance service men who asked if they could

offer assistance and I sent those people to the North Stand

sports hall too.          My priority with the volunteers was to direct

them to give assistance to the living casualties and whilst I was

doing this I was constantly pulled, jostled and man-handled by

distraught people.


2GK<        I tried       establish^a routine aiad assess?the severity/

the injured in order so that when an ambulance arrived I could

give priority to loading the more serious injuries and evacuating

them first.          I recall a St. John's Ambulance lady Superintendent

asked me to get an Ambulance immediately for a man who she said

was dying.       I recall I was able to load that particular casualty

onto an ambulance and evacuate him quickly.



 2   i.   x was constantly aware that I needed to establish my own

 priorities          for dealing with the overwhelming requests           for

 assistance whilst marshalling the evacuation of casualties and

 the movements of the Ambulances in a very confined area populated

 by the police, fire service, the injured the grief stricken and
unsympathetic opposing fans.            The police were working extremely

hard and if I had a problem a policeman in the area intervened

 and allowed me to get on with the job in hand and the police

 comforted and dealt sympathetically with the many distressed

 people in my immediate area.


 22.    I was always conscious that ambulances were being stripped

 of their equipment as soon as the crews had left to attend to the

 injured.


 23.    The ambulances which I assisted in loading often left the

 Penistone Road area carrying as many as seven casualties at a

 time and this was done to evacuate as many casualties as possible

*5i n :t h e s h o r t e s t i«va41afole **&me? to get them -to the^hospifeal *wh±©h -

 could provide the- treatment needed without delay and in the

 circumstances I had no option, I needed to get the many injured

 specialist treatment and the only way to clear the large number

 of casualties was to utilise every available square foot of

  ambulance space.


  24.     I remember      being    asked by distraught          fans to get an

  ambulance onto the pitch because two doctors were resuscitating a

  casualty.     At this time I was also liaising with the police and

  ■ £ services men who were on the scenes.               Although I had little

  contact with the St. John’s Ambulance Brigade, I gave what advice

  I could in the circumstances to the police and fire services and
    I did not, apart from contact with the one St. John's Ambulance

    Officer, speak to members of their brigade;- they were themselves

    very busy.


    25.    I was probably engaged in marshalling the casualties and

    Ambulances and organising the distribution of equipment and

    evacuation of injured whilst liaising with all services and

    giving advice as required for possibly one and a half hours.



    26.    I went to find Alan Hopkins because although I cannot recall

    who, someone had given me a message to go and assist him.          I

    recall'at this time I was unable to contact control on channel 1

    and I remember that I made a comment to radio control shortly

    after I had received the order to transfer to channel 1 that I

    could not get that channel.      The only noise I could hear on the

    channel      was   a faint crackling and the disjointed voice of

    Superintendent Clarke whose voice is quite distinctive because he

     is a "cockney".      I recall other Officers were making calls from

i   the Range Rover which was used as a mobile communication centre

     to maintain radio contact with control and use was also made of

     its mobile phone to make telephone contact.



     27.   I met Alan Hopkins together we proceeded into the gymnasium,

     which was being used as a temporary mortuary.         There was    a

     shortage of body bags.



                                       11
28.    I was sent by Alan Hopkins to make a physical count of the

bodies which had been received by the Northern General Hospital

and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.



29.    I drove in an Escort motor car to the Norther General

Hospital and I remember arriving there at about 1700        because

there had been accident involving a Police motorcycle outside the

Hospital.    I met a Police woman inside the Hospital and was told

there had been 118 casualties,   11 of which were fatalities.       I

left the Northern General and drove to the Royal Hallamshire.       I

was told by staff that there had been 80 casualties and it was

thought there was one fatality although there was some confusion

and they told me there may in fact be two fatalities.         When I

arrived at the Royal Hallamshire I remember there were a lot of

people waiting     at the Hospital    to   accept   casualties    and

fatalities.     This is the procedure as laid down in the major

incident plan and there was obviously confusion about the bodies

 from the Hillsborough Football ground.



 30.    Whilst in the Hospital    I met a Police Inspector       from

 Sheffield and the General Manager of the Hospital David Baldwin

 who told me how many casualties the Hospital had and said that

 the Hospital was geared up and ready to accept the bodies.      David

 Baldwin's assistant, who was also present, told him that all the

 bodies were going to the Medico Legal Centre.      This confused me

 because my understanding is that the Medico Legal Centre can only
take 45 bodies and I left the hospital, returned to the car and

attempted to speak to radio control using channel 2.         I could not

speak to them, there was a problem with the radio and although I

was receiving transmissions 1 could not speak to them.



31.    I used the Vodaphone and spoke to A.C.M.A.O. - A. Smith.        I

informed him that I had made the physical             body   check   and

requested him to relay the information to Alan Hopkins.           I also

requested confirmation of the bodies which were going to the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital.        I reported the problem with the

radio to him and I made my return journey to Hillsborough.



32     At 1800 1 used the radio again in the Escort motor car and

made contact with control without difficulty.         I spoke to _____
           and reported that I had had difficulties with the radio,

which appeared to have abated.


33.    I arrived at Hillsborough and I was informed by David Jones

 that Alan Hopkins did not want to move the Range Rover as it was

 still being used as a communication centre as it had been during

 the afternoon.


 34.    The operations from the Range Rover had been moved to the

 rear of the gymnasium behind the North Stand.       This had been done

 before I left for Northern General and Royal Hallamshire.            The

 Range    Rover   was   being   used   to   pass   many   messages   and
particularly for people wanting to 1st their families know they

would not be returning home and they would be working or that

they had been delayed due to the incident at Hillsborough.



35.     David Jones then called a meeting of the staff and I recall

that all live casualties had been cleared from the ground before

1700.      Most of them had gone when I left the ground to carry

out the physical body count at the Hospitals.



36.     I think I arrived back at Hillsborough at about 1800 to

1830.


37.     On my return I went to the North Stand gymnasium and Alan

Hopkins briefed me about       the   situation   and procedure   for

transferring bodies to the Medico Legal Centre.



38.     Ambulances were to be sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

to collect the bodies which had been delivered there and they

were to be returned to the gymnasium for identification purposes.

 The bodies which had been sent to the Northern General were also

 to be collected and returned to the gymnasium.      The bodies were

 to be cleaned up, laid out, photographed and each body was to be

 accompanied by a Police Officer.     The bodies were laid out on one

 side of the gymnasium and the photographs were to be erected on

 the opposite side.     The relatives of the deceased were to be

 shown the photographs and if they recognised the photograph they
were      to   be   shown    the   body   for    the purposes   of    formally

identifying the deceased.           For the purpose of bringing the bodies

out from behind the screened off part of the gymnasium,                      the

ambulance service provided cots.


3   g#    All the ambulance vehicles were called into Penistone Road

gymnasium area and David Jones briefed the ambulance crews on the

procedure       for the removal of the bodies             following positive

identification and those crews which he selected for the duty

remained on stand by.


40.       I accompanied Alan Hopkins following the briefing of the

ambulance crews and we went back to the temporary mortuary and I

was appalled to see photographers in the gardens of the terraced

houses fronting Penistone Road and backing on to the gymnasium

trying to take photographs of the bodies being moved into the

temporary           mortuary.      Police       intervened    and    moved   the

photographers on.           The photographers were causing distress to all

    present.


    41.   I recall that it was probably around 2000 and the light was

    beginning to fade.        The police had not yet rigged up temporary

    lighting for the area to the east of the North Stand and I was

    asked to move the Range Rover               into   a position    to provide

    temporary lighting.         The Range Rover was moved and illuminated

    the area to the rear of the gym as requested by the Police.              This
was    to   assist and help the relatives who had to enter the

temporary      mo rtu ary   in    the   gy mna siu m   for   the   purpose   of

identifying the dead.        The Range Rover stayed in that position

for probably three quarters of an hour before the Police arrived

with their temporary lighting system.



42.    At about 2045    Alan Hopkins briefed me with the Coroner and

 I was instructed to stay and oversee the proceedings following

 identification of the deceased.           I stayed there with two crews

 whose names I cannot recall and one relief crew plus two Station

 Officers.


 43.    The pr ocedure      for moving the bodies was:               following

- identification, the body would be moved in a body bag to the back

 door of the gymnasium,          loaded into an ambulance and when there

 were three bodies in the ambulance that ambulance would leave to

 deposit the dead at the Medico Legal Centre.



 44.    I instructed                [to co-ordinate operations inside the

 gy mnasium    and   liaise with me outside the gymnasium and to

 organise the Police to co-ordinate the movement of the bodies

 from the gymnasium to the ambulances.                 I gave instructions to

             to contact control centre on the hour and every half

 hour to update control on progress.            I put Station Officer Eason

 in charge of loading the bodies and each body was recorded on a

  list and a number was attached to          that body by Eason, together
     with   the   deceased    name   and   the number of the Officer who

     accompanied the body and the number of the vehicle which moved

     it.


     45.    Two or three bodies were identified almost immediately

     following the establishment of this procedure and the operation

     continued throughout the night.         This was a traumatic experience

     for the staff and I organised staff welfare as best as I could in


•
     the circumstances.


     46.    All the bodies had been identified and moved from the

     gymnasium to the Medico legal centre by approximately 0525                 on

     16th April.     Following completion of that procedure the equipment

•:.«*•.*:«: ■<>£' the Ambulance service which was still present, at theascene: was.,

      loaded into Ambulances and a radio message was sent to control

      confirming the incident closed at 0530.



      47.   I had worked for some fourteen and one quarter hours on the

      major incident. Although I had been on call from 1700 on Friday

      the 14th.      I was not called out during Friday night or early

      Saturday morning and following the incident on Saturday afternoon

      through to Sunday morning I returned home, slept for a short

      while and returned to the Headquarters to check equipment, liaise

      with staff and deal with the press.




                                            17
    Signed
             ROGER MORLEY



    Dated this    \J—   day of June 1989




m




                                           18
