                                         JOHN HERVYN JONES



    nto the inquiry and which they have given to me.   I want
    /erybody to know I am most grateful to you, Hr. Jones,
    :id, of course, to your team members as well, but
    articularly to you.

       Now we are going to start, in fact with Mr. Jones.
B                 ' JOHN MERVYN JONES Sworn

                    Examined by THE C O R O N E R ;

Q    Yes, Officer? - A. Sir, I am John Mervyn Jones,
     Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.
     If it is helpful to you and to your Jury, sir, I would
     like to explain the role of the West Midlands Police in
     this investigation, the nature of the investigation
     which had led to the material which is before you today
     and in future days to come.

      Yes, please, if you would. - A. Also the progress of_
      the investigation overall.   Sir, on the 16th of April
      last year I was invited to head up the investigation on
D     behalf of Hr. Geoffrey Deare, the Chief Constable of
      the West Midlands.   This took place on the Sunday
      immediately after the tragedy the day before.   I
      formally took charge of the investigation on the 18th-
      of April in the afternoon and my first Officer arrived
      in Sheffield the following day.

      The responsibilities at that stage were two-fold.   One
E     was to service the needs of your goodself and, indeed,
      I did meet you on the Tuesday and you first gave
      instructions to me then and we followed those oh from
      that time, gathering evidence on your behalf.

      My other master at that time as well was Lord Justice
      Taylor who, as most people in this room know, followed
      on the oral hearings which commenced on the 15th of May
      and concluded in July, leading later to thepublication
      of his report at the beginning of August.

      An enormous amount of information was gathered in those
      early days and has continued since, although I would
      like to point out that the bulk of the information was
      gathered at the time of the public hearings.

        THE CORONER:   Can I interrupt you for one second?
      Jury, can you hear?   (Y e s )

      I am sorry to interrupt you in mid-statement. - A. The
      majority of the information was actually gathered in^
      the early days of the inquiry and, indeed, was supplied
      to Counsel servicing Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.    I
H                             - 34 -


                                                                 37
                                   JOHN MERVYN JONES


    would like it to be known to you, sir, that nothing new
    or significant has been found in our inquiries since
    the closing of those oral hearings in July of last
    year.

    Lord Justice Taylor published his report on the 4th of
    August and immediately after the Chief Constable of
    South Yorkshire wrote to the Director of Public
B   Prosecutions and invited the Director of Public
    Prosecutions to decide whether a criminal investigation
    should follow.   The DPP did respond and we formally
    took responsibility for the investigation into any
    alleged crime in September of last year.

    All those inquiries have continued since with my
    Officers, with a very large team at the beginning.
    Now a team something in the order of fifty-odd
    Officers.   You may well wonder why it is taking so
    long to conclude that investigation.    Well, the
    material we gathered for Lord Justice Taylor was
    enormous and to give you some feel of that, the
    situation at this moment, today, on the computer is
    that we have had contact with something in the order of
D   13,081 named persons.  We have deployed over 8,500
    Officer actions, as we call them.    Indeed, we have
    completed nearly 8,000 questionnaires.    That has
    actually led to nearly 4,000 people making statements-,
    many of whom have actually made more than one
    statement.   In fact there is something of the order of
    5,000 statements available.

E   In addition, we have something in the order of 5,000
    documents in our possession.

    Now all this wealth of information, sir, has been
    analysed in detailed.   Much of it has been processed
    on to a computer and over the months we have actually
    been working through that material, analysing it, in
    order to prepare the summaries which will be heard
    today and later and also to assemble the evidence for
    the Director of Public Prosecutions.

    Because of the bulk it has taken so long.  With regard
    to the criminal inquiry, I can advise you, sir, we have
    in fact submitted certain papers to the Director of
    Public Prosecutions in the last week or so and we are
    now awaiting his directions as far as further inquires
    to be followed.  We have not, sir, concluded the
    investigation at this time.  When precisely the
    criminal investigation will be concluded will depend on
    directions that the Director of Public Prosecutions
    will give.   It will also depend on the length of time
    the carrying out of those further investigations will
    take.
H                        - 35 -
                                 JOHN MERVYN JONES


Precisely when the decision will be announced by the
DPP is as yet unclear, sir.

As far as the overall investigation is concerned, this
has been an absolutely enormous task, from what you
say?   Of course, it is not just coronal activity you
have been involved in, but jeven if you look at just the
work that has been done for each individual case there
has been a considerable effort, is that right? - A.
That is right, sir.

Could. I just raise one matter about the clothing of the
deceased?    I made a decision on the Wednesday, the
19th of April of last year, to actually retain the
clothing a little bit longer in order for that clothing
to be listed, photographed and help us subsequently in
the identifications.    I know, sir, that that caused
distress amongst some families and I deeply regret that
but by way of explanation I would like to say that if
we had not taken that decision and did what we did with
it, we would not be in a position today and in the
following days to actually identify them.    So I would
like to apologise through you, sir, to the families
where distress was caused, but say there was good
reason.

Yes, thank you, I am sure that is accepted now,
although at the time I know it did cause a great deal
of anxiety.

  THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

  MR. FRASER:    No, sir.

  THE CORONER:   Shall I just w o r k m y way along.   Any
questions of Mr. Jones?   (No)

  Mr. Jones, I am most grateful to you, as I have
already said, for the effort which has been put into
this inquiry by the West Midlands Police, and, as far
as I am concerned, the coronal inquiry, but I do know,
of course, that you have worked very hard.

  THE WITNESS:    In leaving the box, sir, could I
mention that the Director of Public Prosecutions^has
actually charged me to bear in mind the restrictions,
the parameters..of the inquests?

  THE CORONER:   Yes, I am glad you have said that
because that reminds me, I have already indicated the
DPP's view but it is right, Mr. Jones, that...   You
have probably seen this letter but it is addressed to
me.   The substance of what the DPP has said is this,
that he is happy with the evidence relating to the

                       - 36 -
                                   JOHN MERVYN JONES


movements on the 15th of April, 1939, of those who
died, with evidence of identification and medical
evidence of the cause of death to be given at the
inquest, but he has said that any requests for evidence
exceeding this restriction should be refused:

That is right? - A. That is.correct.

I think I am right in saying that he is looking to you
in your capacity as the Officer dealing with the DPP
inquiry to try and safeguard his interests in that
respect? - A. That is correct, sir.

  THE CORONER:   I am, of course, very aware of that
requirement and as far as I am concerned the DPP has
nothing to fear.   Thank you, Mr. Jones.

  Inspector Layton.

                MICHAEL LAYTON Called

              Examined by THE C O R O N E R :

Inspec tor Lay ton , you have already taken the oath,   tha t
is right? - A. Yes, sir.

If you would just introduce yourself so we know who you
are?   Give us your full name and title. - A. Yes, sir.
Michael Layton, Detective Inspector with the West
Midlands Police.

Inspector Layton, you have prepared a statement for me
giving me an outline in particular of the work of the
video/photographic section which I will listen to in a
moment, but before we do that there are just two other
points on those plans.    Can you just walk back to the
plans?    I think if you look at the gymnasium.   I
think .you were actually pointing to the corner.   The
gymnasium is actually that big building? - A. Yes, that
was an error on my part.

  THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, can you look?
The gymnasium, the temporary mortuary and so on which
features as you will hear in a little while, is that
building up there.  OK?   It is not' diagonally across
but it is certainly not next to the terraces:

The other point I forgot to ask you, is that there were
actually four collection sites for people who had died.
Two were the hospitals which are not on that plan.
One was the gymnasium and there was an even more
temporary collection point near Leppings Lane, I
believe? - A. It was in this area here, sir.
