                                                                                 - 3 JAN 19
The Right Reverend David Sheppard
The Bishop of Liverpool
Church House
1 Hanover Street
Liverpool LI 3DW




Thank you very much for your letter of 10 December about the tragic events at
Hillsborough and the calls for a public enquiry.

In the House of Commons on 17 December, I gave an undertaking to consider carefully the
representations that have been made to reopen the public inquiry. I emphasised that I would
not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly: I would need to be convinced that it
would be in the public interest to do so.

I explained that in coining to a decision, I would consider whether there is any new evidence,
and if so, whether that evidence appeared to be of such significance that had it been put
before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the
verdict of the jury would have been different.

The television programme “Hillsborough” made a specific allegation that a video camera
trained on the central enclose was working when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was
not the case. It was further suggested that this film might have represented vital evidence.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed me that both the video tape and the
transcript of that tape were made available to the Taylor inquiry. This is a matter that I have
promised to look into. I have specifically asked that the South Yorkshire Police should
provide me with a copy of this videotape.

The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to provide me with a detailed
report of all the points raised by the*programme. I will consider his report carefully. I fully
understand that, as you say, the drama documentary has revived a great many feelings. I fear
that there may remain matters about which we will never be certain. In a tragedy of such a
magnitude, I feel that it is sadly inevitable, though deeply distressing for the families, that
there will be confusion about some aspects of what occurred. One factor which I must
consider is whether a further inquiry, if it were to take place, would be able to provide
greater certainty about what happened than we have at present.
I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as I have been able to
consider all those issues. Meanwhile I hope you will pass on to the people in Liverpool the
assurance that my thoughts will be with all the bereaved families during what I know must
be a particularly difficult time of the year for them.




                                 MICHAEL HOWARD
