           So u th Yorkshire

           POLICE                                       Ian Daines,       BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                              Assistant Chief Constable
           JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Ref: ACC /ID/NM H

8 August 1997



The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Room 528
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
S W 1H 9AT




Dear Sir

Hillsborough Scrutiny

On 23 July 1997 the Chief Constable, Mr Richard Wells, wrote to you (copy letter attached
for ease of reference).   On Page 2, Paragraph 4, he referred to a planned visit to
Hillsborough Stadium. Things were said during that visit which Mr Wells is keen that you
should know of (Mr Wells began a period of leave on 30 July 1997).

Mr Wells and I met Constable G R E E N W A Y and Inspector CALVERT at the stadium.
Constable Greenway fulfils a role as archivist and librarian for our Hillsborough material.
Inspector Calvert worked on a number of football matches before the disaster and was
involved in planning events.

Constable Greenway had prepared an album of photographs, taken at the time of the
disaster, which allowed Mr Wells and I to picture the stadium as it was then. W e walked
around the inside and outside of the ground and re-familiarised ourselves with what had
happened.

During this tour, Inspector Calvert said that officers, who had been on duty on the day of
the disaster, were instructed to write their own statements and to include anything that may
have been relevant. Inspector Calvert said that when these statements came back from
typing they had been altered in a manner that some officers had found unacceptable, but
they had nonetheless signed the statements.

Inspector Calvert said that officers were coached in evidence to give to Lord Taylor’s
enquiry but that practice ceased part way through the enquiry when it became apparent
that officers were unable or unwilling to adhere to an unacceptable version of the truth.



           Police Headquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                                        Direct Line: 0114 2523405
           Tel: 0114 2202020                                            Direct Fax: 0114 2523481
The Chief Constable and I were concerned at the implications of Inspector Calvert’s
comments. W e did not question him nor comment lest any such action be misconstrued.
At the conclusion of our visit, Mr Wells and I discussed what we had heard.

Mr Wells said that in the seven years he has been Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, he
has not previously heard such things, nor have I in my 12 months with South Yorkshire.
Nonetheless, we resolved to act upon Inspector Calvert’s comments.

Our store of Hillsborough Disaster material is held in the Discipline and Complaints
Department at Heeley Police office. The acting Head of that Department is Superintendent
Alan FO STER. Mr Wells and I discussed with Superintendent Foster the action to be
taken. Superintendent Foster said that he had been a member of the team of officers who
had worked on the enquiry that followed the disaster. Part of that team ’s role was to liaise
with the officers of W est Midlands Police and to facilitate their work. Superintendent Foster
recalled that officers on duty at the disaster were instructed to write their “recollections” and
to put down anything they felt, as well as what they believed to be true. He said that, on
legal advice, the recollections were then converted into statements of evidence. He was
unsure of the source of that advice as he was relying upon his memory of events some
eight years ago.

Superintendent Foster recollected that officers who were to give evidence to Lord Taylor’s
enquiry were prepared in the sense that they were briefed. Lord Taylor’s enquiry was
conducted differently to officers’ experiences of giving evidence in a criminal court. It was
an enquiry not a trial. The nature of giving evidence, and questions on that evidence, w ere
not as in a criminal case. The event itself was traumatic for many officers in a way that is
rare in criminal trials.

As discussed with Mr Wells and Superintendent Foster, I examined our archive of
Hillsborough Disaster material. The “recollections” of officers are systematically filed there.
Som e are handwritten. Some are typed in a manner that suggests to me that the officers
did the typing (spelling mistakes, poor type alignment, etc). All that was written in the
recollections was then typed into the HO LM ES computer. HOLMES (Home Office Large
Major Enquiry System) was launched in 1987 and the Hillsborough Disaster was one of the
first major uses of it in South Yorkshire.

The typed recollections have been annotated by indexers, police officers who identifying
salient points to be entered in the HO LM ES index. For instance, if Constable 123 SM ITH
refers to being on duty in serial 21 under the supervision of Sergeant 456 JONES, the
indexer would highlight “serial 2 1 ” and “Sergeant 456 JO N E S ” as cross references. Actions
would be raised to ensure that a statement was obtained from Sergeant 456 Jones and
other officers in serial 21.

Some of the typed recollections show pencil lines through some sentences.                 These
statements are in a box marked “Amended Statements”.

I examined a small number of randomly selected amended statements. One officer’s
statement contained a page of information about the writer’s feelings the following day
(shock, distress etc) and the reactions of his colleagues. That part of his statement was
deleted no doubt because it was not relevant to the causes of the disaster. Another
statement referred to the duties performed by Special Constables on the day of the
disaster. The officer expressed opinions to the effect that Special Constables should be
confined to traffic point duties. That part of his statement was deleted, no doubt because it
was opinion not evidence. One statement has a note attached which says that the officer
declined to delete parts of it.

Also in the archive is a letter dated 7 June 1989 from Mr Mervyn JONES, Assistant C hief
Constable, W est Midlands Police, to Mr David BRUMMELL, Treasury Solicitor.                Mr
Brummell was one of the team who assisted Lord Taylor in his enquiry. I attach a copy of
Mr Jones’ letter. The opening sentence is pertinent to this matter and I quote it in full;

       “You will recall that in the early stages, because o f the slowness of the supply of
       written recollections from South Yorkshire officers, it was agreed that we would take
       from them their initial submissions which would be later superseded by their signed
       final versions, after they had been checked by the appropriate legal advice”.

I attach a copy of Mr BrummeH’s reply, also dated 7 June 1989. Mr Brummell recognises
that “expressions of opinion were removed from the first versions”. He also says, “it would
not be appropriate to use the original statement for the purpose of the inquiry when this has
been superseded by a subsequent statement”.

The conclusion I draw from this is that the existence of the “recollections" was known to
Lord Taylor’s team and there was no aspect of suppressing evidence. It is a matter for
your Lordship to decide whether Inspector Calvert has “fresh evidence” to offer but my
opinion is that Inspector Calvert was not conversant with what happened and has
misunderstood a perfectly open and proper procedure.

I hold a similar view of Inspector Calvert’s statement that officers were coached in the
evidence to give. In chapter 18 of his interim report, Lord Taylor comments specifically on
the evidence of police officers (paragraphs 279 and 280). Lord Taylor said, "... I must
report that for the most part the quality o f their (police officers) evidence was in inverse
proportion to their rank ... the senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
witnesses ... neither their handling of problems on the day nor their account of it in
evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their rank.’’

As a police officer, it gives me no comfort to say that Lord Taylor clearly found some police
witnesses lacking. He was more than capable of determining the truth of what he heard
and had good lawyers to help him.

I think it naive of Inspector Calvert to confuse briefing with coaching. To even attempt to
manipulate witnesses, about to face such a rigorous process with so much hard evidence
(videos, photographs), would have been foolish as well as criminal.
In the spirit of openness that is the hallmark of Mr W ells’ style, he briefed Her Majesty’s
Inspector of Constabulary, Mr John S TE VE N S QPM, LLB, MPhil, CIMgt, on these
developments. I am sending this letter to him to bring him up to date.

The Chief Constable is determined that any report which even hints at new evidence
should be put before your Lordship and that such notifications should be made at the
earliest opportunity. For this reason I report these matters to you with only very limited
research. I am confident that additional research would shed further light on Inspector
Calvert’s comments. If you wish me to undertake that research, or to assist your staff in
that work, I will be glad to assist.

Yours faithfully




Ian Daines
Assistant Chief Constable

Encs
             S o u t h Yorkshi re

             POLICE                                                 Richard Wells <?mmfonnx coot
             JUSTICE                with     COURAGE
                                                                    Chief Constable




Rt H on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                     23 July 1997
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
R oom 528
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW 1H 9AT




THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: SCRUTINY OF M ATERIAL

Thank you very much indeed for your recent letter, which I received on 21 July, with its
helpful information and suggestion.

Its arrival coincided with the finalisation o f a letter which I had just written to you, stimulated
by your news release on 14 July.

I will take the opportunity, in this slightly amended letter, if I may, to deal with my original
points and your own.

I w as very interested to hear from the H ome Secretary that he had decided to place in your
hands the task o f reviewing material associated with the Hillsborough Disaster. Whatever
your final decision, you will be aware o f strongly polarised view s on the desirability o f a full
new public inquiry. The combination o f your judicial independence and your seniority within
the Court o f Appeal will be invaluable in underwriting the integrity o f the process o f scrutiny.

Reading your recent press release, I see that you have declared your intention to visit the
families in Merseyside, with their legal representatives.

I wonder if you would think it helpful if you w ere to visit other parties as well, not only for the
obvious advantage o f transparent even-handedness, but for very practical purposes, too.

For example, I would very much like to brief you personally on the stance which I have taken
towards the awful consequences o f the 1989 events, since arriving to take command o f the
Force in 1990. The very basis o f this stance is a frank acknowledgement o f the errors which
can be attributed to the South Yorkshire Police.

N eedless to say, I wouldn't dream o f canvassing you on the question o f the material to be
placed before you in the more formal part o f your scrutiny.



            Police H e a d q u a r t e r s
            S n i p Hill                                              Direct line: 0114 2523400
            S heffield S 3 8I.Y                                        Direct fax: 0114 2523481
            Tel: 01 14 2 7 6 8522 F ax: 0 1 1 4 2 5 2 3243           Switchboard: 0114 2202020
                                               2

It is my firm belief that all the evidence held by the South Yorkshire Police was made available
to earlier appropriate authorities with an interest in discerning the causes o f the disaster.
H owever, the publicity surrounding the H om e Secretary's latest decision has stimulated a
number o f approaches to our Force on different themes. Rather than making assumptions
about your interest or otherwise in these offers or enquiries, I have asked Assistant C h ief
Constable Ian Daines to forward them to your secretary, Mr Bone.

W e will, o f course, make available to you and to your secretarial support team any
documentation you need to pursue your scrutiny and which is under our control. The total
material which w e house is stored in a room som e 15 feet square. All four walls are full from
floor to ceiling with, in addition, a central column (allowing a barely reasonable amount o f
access) which also reaches from floor to ceiling. It probably amounts to around tw o tons in
weight. I describe it in this way only to give you som e impression, at a distance, o f its scale
and volume.

Ian Daines has already spoken to Mr Bone, offering him (and yourself, should you wish it)
ready access. I will be happy to meet your request for information about the nature o f these
documents by 4 August and will try to make it as digestible as possible.

On Saturday 26 July, a small number o f officers will be going to the Hillsborough Stadium to
re-familiarise ourselves, or in the case o f som e officers, to acquaint themselves for the first
time, with the reconfigured ground. Some features remain intact (particularly outside the
ground) following alterations pursuant to the late Lord C hief Justice Taylor's 1989
recommendations but others are, thankfully, very different.

I tell you this only so that you are aware o f our intentions and, if you were so minded, to
mention such a facility (willingly provided by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club) to the
M erseyside families when you meet them.

This is one o f the other "practical purposes" to which I referred earlier, should you
contemplate visiting other parties.

Whatever your decisions in these matters, you may be assured o f my fullest co-operation.




R ichard W e lls
J M ERVYN JO N E8 M Sc                                        FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                     Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                    Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                              Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 7 5 9 9
WEST M ID L A N D 8 POLICE HQ                                 S M IT H D O W N LANE POLICE STA TIO N
PO Box 52 , Lloyd House                                       Liverpool L7 3PR
Colmore Circus Queensway                                      Telephone: 0 5 1 -7 0 9 7 1 7 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                              Your Ref:
NECHELLS QREEIM POLICE 8TA T IO N
Fowler Street                                                 Our Ref:               JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2                               Date:                  7 June 1989




             D Brummell Esq
             Treasury Solicitor
             C/0 Town Hall
             Surrey Street
             Sheffield
             S1 2HH




             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

            You will recall in the early stages, because of the slowness of the
            supply of written recollections from South Yorkshire Police Officers, it
            was agreed that we would take from them their initial submissions which
            would be later superseded by their signed final versions, after they had
            been checked by their appropriate legal advice.  I personally made an
            undertaking with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police that only
            the final versions would be the ones used in the Public Inquiry and this
            was after discussion with you.

             I am concerned that yesterday an officer was referred to his initial
             submission which contained opinion that had subsequently been removed
             from his final account.   Given the undertaking I made to South Yorkshire
             Police I would hope that this would not happen  in the future because it
             was only on that understanding that we received their information as
             early as we did.

            I have formalised this in writing because this effects our personal
            integrity in the matter.  I have copied this letter to the Chief
            Constable of South Yorkshire Police for his information.




    PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                 Sheffield
                                                       TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
                                            TOWN HALL
                                            SHEFFIELD
                                            SI 2HH

                                            Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                            FAX       0742-736900

                                            7th June, 1989


J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., MSc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN.




                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

    Thank you for your letter of today's date, which we have already discussed.

    The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South
Yorkshire Police Officers' statements is that any expressions of opinion were
(as I understand it, on the advice of Mr. Woodward) removed from the final
version. As I understand it, Andrew Collins' view is that there is absolutely
no reason for excluding such expressions of opinion when they touch on matters
relevant to the Public Inquiry and that, in the circumstances, there is no
objection in principle to written statements containing such opinions being
submitted to the Inquiry.

    Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be
appropriate to use the original statement for the purposes of the Inquiry when
this has been superseded by a subsequent statement. However, what I understand
may have happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is
that the original unamended statement was circulated because of the need to
circulate statements to all parties as rruch in advance of the calling of the
relevant witnesses as possible and because at the time of circulation of the
relevant batch of witness statements the revised, final version of the
statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in total
there are three cases where this has been necessary: P.C.s Best, Huckstepp and
Illingworth. However, in such cases only the final, revised version of the
statement was given to the press.

    I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

    I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police, but am naturally happy for you to do so.




                            D. Bnjrnne.il
