                                                      H   ome   O   ffice
                                                     Q UEEN A NN E’S GATE
                                                     L O N DO N SWIH 9AT

                                                           MAY 1989




    Thank you for your letter of 19 April with a copy of the one sent

♦
    to Lord Justice Taylor about your concerns over First Aid
    provision.

    You will, I expect/ already be aware that two assessors have been
    appointed to assist Lord Justice Taylor in his Inquiry/ namely/
    Mr Brian Johnson (Chief Constable of Lancashire) and Professor
    Leonard Maunder (Professor of Mechanical Engineering/ University
    of Newcastle-upon-Tyne). However/ I would expect that the
    Inquiry will want to receive evidence from St John's whose
    contribution at football matches and elsewhere is recognised by
    everyone. Dr Herbert Ellis's letter of 18 April to Lord Justice
    Taylor will already have established contact with the Inquiry.   I
    am however sending a copy of your letter to me and of the reply
    to the Inquiry for their information.

    Dr Ellis's letter refers to the Popplewell Inquiry. That Inquiry
    specifically recommended that it should be a term of a safety
    certificate that an adequate First Aid Room should be provided.
    We made sure at the time that local authorities were made aware
    of and asked to consider that recommendation.




                               (TIM RENTON)

                                                                hcc: Miss Banniste
                                                                     Miss Nicholsc
                                                                     Mr Yates
                                                                     Mr Moriarty
                                                                     Mr Turney
                                                                     Mr Watts
                                                                     Mr Mould




    Robert Balchin Esq
Director-General: Robert Balchin M.Ed, FCP




                                                                      f] /

  ST. JOHN AMBULANCE                                      Training for Emergencies


1 Grosvenor Crescent London SW1X 7EP                         Telephone: 01-235 5231
                                                                   Fax:01-235 0796


                 Tim Renton Esq., MP
                 Minister of State,
                (Home Office)
                 House of Commons,                              k /M           7'



     £           London SW1                                    19th April 1989

                                                                Sir                 X
                 HILLSBROUGH ENQUIRY;
                                             u                          ^           If
                                                               iZl+fY tfy^
                 Please forgive this direct approach; ! even tried yesterday j
                 to get through to your private office                       lU v t .
                 You will see from the enclosed letter to Lord Justice Taylor ^
                 from the Chief Commander of our Brigade that we in          01          j,
                 St John Ambulance are concerned that our evidence will
                 not carry the weight that it should.

                 If there is the opportunity for one of us to serve on the
                 Committee of Enquiry, I would be very grateful indeed
                 if I or someone else from my organisation could be considere
                 We have some immensely experienced people at local levels,
                 including several doctors, who would, I know, be willing                A
                 to give evidence.  I believe that it is essential that
                 they are called.               *---- ------------- -


                  If you would be so kind as to consider our case and
                  to bring such influence to bear as you may think suitable,
                  I should be very grateful indeed.


                 With warm regards,




                  ROBERT BALCHIN
                  DIRECTOR-GENERAL
                  ST JOHN AMBULANCE
               THE ORDER OF ST. JOHN
                                 In service of mankind

Telephone: 01-235 5231   HEADQUARTERS - ST. JO H N AM BULANCE             Fax: 01-235 0796
                           1 Grosvenor Crescent • London SW1X 7EF

Chief Commander:
Dr Herbert Ellis, AFC                                                 18 April       1989

  The Rt. Hon. Lord Ju st ic e       Taylor
  Royal Courts of Justice,
  Strand.
  LONDON WC2A 2LL




                                   H I L L S BR OU GH ENQUIRY

      I am sure that you will be aware of the role played                    by St.
  John Am b u l a n c e at football matches.

       We had 26 adults and 9 cadets together with 2 am bul anc es on
  duty at H i l l s b r o u g h last Saturday, and you will und er st an d my
  admiration, tempered with concern at the way these men and women,
  some of them teenagers, set about helping those unf ort un at e
  vict im s of the horror that so s u dd enl y envelo ped them.

          We are concerned that our r e c o m m en da ti on s to the Popplewell
  En qu i r y carried so little weight, and for this reason I am taking
  the liberty of wr it i n g to you, to say that, if you should be
  i n v i t i n g others to join you in your Enquiry, St. John wo uld be
  ple as ed to provide a suitable person;              but in any case I must ask
  that we be allowed to ap pe ar before you with some urgent
  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s on First Aid requirements, for I fear that we are
  m o v i n g into an era when disasters, of one kind or another, are
  taking on 'mega' proportions, and are sadly, more than likely to
  be repeated.

          Sh o u l d you so invite us, I wo uld recommend that, to give
  evidence, a Senior Br igade Officer, together with one of our
  C o n s u l t a n t Surgeons, and a Se n i o r Nurse e x p e r ie nc ed in these
  m a t t e r s should appear before you.

           Y.


   Copy: The Director-General
