INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       T he Kt H on Lord Ju stic e Tayfcbr
STADIUM DISASTER
                                    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                    01-2732577/3602/2370

                                                          tvA

Nicholas Soames Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA
                                   Date
                                            19 May 1989



Dear Mr Soames

      you for your letter of 21 April 1989 to
Mr Moynihan enclosing one from your
constituent, Mr           \ which has been
passed to the Inquiry. Your correspondence
with Mr Moynihan has been shown to Lord Justice
Taylor.

                                Yours sincerely


                        n. iL (Wwss
                        n    R M WHALLEY
                        Secretary to the Inquiry
              From-. T h e P rivate S ec r eta r y



                                                      H   ome   O   ffice

                                                     queen   ANNE'S GATE
                                                     L O N D O N SWIH 9AT



                                               11 May 1989




  U   ca T




      As you know, your correspondence with Mr
Colin    Moynihan    about  a   letter    from    your
constituent, Mr                  about the proposed
national     membership    scheme     for     football
supporters, was copied to the Home Secretary.       He
has asked me to pass on this correspondence to Mr
Robert Whalley,     the Secretary to Lord Justice
Taylor's    inquiry   into the   tragic   events    at
Hillsborough,    who   can  be  contacted    at   this
address, in order that your constituent's points
may be taken into account by the inquiry team.




                                       (AMsJb
                            MISS C J BANNISTER




The Hon Macholas Soames, MP.
                                              department   of   the environm ent
                                              2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON    SW1P   3EB
                                                         01-276 3000
                                              My ref
                                                             M/PSO/14696/89
                                              Your ref


                                                           - 8 M*Y19*9
                                                                   C C          ^


    Thank you for your letter of 21 April enclosing this one from
    your constituent Mr                  .
                                        about  .
                                              the proposed national
    membership scheme for football supporters

    The working party I chaired which reviewed the principles of the
    scheme considered very carefully the question of processing
    crowds through the turnstiles.    There is a consensus amongst


f
    potential suppliers of the technology that some systems would
    enable supporters to be admitted with no more time at the
    turnstile than it presently takes to hand over tickets or money.
     owever,  I accept that the issue of last minute crowds,
    particularly at big games played in the evening, will need
    further consideration.

As you will know it is the Government's aim to Complete the
passage of the Football Spectators Bill through Parliament during
triy current session.    Everyone is appalled at the tragedy at
Hillsborough and it is right that there should be a pause in
proceedings on the Football Spectators Bill.       But there can
surely be no doubt that the need remains for action to be taken
now to combat the continuing scourge of football hooliganism. The
weekend immediately after the Hillsborough tragedy saw 24 arrests
at West Ham and 94 arrests at Chelsea reflecting behaviour which
for two decades has ruined the game as an entertainment for many
       y C.ally endangered law abiding supporters.   Introduction
of the national membership scheme will provide for the first time
     ffective means of keeping the troublemaker away from matches
and of breaking the link between football and hooliganism.

Yotv  will    be    aware   that  Douglas    Hurd  has   appointed
Lord Justice Taylor to undertake a judicial inquiry into the
events at the ground on 15 April.    The Football Spectators Bill,
therefore, may also provide a legislative vehicle to implement
any relevant recommendation Lord Justice Taylor might make in an
 n erim report.    Moreover, as the Bill provides a framework for
the membership scheme the football authorities will be able to
take account of relevant points in the final report of Lord
       S In(JuirY when drawing up the details of how the scheme
should operate.
                                             /"
As Mr _________ letter raises a number (of points about safety of
sports grounds which might be relevant Vto Lord Taylor> Inquiry,
I am copying the correspondence to Douglas Hurd.       /
                  ‘y — .j* v 'J * * *   «vs

            CLu
                                                           COLIN MOYNlH&N*
The Hon Nicholas Soames MP
      THE HON. N IC H O L A S S O A M ES , M.P.



                                        HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                          LONDON SW1A OAA
                                  21st April 1989.




Dear Mr. Moynihan,

         M r . Soames  has  asked me  to
send you the enclosed letter he has
received     from  his  constituent, Mr.
          about the Football Spectators
Bill.  Mr. Soames would be most grateful
for your comments.

        Yours sincerely,




        Private Secretary



The Hon. Colin Moynihan MP
Minister of State
Department of the Environment
Marshaxn Street
London SW1.
