 s f>             4 ^ - v V                                                             ', l / 0
             H       i   v       f          O    e    o      TIa] ^
               ^ __          %                               V                      ■
                                                                                    “
  /o M . J wok c l (JVixcrV-                                                  O ^koy

 l^> y o u                       rr^                                     u jia jj



 't U         IX t                                          *£auA c|      iT u ^ fo r ir


 ^ V x )\A ^                     £ td -c ^ l          O tU j          Q jo u k '    * -H ^


  ^ 0 \A


 H i                      IJ                         u i^        (^   Kj o/' ,ti^       <~

io U a J                                C/'^ -        cCc»r>>              ‘i’U .

f c * W              r t ^ - g              i.                                "

<J^> \joW         KJ^anK-> C K AAOAC f v i p ^ l c

j*               p -U a              / lw        ^           H J          .



 \(       (^ v b v k      I-

      X                  W <2^A 2 . £.1 ekouJ-* kcvz cJz&
  t/vCixAjClficl   c-                h> * i\x        H \A h j6o s o \j L

j) ( j o o / t A        P c ' L -j     f h   b   o   r )   f \% y c S




                                                                ?   /   cl
From: Peter Edmundson                                          cc Mr Michael
      Operational Policing                                        Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                                                 Mr Howarth
      Room 527, QAG                                               Permanent Secretary
      ® 273 - 2621                                                Mr Boys Smith
      3 December, 1997                                            Mr Middleton LAB
                                                                  Mr Pugh
                                                                  Mr Clifford ABCU
                                                                  Mr Granatt CD
                                                                  Mr Bailey
                                                                  Mr Warner
                                                                  Mr Owen

Home Secretary
                                                                                     :IVI=D i
                                                                                „ IS '7 ’7'1
                                                                                0 3 DEC 1997
HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                                                                          fHOMESECRETAR
Issue

You asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for his advice on the issues raised by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police. The Judge has now written back to you and, in the light of his
advice, you can reply to the earlier correspondence.

Timing

2.     Urgent. The Judge has indicated that he would like any final submissions to
his scrutiny to be made by Friday 5 December.

Summary

3.     Mr Pugh’s submission of 20 November explained the issues raised by the
Family Support Group. The Group asked you to extend the timetable for Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny because of the delays which the relatives alleged they were
experiencing in obtaining documents from South Yorkshire Police. The Group also
asked that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith should take possession of the police’s archive to
safeguard its integrity. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire,
vehemently denies the allegations and inferences made by the Group.

4.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has confirmed that he has not encountered any
difficulties with access to the information held by South Yorkshire and that there has
been no cause for concern as to the integrity of the police’s archive. He also indicates
that he expects to keep to his original timetable to report to you by the end of the year.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
Recommendation

5.     That you write to the Family Support Group indicating that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith does not intend to prolong the scrutiny or to require the transfer of the
archive from South Yorkshire Police. You should also write to Richard Wells in
similar terms.

Consideration

Access to information

6.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s reply to your request for advice is attached at
annex A. He indicates that South Yorkshire Police have co-operated throughout his
scrutiny and he refutes any suggestion that his scrutiny may have been obstructed by
the South Yorkshire Police. He states that the scrutiny has not had any difficulties
with access to information held by the force and that, in his view, the police have done
all they can to ensure the families and the Family Support Group received the
information they sought.

7.      During his visit to Liverpool a number of families complained to the Judge
either that they had not been given their relative’s body file or that they thought it was
incomplete. The Judge says that he asked them to request the file immediately from
the police or to let him have details of what they had so that he could check it against
the archive. Most did not contact him and in the two cases that he was asked to
pursue, nothing of significance had been left out. The Judge also notes that medical
records do not exist for most of the victims because they were not admitted to
hospital. Those medical records which do exist are held by the hospitals, not the
police, and can be released to properly authorised persons.

Integrity of the South Yorkshire Police archive

8.      The Judge says that he would have removed the archive of material from
South Yorkshire if there had been any question mark over its integrity there, but this
was not the case. He also points out that it would have been a formidable logistical
task to remove all the material to London and the scrutiny would then have been
responsible for dealing with the families’ requests for information, distracting it from
the main task.

Timetable for completion of the scrutiny

9.     No timetable was imposed on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for completion of his
scrutiny, but his letter re-iterates his intention to complete his report within the
timescale we originally envisaged, i.e. by the end of the year. He has written to the
Family Support Group and other interested parties to ask that any further material
which they wish to submit is forwarded to him by 5 December.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
10.      The Judge has responded positively to your invitation to discuss issues
relating to the publication of evidence to the scrutiny and I understand that your
offices are in touch about a convenient date.

Terms of reference

11.    Trevor Hicks has also written to you about the scrutiny’s terms of reference,
which he promised to do in his earlier letter. We suggest that you simply acknowledge
receipt of his further letter. We will forward advice as soon as possible.

12.    We have also received a letter (at Annex B) from the Clerk to the Liverpool
City Council Hillsborough Disaster Working Group in support of the Family Support
Group’s representations about the scrutiny. You may wish to reply personally or
arrange a P/S reply rather than a reply from officials. A draft is enclosed.


Hand!ing/presentational issues

13.    No further issues at this stage.



                                              Peter Edmundson




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0400.doc
          THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTIN
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT X
          Direct Line 0171273 2512 Fax 2007 /


The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP     f ]                              Your reference:
Home Secretary                V
Queen Anne’s Gate                                             Our reference:

                               f\<                            Date:              November 1997
                                                             ll it-


                                                                                REC§ ^ D 8 V -
                                                                      1            2 4(10 V 1997
                                                                                H0»E SECRETARY
Thank you for your letter of 24 November about the correspondence you have had from the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. I have as
you say seen copies of their letters.

I said soon after my appointment in the summer that I expected to be able to let you have my
report by the end of this year. My work on the scrutiny is well advanced and I believe that I
will be able to keep to this timetable. I am writing to the Family Support Group and other
interested parties to tell them this and to say that it would help me if they could let me have
any further material which they wish to present to me by Friday 5 December.

I have not experienced any difficulty with access to the information held by South Yorkshire
police. They have co-operated with my scrutiny throughout. I have as you say decided to
let this material remain in police custody in Sheffield rather than transport it to London.
Bringing it here would have created formidable logistical difficulties. It would also have
meant that it was the scrutiny, rather than South Yorkshire police, who would have had to
respond to requests from the families and others for information from the archive. That
would have seriously hampered me and my staff in the task which you have given us to do.

Nevertheless if I thought there was any question as to the continuing integrity of this material
I would have ensured that it was removed from South Yorkshire police custody. But I do not
think that.

Although this is not strictly speaking a matter for me I have also formed the view that the
police are doing all they can to ensure that the families and their support group receive the
information which they ask for. These requests are onerous but I have seen no sign that the
police are obstructing them.

When I was in Liverpool from 6 to 8 October a number of the families whom I met told me
that they did not have a copy o f their relatives’ ‘body file’ from the police. I recommended
that they should ask the police for it straight away. Other people told me that they suspected
that the ‘body file’ material which the police had sent them was incomplete. I asked them to
let me know what they had so that I could check, but in most cases they have not done so. In
the two cases where I have been able to check the material which a family has against the
actual body file I have found nothing of significance missing.

Mr Hicks’s letter mentions the medical records of the people who died at Hillsborough.
These detail the treatment they received in hospital. Most of those who died did not go to
hospital and have no such medical record, but for those who did their medical record is held
by the hospital, not by the police. It is not part of the ‘body file’ (unlike the post-mortem or
autopsy report, which is part of the body file and which families who asked for this will have
seen).

Hospitals will release copies of the medical records of a person who has died to a properly
authorised personal representative, including of course a solicitor such as the solicitor who
acts for the Family Support Group. I have to say that I am slightly surprised that the Group
now say that they are denied access to them. I have as Mr Hicks says looked at the hospital
medical record of Philip Hammond, who died in the disaster. It is a one-page document
which contains no useful information at all.

Finally, I agree that it would be helpful for us to meet to discuss the publication of the
material which has been put to me during my scrutiny and I look forward to that.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
                              The City of Liverpool

                               Per s o n n el & A d m in is tra tio n Dir ec to rate
                              Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                              Solicitor to the Council
                              PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                              Tel: 0151-225 24&4 Fax:0151-225 2427



                                                                        Colin Moneypenny




R t . Hon Jack Straw
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                                                       Nove


Dear

Hillsborough Scrutiny
You will be a w a r e from our ^©srEt5tTgp!^orrespondence, when I
expressed the welcome of Liverpool City Council to your decision
to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake a Scrutiny of •
evidence related to the Hillsborough Disaster, that the City
Council, through its Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, h a s _
continuously and unanimously^ supported the.,.Hillsb.oro.ugh families
throughout'tfieir' eight year quest for justice.

I have now been requested by a recent meeting of the Working Party
to write to you again to express the full support of this Council
for the comments contained in the letter to you, dated 9th
November, 1997, from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group. The Council considers that in particular you
should give serious consideration to responding positively to the
requests made in that letter for you to extend the timescale of
the Scrutiny to ensure that all the concerns of the families are
properly and fully investigated and for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
to be allowed to take possession and control of all the
documentation and evidence to ensure their integrity and their
disclosure to all parties.

In endorsing the above requests, the City Council feels that for
you to act upon them would be entirely consistent with the
comments made by you on 3 0th June stating that you were determined
to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that ■
you did not reach a conclusion without a full and independent
examination of the evidence. The Council, as I have said, did
support the announcement of the Scrutiny and was particularly re ­
assured by your comments, even though its own position at that
time, was that sufficient reasons and sufficient cause for concern
had already been demonstrated to justify the establishment of a
new Inquiry into the Disaster.




                    Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                  Administration & Commercial Services; Human Resource Service;
        Information Technology Services; Law & Committee Services; Legal Services Agency;
                              Public Relations & Information Service.
You should be aware that Liverpool, City Council has now expressed
extreme dissatisfaction With"the"entire Scrutiny process. There is
a specific concern, I understand being expressed to you by the
Family Support Group, which is aga i n■shared by this Council, that
its terms of reference are so narrow that they prevent the
assessment of all the evidence which the families believe, in the
interests of justice, need to be assessed.

Furthermore I have been requested also to place on record the
extreme concern of this Council that the appalling remarks made by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - a reference to Liverpool fans arriving
late for which he subsequently apologised - prior to his meeting
with families on October 6th, do appear to indicate a severe lack
not only of judgement but more importantly of the impartiality
which should be the most crucial attribute necessary for ensuring
the independence of the judicial assessment he was appointed to
make.

While the City Council will await the outcome of the investigation
with great interest, there is no doubt there is a widespread
feeling, certainly amongst the Members of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party but also throughout the wider Merseyside
community, that the offensive comments made by Mr. Stuart-Smith at
the Albert Dock, indicating at least some pre-judgement of the
issues, may well have demonstrated that, in addition to the other
difficulties discussed above, he personally is not able to provide
the balanced and fully independent assessment of the evidence to
which the Hillsborough families after all these years are surely
entitled.

I would be most grateful if you would be able to take on board all
of the above comments in considering your response to the letter
from Mr. Hicks and in determining the future progress of the
Scrutiny.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Committee Clerk to the^Tfillsborough
Disaster Working Party.
10 II          (I(1 .10 l-'.\\                             TREVOR HICKS


          >0RO{/g

          J*                                                                                                             PU
 *■*1 ifv

          ~
         sup?®*
               ,    i                                                                                  ^ SUppO^
                                 H illsborough Fam ily Support G roup
                                                 cc                   S ic
                                                       M''
         Rt. Hon Jack Straw MP
         Home Secretary                                               Sec-               ^ \r
         Home Office
         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
         London
         SW lii 9AT
                                                                                               9* November 1997
                                                                                             BY FAX AND POST
                                            \AvTkfc—                                                     I^CpCv^           Iw "
         Dear Mr Straw,
                                             s n v ^ iw e .       p ^ f A A t . . "T^»    ''l i e   C e v f i^ ( e ^     b»l * « W w
         r e : Hillsborough Scrutiny 4 W                      ~                     UTV\U H          U

         It is with deep regret that we feel we have no alternative but to write to you to seek your                          AO
         intervention in the timetable for the scrutiny. Since your announcement of the scrutiny on the                         A
         30* June the problems of slow or non-disclosure of information by South Yorkshire Police
         and others have continued unabated.. It is of such scale and regularity as to render any
         arguments of mistake, oversight or pressure of work totally untenable. We believe it is a
         deliberate tactic to disadvantage the families and is clearly a cynical attempt to influence the
         outcome of the scrutiny.

         We have already made direct representation and ensured the problems were known to Lord
         Justice Stuart Smith’s team / the Home Office but despite small temporary improvements, all
         our attempts to gather information vital to proper presentation o f our case are being thwarted.

         You will recall from our meeting at the Commons that families expressed concern that custody
         (and apparently control!!) of the evidence /documents should remain with South Yorkshire
         Police when clearly their role in and after the disaster is central to the scrutiny.
         Rather than the spirit of “openness” so vigorously espoused by New Labour the continuation
         ol lhe problems of the last eight and a half years is realising our worst fears.

         They appear to have absolute power to determine what we see and when, if ever, we see it.
         It cannot be right, fair or just that they have the scope to manipulate the proceedings by denial
         or delay of information.

         l-.xaniplcs of the problems we are encountering are:-

          I * As laic    as the 6 th November we received four important photographs - they were requested
         o \ c r three    months ago!!!

                                                  VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRETARY                             TREASURER
( IIAIRM \'■
i tick                                            R ll.un nil                                           Mrs. J.Traynor
                                                  TREVOR HICKS




2)Several families are still waiting to receive all or parts o f their loved ones “bodyfiles”

3)On the 24th September our solicitor was denied access to medical records despite having
written authority from the relatives concerned. Access is still being denied!!

4)Medical records of the late Phillip Hammond have apparently been made available to Lord
Stuart Smith when the Hammonds have always been told such records did not exist.

The initial “deadline” for submissions was 1st September but this had to be relaxed when it
became clcar that South Yorkshire Police did not begin to comply with requests for
information until late August. The HFSG made preliminary submissions mid-September and
lodged others on the 25* September. Both of those documents made it clear that our efforts
were being hampered by the painfully slow information release by South Yorkshire Police.

Clearly if the scrutiny attempts to report “at the turn of the year” foil consideration of newly
disclosed evidence cannot take place and hence it could not form part of any deliberation or
conclusion.

It is our belief that Lord Justice Stuart Smith should take possession and control of all the
documents/evidence to safeguard their integrity and ensure proper and timely disclosure to all
parties. Surely, no one can have greater claim to the truth than the families of the deceased.

We further submit that it is now imperative that you extend the timescale for submissions and
their proper consideration by the Judge if the scrutiny is to be accepted by the families and the
public as fair and exhaustive.

 All of us want this matter concluded, but having waited for so many years the families implore
 you to introduce a one or two month extension to the timescale to ensure all our concerns can
 be properly investigated and “scrutinised”. It is the families view that this is our last chance
 for justicc to be done and clearly it must be “seen to be done properly” if faith in the judicial
 process is to be regained by the many thousands of voters who wrote to you, attended the
 justice concert, and wrote/telephoned the media in support of our cause.

 We shall be writing under separate confidential cover regarding deep concerns relating to the
 Terms o f Reference you have set down for Lord Justice Stuart Smith and these may also give
 rise for revision of the scrutiny programme.

 Yours sincerely,



 Trevor 1Ticks
 Chairman. - TIFSG
                                                                                                       ofs\       5YK'X
              S o u th Yorkshire

              POLICE                                                     Richard Wells (JPAf,MA(Qxnn), CIMgt.
              JUSTICE       with     COURAGE                             C hief Constable


J Straw Esq MP                       M,
                                     /A   T U ji                                               12 November 1997
Secretary of State
Home Office                           ^JU /vcZ             c                      Cc ' K / R i G L cxX
50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                                    ¥ is/^ iy \jL A f J< C /rkzs^A
London SW1H 9ATtC                                                    ,
                                                                                         kA\T          f 'J'M A *K    I
                                                                                        jlA/ ^
                                                                                        Ka /
HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                  8       / (
                                                                                        AAX" 0 LrO \
I am incensed that I should have to respond to a letter signed by Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group to yourself, which I have received courtesy of the Liverpool
Echo News Desk. I do not believe that such correspondence should be conducted via the media.

We have bent over backwards to co-operate with the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the
release of information to them. As you know, we are constrained by Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules
1984 and by aspects of confidentiality so far as statements are concerned which do not fall within
Rule 57. These constraints are particularly noticeable when we correspond with the author of a
statement who seeks release of documentation to the Hillsborough Family Support Group or to
other families. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is fully aware of our policy. We have also been at pains to
be completely open with the Scrutiny Team, promptly supplying any documentation requested.

The letter writer is being disingenuous in suggesting that it is the fault of South Yorkshire Police
that the Hillsborough Family Support Group and individual families cannot meet the time scales for
submissions to the Scrutiny. If the Group wish more time to make their submissions, of course it is
a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in consultation with yourself. Certainly South Yorkshire
Police would not resist that proposition but we strongly object when the reason for the extension is
laid at our feet.

Neither would I object to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's taking custody and control of the Hillsborough
evidence and documents. I have made this perfectly clear to the Judge. The volume of the archive,
however, the time for its transportation and the fact that the Judge is unlikely to be able to afford
dedicated staff to access the material, will combine to make delivery of information from the
archives take more time than at present rather than less.

Moving now to the four examples used by Trevor Hicks to highlight the problems encountered

1.     The writer of the letter - dishonestly in my view - makes no mention of the fact that four
       important photographs received by the Group on 6 November 1997 were also accompanied
       by two that had been requested as late as 27 October 1997. Furthermore, within seven
       working days of the original request, the Group's Solicitor had been supplied with laser
       copies of three of the photographs and an original photographic copy of one of them. At this
       time it was made clear that there would be a delay in providing photographic copies, though
       we had acted in good faith in providing the best copy versions of the photographs available
       at the time.
               Police Headquarters
                                                                              Direct line: 0114 2523400
               Snig Hill                                                       Direct fax: 0114 2523481
               Sheffield S3 8LY                                              Switchboard: 0114 2202020
              ■Tel: 0111 276 8523 Fax: 0114 252 3243
•> <•i

u
1      As to the allegation that families are still waiting to receive all or part of their relatives' body
       files - this is simply wrong. No family is waiting to receive all or part of body files. A body
       file is a complex bundle of documents varying from 30 to 100 pages, depending on the
       amount of evidence gathered, made more complex by the presence of photographs and
       ANACAPA analytical charts. Two families are waiting for actual photographs from the
       body file as opposed to the laser copies we originally sent. You should know that, within the
       last two weeks we have received no fewer than eighteen word-processed, identically worded
       requests from different families, who in the main have had no previous contact with South
       Yorkshire Police^o supply a copy of their deceased's body file to the solicitor acting fo r the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group. This figure represents 72% of the requests previously
       received during the period from April 1992 to the end of September 1997. Staff are
       presently processing these requests and the majority will be dealt with this week. If I
       indicate that some of these stereotyped requests have earlier names crossed out and new
       names written in, you will appreciate our doubts about the motives behind the demands (a
       sample is attached for your interest).

3.     Without the courtesy of further information I am unable to comment on access to medical
       records being denied to the Hillsborough Family Support Group solicitor.

4.     Again we are not sure precisely which medical records the Hammonds have been told did not
       exist yet which have been made available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. I can be certain
       however, that Mr Hammond has been supplied with all the statements from his late son
       Philip's body file, including the autopsy report supplied as long ago as 8 May 1992, which
       have been supplied to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Any purported failure to supply records
       would be patently 'out of synch' with all we have done so far.

South Yorkshire Police and its officers are as interested in the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith's Scrutiny as the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and look forward to its conclusion. We
have no wish to leave any room for doubt to be cast in future, which is why we have put so much
effort, despite some inevitable legal constraints, into providing material when we have been asked
for it.

Though Trevor Hicks has lent his name to the letter, I would be surprised if Ann Adlington were not
the author of it. It has all the hallmarks, ironically, of the delay and prevarication attributed to the
South Yorkshire Police. This is at its most obvious in the final paragraph where, at least four
months into the process of the Scrutiny, they seek to challenge its early announced terms of
reference. My feeling is that this is simply because the existing framework is unlikely to have yielded
the 'successes' of which they had built up expectations. Though the butt of allegations of 'dirty
tricks' emerging from some quarters close to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, may I
reiterate my complete commitment to openness - even if it should be to the detriment of our Force -
and to the repeated expression of my sorrow at the awful consequences of 15 April 1989. Nothing
will ever change those two aspects of my life or my relationship with the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.




                                         ““Tlichard Wells

Enc.

cc. Paul Pugh, Scrutiny Office, H.O.
Liverpool L14




22 October 1997


PC Greenway
South Yorkshire Police
Discipline and Complaints Dept
Windsor Road
Sheffield S8 8UB

Dear Sir

Would you please release the body file of my brother,'tiralin Bell, who died at Hillsborough to
the Group’s solicitor, Ann Adlington, Hillsborough Family Support Group, Pioneer Building,
65-67 Dale Street, Liverpool L2 2NS.

Thank you for your assistance in this matter.


Yours faithfully
