       SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE
         RELATING TO THE
 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM
             DISASTER




                          BY
          THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




Cm 3878
      SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE
         RELATING TO THE
 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM
            DISASTER




          Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                 by Command of Her Majesty
                                          February 1998




Cm 3878                                                                               £22
                                   CONTENTS
                                                                   Pages
Introduction                                                          V

Chapter 1      The background                                          1

Chapter 2      Video evidence about the disaster                     15

Chapter 3      The aftermath of the disaster                         39

Chapter 4      Alleged improper interference with witnesses          63

Chapter 5      Other matters of concern to the victims’ families     85

Chapter 6      Miscellaneous                                         95

Chapter 7      Summary                                               103


Appendix 1     People who helped in the scrutiny                     109

Appendix 2     Map and photographs                                   113

Appendix 3     Evidence of Roger Houldsworth                         117

Appendix 4     Analysis of police CCTV tapes                         161

Appendix 5     Evidence of Dr Edward Walker~:                        169

Appendix 6     Statement by David Frost                              199

Appendix 7     Alterations to police statements                      205

Appendix 8     Correspondence about amendments to statements         211

Appendix 9     Some individual cases                                 215

Appendix 10    Ten ’unresolved’ questions?                           217.




                                                      :z ,

                                                                            l,


                                          111
The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State for the Home Department


                       SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE
                         RELATING TO THE
                  HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM
                            DISASTER


                                        REPORT


Introduction

1. On 15 April 1989 an FA Cup semi-final soccer match between Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest was to take place at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, the home of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Play was stopped after six minutes when it became
apparent that Liverpool spectators on the standing terrace behind one of the goals had
been seriously crushed. Ninety-five people died and over 400 required hospital
treatment. A ninety-sixth victim died in 1993.


2. This tragic incident--in terms of deaths the worst in the history of British
sport--occasioned a series of investigations and other proceedings. Lord Justice Taylor
conducted a public inquiry, for which the West Midlands Police, acting as an
independent investigating force, collected a massive amount of evidence. The Director
of Public Prosecutions considered laying serious criminal charges against police officers
and others. The Police Complaints Authority considered complaints which had been
laid against the chief officer of the force and against other police "on duty at the ground.
There were Coroner’s inquests, whose conduct was itself later considered by the
Divisional Court.


3. On 30 June 1997 you appointed me to conduct a scrutiny into whether there is
any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures and
decisions that have been taken. My terms of reference are as follows:

To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;
  (a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or
  (b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the purpose of
      discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or .~
   (c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation
                                                          -<
                                                                  to police disciplinary
        matters;
and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to
their attention any evidence not previously considered by them which may be
relevan{’to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest.


4. I now submit my report.

5. My report is divided into seven chapters, with Appendices. Chapter 1 sets out
the background to the Hillsborough disaster and the sequence of events since.
Chapter 2 deals with allegations about video evidence relating to the disaster.
Chapter 3 discusses allegations about the inquest and the rescue operation
following the disaster. Chapter 4 is about suggestions that improper pressure has
been put on witnesses to the disaster. Chapters 5 and 6 deal with issues that have
been put to me by the relatives of victims and some other miscellaneous points.
Chapter 7 summarises my findings.

6. I should like to record my sincere thanks to my Secretary Chris Bone and my
Clerk Graham Catherall who have greatly assisted me throughout my scrutiny. I
should also like to thank Mike Ward who has also helped me from time to time.




                                     vi
           CHAPTER 1

           THE BACKGROUND

           The sequence of events since the disastei

           1. It will be helpful first to set out the broad sequence of inquiries and investigations
           following the disaster. Two days afterwards, on 17 April 1989, the then Home Secretary
           appointed Lord Justice TaylOr (as he th--e~ was and whom I shall refer to as Lord Taylor)
     i
i!
           to conduct an inquiry. On 24 April, West Midlands Police were instructed to investigate
           the disaster for the purpose of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

          2. Lord Taylor’s Inquiry held public sessions between 15 May and 29 June 1989. 174
          witnesses gave evidence and much other material in the form of statements and video
          evidence was made available to the Inquiry. On 4 August, Lord Taylor’s interim report
          was published. He concluded that "the main reason for the disaster was the failure of
          police control" (interim report, para 278).

          3. On 18 April 1990, Dr Popper, the Coroner for South Yorkshire began the first of 95
          m~ini-inquca:s to decade the statutory questions as to who each of the deceased-~as an--ffd
          when and where he or she died. He did not deal at that stage with the remaining
          statutory question of how each victim died, since that could not be answered pending
          the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) as to whether or not any
          prosecutions should be brought against any of those involved.

          4. On 11 July 1990 the Police Complaints Authority (PCA) directed that disciplinary
          c ah--~ges of neglect of duty be preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
          Superintendent Murray. Mr Duckenfield had been in overall control of the police
          operation for the semi-final at Hillsborough, and Mr Murray was in control of
          operations in the ground.

           5. Both officers had been in the police control box with good views of the part of the
          ~d wheret_he tragedy o_ccurred. In ~ 1990 Mr Duckenfield retired on
           grounds of ill-health. Since disciplinary charges can only be pursued against serving
         -police ottlce-~, this meant that the complaint against him had to be-dropped. The PCA
           subse~ce "                   rsue the charge against Mr Murray on the
           ground that it would be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge against one
           officer only.

          6. In the autum f@!~!)ABeDPP announced that there would be no prosecutions. On
          19 November the Inquests were resumed at Sheffield. The-seproceedings are often

     I    referred to as the "main" or "generic" Inquest, since they were concerned with the
          question common to all the (then) 95 deceased of how they came to their deaths.
    7. Around 200 witnesses gave evidence at these resumed Inquests, including 56 who
    had done so before Lord Taylor. On 28 March 1991, the jury returned verdicts of
    accidental death in all 95 cases~ by majorities of 9 to 2.

    8. In April 1992, a Memorial was presented to the Attorney-General inviting him to
    exercise his powers under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 asking him to apply for
    new inquests on the basis of evidence that had come to light since the original Inquests.
    In August of that year the Attorney-General announced that he had declined to do so.

    9. On 6 April 1993, six families who had lost relations at Hillsborough were granted
    leave to move for judicial review to quash the verdict of the Inquest and seek a fresh
    inquest. On 5 November 1993 the Divisional Court dismissed their application.

    10. Civil claims for compensation have been made throughout the period since the
    disaster. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has not contested liability for these
    claims, though he has sought contribution from other parties. Paragraph 65 of this
    chapter gives details in relation to the claims which have been settled.

    11. On 5 December 1996, Granada Television broadcast a programme entitled
    "Hillsborough". The programme presented an emotive and powerful picture of the
    plight of the bereaved immediately following and in the aftermath of the tragedy. It also
    suggested that there was fresh evidence which had not previously been considered
    which called into question the verdict at the Inquests and perhaps also some other
    decisions.

    The scrutiny


    12. Since my appointment to conduct this scrutiny in June, I have had evidence either
    in writing or in person from a wide variety of people. There is a full list of those from
    whom I have taken evidence in person, or otherwise ~ix_l_Aswell ....
    as the people listed there I have had about 30 letters ~~~
    the public.
,


    13. I have read the evidence given at Lord Taylor’s Inqui~t
    the Inquest. I have examined m~les" which contain "reformation about
    individuals who died and considered other material, the nature of which will be
    apparent from my report. I visited Hillsborough Football Stadium on 24 September.




                                               2
           14. I have in particular had written submissions from Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr
           Julian Knowles, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which represents
         ~many of the families of those who died. I discussed these with Cou~
          ’~accompanied by the Chairman and vice-Chairman of the Group, in late September. I
         then visited Liverpool, where I met all those families personally who wished to see me. I
         ~ppreciate the thoughtful and constructibe way in which~the family members whom I
             et on that occasion, and since, have put their points to me.
          p
          15. Since my visit to Liverpool, I hue hadm e_eetings__~_ith a_p_u_mber_gf other people
          who expressed their concern to me about the disaster, or who I thought could help me in
          my scrutiny. I am very grateful to all those who have helped me in the course of my
          scrutiny.

          Evidence


          16. My terms of reference mention evidence which was n_no_Lavailable to the_earlier
          inquiries into the disaster, and invite me to judge whether any such evidence is
          significant in various ways. In an event of the magnitude of Hillsborough, witnessed by
          so many people, there will inevitably be evidence which is "new" in the sense that it has
          not surfaced before. I therefore think that it is important at the outset of my report to
          establish what the concepts of "new" and "significant" evidence must mean in the
          context of the Hillsborough disaster.

          (a)--evidence which is ’not previously available’


          17. Much of the evidence which I have been invited to consider, including that of the
          two witnesses Dr Walker and Mr Houldsworth upon whom reliance is placed by the
          Family Support Group, has been ~sly available in the sense that their existence
          was known at the time of Lord Taylor-Y’g-In-qo’iry-~nquests an~itten statefflents
          were taken from them. But for one reason or another they were not called to give oral
          evidence to Lord Taylor or the Coroner, or their evidence may not have been
          considered by the prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities and the Divisional
          Court. Evidence which falls into this category might in my opinion be regarded as not
    \\    having been previously available, so long as it was not--at the time of Lord Taylor’s
     \    Inquiry or the Inquests--in the public domain.
          18. I would~egard evidence as being. in the_guNicdo~a_inn if the su__bstance of it was
          known to the iega~-fiI-g~l~g 0fl:h-e ]sarties--including the legal advisers of the~-~
          th~ items such as videdta---p~, or other "exhibits", I would regard them as not
J         previously available if they were unknown to Lord TayloY’s Inquiry team or to the
          Coroner, or if it seemed that Lord Taylor’s team or the Coroner did not appreciate their
          significance. I would also regard videotape or other evidence as not previously available
          if its existence was unknown to the legal advisers acting for the families--even if Lord
          Taylor or the Coroner knew about it.
    19. But I should make it plain that I have looked at all the evidence I have been asked
    to consider, whether it was previously available in this sense or not.

    (b )--" significan t e~vidence"


    20. In order to be significant a piece of evidence must first of course be credible, but it
    must also differ in some important way from evidence which has already been given.
    Over 50,000 people were present in the Hillsborough Stadium on the day of the disaster.
    Many others were involved in the rescue operation, including police, ambulance and fire
    service personnel, doctors and nurses. It is highly unlikely that any two had precisely the
    same perception or recollection of the fast moving and horrific events.

    21. The West Midlands Police took3 7+7J~ statements from witnesses. These included
    the people who were most involved, bu-~-even so this was only a fraction of those who
    witnessed something of the events. Lord Taylor was satisfied from the evidence that he
    heard that he was able to reach the necessary conclusions for the purpose of his report.
    He said that to have heard further evidence would not have added significantly to the
    picture (Interim Report para 14).

    22. Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues, for example why the
    police lost control of the crowa outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles. The evidence of
    witnesses who have not previously come forward is unlikely significantly to affect the
    weight of the evidence already given on these controversial issues.

    (c)--evidence significant enough to "usti           ~"

    23. So far as a further public inu~ isconcerned, the new evidence needed to justify
    one would in my view have to be such that there would be a real possibility that the

II
\
    conclusions reached by Lord Taylor in his Report might be different. Neither Counsel
    appearing on their behalf nor any of the families who I have seen in interview had any
    criticism of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or the conclusions that he reached.

    24. I would aspect
    important   also recommend   a further
                        of the disaster orpublic inquiry
                                           its af~ich hadifnot
                                                           I considered that there was anl/]/
                                                               been aufficSently
    investigated and that itwas in t e-fiE~blic interest that it should now be investigated,
    notwithstanding the long a~.




                                                4
         (d)--evidence of such significance that I should draw it to the attention of the Director of
         Public Prosecutions, the Attorney-General or those in charge of police disciplinary
         matters


         25. The Director of Public Prosecutiong had the responsibility of deciding whether
         criminal proceedings, in practice charges of manslaughter, should be brought against
         any corporate body or individual. In their submissions to me Counsel for the Family
         Support Group have only invited me to make a recommendation to the DPP in the case
~r.      of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray (see note 1).
re
le
         26. The DPP, acceptin~ advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel,
         concluded in 1990 that there was not s-u~i-diE--nt-e-gTd~-n-ce~ccrjusti~            against
         e~3~roT-rh~gg-Yo 1~ fresh evidence; therefore, wouldhave to be of suffic~-ffnt
         significance that there is, in my view, a real possibility that in considering it the DPP
         might change her mind and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or any other
         offence, against one or both of these officers.

         27. My terms of~ention the Attor~eneral. The Attorney-General
         has powers under the Coroner’s Act 1’988 in relation to inquests. Section 13 provides
         that:--
               ".... where on an application by or under the authority of the Attorney-General, the
               High Court is satisfied .... where an inquest has been held .... that (whether by
               reason of fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency of
               inquiry, the discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or
               desirable in the interests of justice that another inquest should be held, the High
               Court may .... order another inquest to be held into the death .... [and] .... quash the
               inquisition on that inquest".


         28. In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group stated
         "it is accepted, eight ~nd a half years a~~ev_ent, lhatfX_is_impracficab~and may be
         undesirable for fresh inquests to be convened." In my view the Courts’ powers under
      ~n 13 only arise-flit is "ngces.~nry or cto~sirable" in the interests of justice that
                                                                                                          /
         another inquest should be held. If it is impracticable, it cannot be said to be necessary in
         the interests of justice. I agree with Counsel that it is impracticable and undesirable to
         hold fresh inquests. In their oral submissions to me Counsel accepted that this remedy
         was not available (transcript 30 September 1997, page 3).

         29. Counsel however submitted that there could be a further application to the
         Divisional Court for judicial review of the Coroner’s Inquest with a view to quashing the
         verdicts of accidental death. He further submitted that I should grant leave for such an
         application. That I cannot do, since no formal application has been made, nor am I
         sitting as a Judge dealing with the Crown Office List.




                                                       5
30. If I came to the conclusion that a further application to the Divisional Court for a
review of the Inquest would have a reasonable prospect of success I would be prepared
to say so, in the hope and expectation that the single Judge hearing the application
might be inclined to grant leave. Since however it would be impossible to substitute a
verdict of unlawful killing in the absence of a fresh inquest, I cannot see what the point
of such an application would be. As Lord Justice McCowan said in his judgement in the
Divisional Court in 1993 (transcript page 41B):
        "As to the ... suggestion of a mere quashing of the existing verdicts leaving nothing
       in their place, I would regard that as absolutely valueless".

31. The effect of quashing the accidental death verdict without substituting any other
verdict would be the same as if the jury had returned an open verdict. (R v St Pancras
Coroner ex parte Higgins, 152 JP 637.640). An open verdict is only appropriate where
there is insufficient evidence to record any other suggested conclusion. In practice there
were two alternative verdicts here--unlawful killing or accidental death. If the jury did
not consider that the evidence justified a verdict of unlawful killing, then accidental
death must inevitably be the verdict.

Other action which should be taken in the public interest


32. My terms of reference also ask me to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest. I shall return to this later, in Chapter 3 Part
2 and Chapter 4 Part 2.

The previous proceedings


33. It is necessary to summarise the previous.proceedings as briefly as I can in order to
see what possible impact any fresh evidence might have upon the conclusions reached
by those making the relevant decisions. It is important to bear in mind that each set of
proceedings had a particular scope and purpose.

Lord Taylor’s Inquiry


34. Lord Taylor conducted a thorough and wide-ranging inquiry which was in some
respects--certainly in its effects upon crowd safety at major sports events--one of the
most important to be held in this country for many years. His terms of reference were--
      "To inquire into events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on the 15 April
      1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at
      sports events".
35. Lord Taylor’s Interim Report was concerned with the events of 15th April, while
his final report dealt with his recommendations. The 174 witnesses from whom he heard
oral evidence included more than 50 Liverpool supporters, over 50 police officers, 11
representatives of the Ambulance and Fire Services, including senior officers, 15
employees of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club together with their consulting
engineers, and 5 doctors (3 of whom were Liverpool supporters) who had attended the
injured and dying.

36. The purpose of the first part of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was to find out what
happened and why, and to consider the response of the emergency services.

37. It was not difficult to discover what happened. The Leppings Lane standing terrace
on which the disaster occurred was separated trom fhe pitch by high metal fencing, and
divided into pens by "radial" fences which stretched from the pitch back towards the
rear of the terrace. The match was to kick off at 3 pm--by about 2.50 pm the central
pens 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane terraces were full or nearly full. At 2.52 the police
had an exit gate by the Leppings Lane turnstiles, Gate C, opened in order to relieve
dangerous crowd pressure which had built up outside the turnstiles. The result was that
some 2,000 supporters came through Gate C into the ground in a relatively short time.
Most went through a tunnel leading into the rear of pens 3 and 4, and the result was a
crush of people substantially exceeding the safe capacity of those pens. Part of a crush
barrier in pen 3 collapsed.

38. The police did not at first appreciate what was happening. When they did, rescue
was difficult because of the congestion and restricted access to the pitch.

39. The question of why the disaster occurred ~vas more complex. The first issue was
why the police lost control of the crowd outside the turnstiles. The police said it was due
to the unexpected late arrival of very large numbers of supporters, many of whom were
determined to get into the ground on time come what may. They said that there was a
larger number than usual affected by drink, and behaving badly. A substantial number
had no tickets, which increased the problems of crowd control. The position was
exacerbated by people not knowing where to go because of poor sign-posting.

40. The police said that they could not stop those at the back pushing forward and
crushing those at the front, near the turnstiles. They said that they could not have
anticipated such a large uncooperative crowd in the last half hour before the game. The
policing operation was conducted on similar lines to that which had been successful
during the identical Nottingham Forest-Liverpool semi-final fixture at Hillsborough in
1988.




                                           7
41. The other side of the picture was given by the supporters. Many of them criticised
the policing. The police shou!d have appreciated that many people would turn up in the
half-hour before kick-off, and should have taken more effective steps such as filtering
the crowd well before they reached the turnstiles, as was done in the previous year. This
would have prevehted people without tickets getting in the way and adding to the
throng in front of the turnstiles. If need be the kick-off should have been delayed.

42. Lord Taylor rejected the view advanced by the police. He summarised his
conclusions on this aspect of the matter at para 268 of his Interim Report:
       "the need to open Gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That
      occurred because, as both Club and police should have realised, the turnstile area
      could not easily cope with the large numbers demanded of it unless they arrived
      steadily over a lengthy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the day
      failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should
      that occur in a short period. That it might so occur was foreseeable and it did. The
      presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much aggravated the problem.
      So did the Club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing."


43. Lord Taylor also criticised the police decision not to delay the 3 pm kick-off for the
match.                         "=-

44. I have heard no fresh evidence relating to what took place outside the ground
before 3 pm. There is no question of reviewing Lord Taylor’s finding on that.

45. But the crucial question was what happened inside the ground. Lord Taylor
concluded that the influx of supporters going through Gate C after 2.52 should not have
been allowed to go down the tunnel. He said (para 231):
      "It should have been clear in the control room where there was a view of the pens
      and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been
      given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to
      the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure
      to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude."


46. He also criticised the police response to the situation. He said they should have
gppreciated ear ler an ey w a was-happening arid summoned the emergency
services earlier. But here we are only dealing with a few minutes--albeit vital minutes.
47. Lord Taylor was therefor~ical of the police. But he also criticised others.
The--Safety Certitlcate issuea tor the ground by Sheffield City Council was
unsatisfactory so far as the capacity of the Leppings Lane terraces was concerned once
the radial fences had been installed. He criticised the Club and their consulting
engineers, because the layout of the forecourt and turnstiles at Leppings Lane was quite
inadequate to cope with so many peoplei~There was no method of monitoring how many
people went into the individual pens on the Leppings Lane terrace except by a visual
check, which was wholly unsatisfactory. The signposting at the ground and the
information on tickets for the match was inadequate and misleading and the club had no
stewards in the concourse directing people where to go. The result was that most
standing spectators who went in through the turnstiles A-G or Gate C did not realise
there was any alternative but to go down the tunnel.

48. Barrier 124A which collapsed was of insufficient strength. The crush barriers were
insufficient and poorly placed and the gates on the perimeter fence were too small.

49. Lord Taylor also considered the response of the Emergency Services. He said at
para 296 of his interim report:
      "I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the


   IA  esponse by the St Jo~hhn Ambulance Brigade, by South Yorkshire Metropolitan
        mbulance Service or by the fire brigade on 15 April Indeed, no represented pa?ty
       entured any criticism of them. "


50. He considered the criticisms of two Liverpool doctors in relation to the rescue
operation, and specifically rejected them.

51. None of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord Taylor’s
censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate or additional ground
of criticism in respect of the events leading to the tragedy. Nor, save in one respect
which I mention in Chapter 6, has it had any impact on the responsibility of other parties
criticised in Lord Taylor’s report.

The decision not to prosecute

52. I have read the joint opinion of Counsel dated 6 August 1990 which gave advice to
the Director of Public Prosecutions on the possible criminal proceedings against Mr
Murray and Mr Duckenfield, amongst others. Although the material available to
Counsel was more extensive than that which was placed before Lord Taylor, because by
that time the criminal investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police had been
completed, Counsel stated that
      "the criminal investigation, for all its thoroughness, has not significantly added to
      or contradicted Lord Justice Taylor" s findings. In our judgernent, therefore, the
      Taylor analysis of the facts is as firm a base as any from which to approach the
      question of Criminal Liability".


                                             9
  53. Counsel then set out a full, detailed and careful r6sum6 of the facts based on the
  evi~n ay__ailable. I have not found any error or omission in this r6sum~, nor in
__my view is any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. I have als~e
  statement of the law set out in the opinion. Counsel considered both the offences of
  manslaughter’and culpable misfeasance in public office. They were plainly correct to
  consider that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in the
  circumstances of the case.

 54. In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the decision not to prosecute,
 there-Yore, I must be satisfied that any tresh evidence establishes, or may establis-fi’, facts
 fff~iously considered by Counsel or the significance of which was not fully
 appreciated, which makes it more likely that charges of manslaughter could be
 established. Essentially this relates to Mr Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge
 and appreciation of the risk of injury in doing what they did or omitted to do (but,see//7
 note 1 at the end of this chapter).                                ~                       ///

  55. From my meetings with the bereaved families and their representatives, I am left in
  no doubt that there was widespread disappointment at the DPP’s decision not to
  prosecute. They find it difficult to understand in the light of Lord Taylor’s trenc-hant
  criticisms of the South Yorkshire police and the fact that the force ha;ge been paying
  compensation.

 56 What the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however, is the
 significantly__different and greater degree of culpablhty which is lnvb-lVE~i-6
 manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as against the degree of
 ~~ gives rise t~y-~gnd compensation payments, ~vil law.
 Any prosecution of an individual police officer wonld have to establish his individual
 responsibility. It would not be enough simply to prove the composl-~Ufaiiure of t eh-E--
 police operation.

  57. ,~_T_~ causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two officers
  were concerned, the prosec-ffti-oW-w-o-utfl-h~e to p~ ow to the high standard required for
  a criminal conviction that the failure to give the order to close off the tunnel when Gate
  C was opened amounted to the serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute
  manslaughter.

  Police Complaints Authority


  58. The decision by the Police Complaints Authority not to pursue charges against
  Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray was not taken on the
  gr~~e was insufficient evidence to charge them with neglect of duty. Mr
~ ~retired   from the police on grounds of iii health aud, ~ th~ ~ trte-Ustood (and
  still stand), such charges cannot be pursued against a retired officer. In the case of Mr
  Murray it was considered unfair to pursue a joint charge against the junior of the two
  officers only.

                                              10
59. It is clear to me that many of the families of victims consider this to be unfair and
u Ensatisfactory. I sympathise with thisa4ew. But it is not my task to comment on t~
rules. The issue is a complex one and is a matter for Parliament. The Police Complaints
Authority commented on it in their Annual Report for 1988, and the matter has recently
been reported on by a Parliamentary Committee. In the context of my scrutiny it means,
however, that fresh evidence is unlikely tO have any impact on the decision not to
pursue these charges.

The Inquest


60. The purpose of an inquest is to find out who the deceased was and how, when and
wherehe or she came to their death (Coroner’s Act 1988, section 11(5) and Coroner’s
Rules 1984, Rule 36--which also prohibits the Coroner or jury expressing an opinion on
any other matter). No verdict can be framed in such a way as to appear to determine any
question of criminal liability on the part of a named person or civil liability.

61. The Hillsborough Inquests therefore were, or should have been, of much more
limited scope than the wide ranging Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor. The questions of
who the deceased were, and where and when they died were dealt with at the mini:
inquests. At each mini-inquest a police officer gave a summary of the evidence relating
to the deceased. This was based on statements taken from witnesses and sought, so far
as possible, to trace what happened to each person from the time they left home to go to
the match to the post-mortem examination on them. A second police officer gave
evidence based on photographic material in an attempt to trace the movements of each
individual.

62. Then the pathologist gave evidence in relatjon to the post-mortem examination
and~c--d-use ot death. Because of the general confusion as the disaster unfolded it was not ]
always possible to trace what happened to everybody who died from the time they were
last seen alive on the terraces to the confirmation of their death and subsequent
identification. This has understandably caused great concern to families who are / /
                                                                                                     /
anxious to trace the last moments of their children or relatives. I will return to this
question in Chapter 5.

63. The main Inque~ on 19 Nove_ mbe___rr 1990 and concluded on 28 March 1991.
As I h~ e~Ta~agra~ 3-1 there were in practice only two possible verdicts,
unlawful killing and accidental death. The jury returned the latter verdict. Again as a
result of my meetings with the families and their representatives, I have been left in no
doubt that there is widespread dissatisfaction among them as to the-verdict and much-----~
criticism of the Coroner and the way the Inquests were conducted, as I ~/]
have already said, Counsel for the Family Support Groffphas accepted that it is now ]/[1[
impossible io have a fresh inques-gg~’th a view to su~bstituting a verdict o~ //] [I[
kil i . e uppor at the public Dercept!o_hT_ i~ that the ve                          relict of      [//1/
accidental death lmphes that there was no fault on the part of the .police    .....
                                                                                         or any other ] [
party. I cannot say what perception, if any, the general public have/In any event the
proposition is wrong. In his summing ~tatcd tgat a vcrdic-t-of/!/
accidental death did not mean that the deaths occurred~withou- - - - " - t fault.

                                               11
                                                                                                  v




    64. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has never contested civil liability on the
/   part of the police to pay damages for negligence to the bereaved and injured. This was
    ac~ed in a letter from__HammongSuddards, solicitors for the Chief Constable and~d-~



/
    insurers dated 15 December 1989 and recognised as an admission of liability by the
    Courts (Divisional Court Transcript, page 40; Lord Keith of Kinkel in Alcock v Chief
    Constable [1992] AC 310, 392).


     65. Compensation has been paid. In respect of the fatalities, 37 claims were made for
       ~y pursuant to the Fatal Accidents Acts. Of these 36 have
     loss
     been settled. 53 fatal claims were restricted to damages for funeral expenses and/or
     statutory bereavement payments. 50 have been settled. Offers have been made in
     respect of the other 3 but not accepted. 1473 claims for personal injury were intimated.
     All claims included ~ment. The great majority were for psychiatric as
     opposed to physical injury. 1035 have been settled, 19 remain outstanding. The
     remaining claims have been closed with a nil payment or not pursued. The Club and
     Eastwood_mr~~b’s consultant engineers, made a very-substantial lumpl"
    ’sum contribution to those settlements; so also did tile City Council, although their
     insurers were the same as those of the police. The major portion was borne by the police
     and their insurers. In total £13.25 million has been paid in compensation and legal costs,
     not including compensation to police officers.

    66. I have heard the suggestion that the verdict of accidental death at the inquests in
    some way undermined or reversed the findings of Lord Taylor. But it did no such thing.
    In order to justify a further application to the Divisional Court for judicial review to
    quash the inquest verdict of accidental death, without an order for a new inquest, any
    new evidence must, in my opinion, show that had it been presented to the jury they
    would have been likely to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.

    The Divisional Court


    67. As I have already mentioned, the Divisional Court heard in 1993 an application on
    behalf of six families to quash the Inquest verdicts of accidental death and seek fresh
    inquests. It considered ten grounds which were advanced on behalf of the six families,
    but rejected all of them. I will discuss some of the points which the Divisional Court
    considered in more detail later.

    68.   The main arguments before the Divisional Court were--
    \ (a)That thec0roner should have disqualified himself on the gr_o_unds.that he was_to_Q
                                        ~eld_Ciky_Coamcibrle~f4he interested parties,
          who appointed him and paid his salary. This was said to give rise to apparent bias.
          The Divisional Court said the point was far too late, since no objection was taken
          at the time. This ground was raised for the first time before the Divisional
          Court--nobody had mentioned it at the Inquests. The Divisional Court
          concluded in any event that the point had no merit.



                                              12
        (b) That the Coroner wrongly conducted the mini-inquests by reference to
            summaries of the statements of eye witnesses which were read out and the
            contents of which could not be tested by oral evidence and questioning. (Ground
            1 of the application). The Court held that Rule 37(3)(C) of the Coroner’s Rules
            1984 permitted this. It had been done with the complete agreement of Mr Fraser
            who was then acting as solicitor offbehalf of the relatives. This ground was not
            pursued by Mr Alun Jones QC who appeared before the Court on behalf of the
            Applicants.
        (c) That there was now (1993) aT_ai!_~ble some evidence that the Coroner and his jury
            were not given the full picture of the evidence of some of the witnesses, whose
             sta------tements were partially summarised at the mini-inquests, and the result was
            that the proceedings were vitiated (Ground 7). Six cases were relied upon. One of
            these was that of Kevin Williams, with which I shall deal in more detail later. The
             Court rejected this ground.
        (d) That the Coroner wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15 pm (Ground 3). The
             Court upheld his decision ab~-o~f-point;-artdthe-Coroner’sreasons for /,, t’
            making it. I shall deal with this in more detail later, because Counsel say that
,lice       further evidence now              "s-approac@h was wrong. .....................
sts,
        (e) That the Coroner wrongly limited his inquiries into how the deceased met their
            deaths so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have been saved by
            calling the Emergency Services sooner and providing better emergency care for
            the injured thereafter (Ground 5). This point is clearly related to the 3.15 pm cut-
            off point. The Court held that there was a sufficient inquiry to answer the
            statutory questions of who the deceased was, when, where and how they died.
        (f) That the Coroner should have left the verdict of lack of care to the jury (Ground
            6). After considering the authorities, the Court held that:
ing.
                  "the verdict of "lack of care" is concerned with the failure to provide care in




           sul
                  the form of food, medicine, clothing, shelter, etc., not with carelessness, and
                  is appropriate only in cases which are the other side of the coin of self-
                  neglect such as starvation, hypothermia and persistent failure to provide
                  medication."
                a verdict could not have been appropriate in this case. The law on this point
           has subsequently be~’-n affirmed in Reg-~--~Humberside Coroner ex parte
           Jamieson [1995]QB 1 at 24 and 25. It was not seriously argued before me, either "~
           by Counsel for the Family Support Group or by Professor Scraton, who has taken
           a keen interest in the Hillsborough Disaster and who made written and oral
           submissions to me, that this was a possible verdict. In my view the decision of the
           Divisional Court on this point needs no further consideration. None of the
           evidence I have been invited to consider could make this an appropriate verdict.
S,
fias.
ken




                                                 13
                                                                                                      v




        69. Although only six families made the application for Judicial Review, the Court’s
        reasoning applies to the Inquest verdicts on all those who died at Hillsborough. There
        was no appeal from the Court’s judgement. A fresh application for Judicial Review
        could only succeed, therefore, if fresh evidence undermines the Court’s reasoning, or
        shows that it may.have proceeded on an incorrect factual basis.

        70. The Divisional Court also stated that even if any of the grounds had been made
        out, the Court would not have exercised its discretion to order a fresh inquest and gave
        cogent reasons of this decision (per McCowan LJ at pages 40 and 41 of the judgement).
        These reasons are even more cogent now and, as I have already said, Counsel did not
        contend that there should be a fresh inquest.

        Note 1 (to paragraphs 25 and 54).

        The only person who suggested that another officer should have been£roxecuted was Mrs

/       McBrien. In a clear and restrained submission to me, she argued that the sole cause of the
        tragedy was the opening of Gate C when the need to do so had not arisen and when it was
        quite contrary to the whole concept of proper crowd control. She contended that the fault
        lay mainly with Superintendent Marshall who called for the gate to be opened, and Chief
        Superintendent Duckenfield for ordering it to be opened.


        Lord Taylor rejected this argument. Atpara 228 of his interim report he said that "Having
        lost control and reJected-the-option of postponing kick-off, the police were faced with a


i       serious danger of deaths or injuries. They were ~ernative but to
        ~op.~Superintendent Marshall was right at that stage to ask for tt an~
        Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step required
        other action".                      "-
                                                                                                  /




    l
        M oreover, Mr Hytner, the QC who appeared for the bereaved and injured at Lord
         Taylor s Inquiry, specifically stated tha~~b!a~questing the
         opening of the gates (transcript day 10, page ll2~. Tliave not been asked to consider any
        fresh evidence bearing on this issue and there is no basis for re-considering the decision
        not to prosecute him.




                                                                                                          6
                                                                                                          p
                                                                                                          it

                                                     14
        CHAPTER 2



        Video evidence about the disaster

        1. At the heart of many of the allegations about the disaster which I have heard over
        the last few months has been the suggestion that vid~_oLwhat _happened has



                                                                                                                  1
        been distorted or concealed. Several different possibilities of this sort have. be-e-n°i~-ut-ti5 ......
        me. Their common theme is that, had the full video evidence been available, the
        culpability of the police would have been even clearer than it already is. That might
        have meant inquest verdicts of unlawful killing rather than accidental death, or led to
        criminal prosecutions of senior police officers, or both. It is said that the police
        themselves concealed the video evidence to hide the true facts.
            r"
MFs
the.
        2. I have found that there is considerable confusion and misunderstanding about the
vas
nlt      vi~disaster. Before moving on to discuss the allegations in detail, I
       -Itiink it is necessary to explain what video cameras were operating on the day and what
ief      has happened to the tapes that were made.

        3. The police and Sheffield Wednesday FC were each operating their own separate
ving
        video systems at the ground. BB~s were a~Fs-6 p-r~-s-e-nt-To-re-crrrd the game. --

        4. The West Midlands Police team which investigated the disaster used footage from

                                                                                                                  /
   /
        all these sources to create a "compilati no a_t~e", lasting about 2 hours, giving an overall
        picture of the disaster. This tape was shown both to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and to the
        jury at the Inquests.

        The Club CCTV System

        5. Sheffield Wednesday had 19 fixed closed circuit (CCTV) cameras which were
        trained onto the various turnstiles around the ground. There were 19 CCTV monitor
        screen~ub’s Control Room showing what these cameras photographed--the
        club’s Control ~de the South Stand, just off the players’ tunnel (and had no
        direct view of the pitch). The club recorded the output of all these cargeras. One of the
        club’s CCTV cameras showed the Lepping---sLane turnstiles, in particular the turnstiles
        A to G through which spectators going to the Leppings Lane standing terrace would
        normally come. It also showed the exit gate, Gate C, which the police opened to relieve
        the pressure outside these turnstiles.

        6. The pictures from this camera were recorded on tape JH2. The, West Midlands
        police officers inves lgatlng the disaster took custody of this tape and used footage from
        it in the compilation tape.                                ,


                                                        15
                                                                                                          v




    \\




         7. As well as the 19 screens linked to their own CCTV system, Sheffield Wednesday’s
         Control Room also contained a further screen, linked to thepolice CCTV system. This
         allowed people in the club Control Room to see what was being shown by any of the five
         police CCTV cameras. But they could not record these police pictures.

J        8. The club also had a mechanism which automatically monitored the number of
         spectators passing through the turnstiles.

         9. There were three people in the Sheffield Wednesday Control Room as the disaster
         took place. One was Mr Lock, the club’s secu__q_U_~y officer. Mr Lock__~_, a former policeman,
         gave evidence both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and at the Inquests. H~Control
         Room at about 2.45 pm, ~he time when Gate C at Leppings Lane was opened
         briefly so that police could eject somebody. He returned just after the kick-off.


         10. The second person in the Contr l~oom was PC Guest, who has since died. He was
         police liaison officer with the club, and g~e evidence at~ T~lor’s Inquiry. The
         third was Mr Houldsworth, the club’s video technician.

         The Police CCTV System

         11. The police had five fixed CCTV cameras situated around the ground. The police
         Control Box contained one screen for ea           "     eras. The screens are shown
         in ph~t_ogr_aph 48 in Appendix 2 (48 was the number this photograph was allocated
         when it was used as an exhibit at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry). I need only be concerned with
         cameras 1, 2, 3 and 5. Police camera 4 was situated outside the ground, on Penistone
         Road, at the far end of the ground from Leppings Lane where the tragedy occurred.

         12. Police camera 1 was mounted on the rear of the West Stand. It looked out from the
         ground towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles, in particular turnstiles A-G through which
         the standing spectators would come. It could also show Leppings Lane itself, part of the
         area outside the turnstiles, and part of the concourse between the turnstiles and the
         West Stand. Its pictures were in black and white.

         13. Police camera 2 was mounted on the South Stand and it commanded views all

f        round the ground~It was in colo_ur~ Police camera 3 was also mounted on the South
         Stand, but was nearer the Penistone Road (Kop) end, where the Nottingham Forest
         supporters were standing. It was in black and white.

         14. Police camera 5 is the important one from the point of view of my scrutiny. It was
         mounted near the scoreboa~s--d-uTh east corner o-f-t~e West Stand and was the
         closest one to the police control box~ views of the West Stand and the West
         Terraces. It was in black and white.


    ,

                                                    16
15. A plan which formed Appendix i of Lord Taylor’s Interim Report showing the
five police cameras with their numbers~rms42~ of A~__e_~ix 2 to this Report. All five
police cameras were operating continuously from about 12 noon to 17.20 on the 15
April. They were under the control of PC Trevor Bichard. All five could zoom and pan.
(PC Bichard in fact referred to camera 2 as camer~ and to 3 as 2. I have adopted Mr
Houldsworth’s numbering~ cameras)i°

16. Additionally in the police Control Box were two video recorders, each linked to a
monitor screen showing what it was recording. T~ould be operated in one
of two ways. They could operate o~", in which mode the recording
would move around the five police CCTV cameras at pre-set intervals. Alternatively,
the operator could override this and record output from whichever of the five cameras
he wanted, for as long as he wanted. The monitor screens can be seen without numbers
on the right in photograph 48, Appendix 2, one above the other.
                                                                                            !
17. Both of these tape recording machines could record in two ways, either in
continuous or normal play, or in "time-lapse", recording a new still frame every half
second. "Time-lapse" is ierky when played back, but it allowed tapes to be used for
longer. Police made four tapes from these two recorders in the course of the day. One
(TB1--TB for Trevor Bichard) ran from 12 noon to 15.04, the second (TB2) from 12                ix
noon to 15.34. These are the tapes with which we are primarily concerned. TB3
continued on from TB2, and TB4 from TB1 but with a 30-minute gap. TB3 and TB4
both ran up to 17.20. The reason why there was a half-hour gap between TB1 and TB4 is
that gC_Bichard forgot, in the anxiety__of the moment, to replace the tape when it
expired at 15.04. TB2 lasted longer than ~ because of greater use of "time-lapse".

18. PC Bichard sealed the four tapes at the end of the day and handed them to other
South Yorkshire Police officers for safe custody. S~outh Yorkshire Police later gave them
to the West Midlands Police investigating team. I have inspected the originals of tapes
TB1, 2, 3 and 4. Th,~y_ are in~act. Each of the four tapes is timed throughout and there
are no gaps in these times. The four tapes were all made available in their       to
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.

Other video cameras operating on the day

19. The police had a hand held vide_o_camera operating from time to time between
11.45 and 17.30. The tapes from this are identified as VRM1 and VRM2.

20. The BBC had a number of cameras, both mounted and hand held operating during
the day. Tapes from these are identified as MAP1 to MAP9.




                                           17
     Theft of two videotapes

     21. Between 4.30 pm on the afternoon of the disaster and 9 am the next morning two
     tapes were stolen from the club’s Control Room, which was locked. One of these tapes
     was entirely blank (the club camera concerned was wrongly placed and pointing at a
     wall). The other showed turnstiles 9 to 16 at the Leppings Lane end of the ground,
/    which were next to turnstiles A to G.

     22. The theft of these tapes was investigated by the West Midlands Police but remains
     unsolved. There is no proof of who was responsible for their disappearance. During the
     course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that they were taken by South Yorkshire
     Police officers as part of a "cover-up". There is no evidence for this suggestion. The loss
     of these tapes could not have hindered Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, the Inquests, or any of the
     other proceedings. They would not have shown anything relevant.

     The Compilation Tape

     23. This tape, which lasts about 2 hours was made by the West Midlands Police in
     conjunction with the Treasury Solicitor. It was designed to "show what was felt to be the
     most important scenes and sequence of events" (Inspector Layton, Inquest transcript,
     Day i page 64).

     24. It consists of extracts from tapes TB1, TB2, and RJH2, together with BBC footage.
     The tape shows scenes in Leppings Lane and at the turnstiles there prior to about 15.00,
     and then scenes inside the stadium up to 16.44. It begins with some footage of the layout
     of the ground which West Midlands Police shot specially later on. The compilation tape
     was shown at the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest. It includes no scenes taken by police
     camera 5.

     The evidence of Roger Houldsworth

     25. Mr Houldsworth was the technician responsible to the club for the working of the
    f c~c_e CCTV systems. The Family Support Group have presented him to me as
     having evidence that what the police said about the capacity of their CCTV system and
     what it showed on the day was false. During my scruti__n,¢I have considered a number of
     writ._~_ten statements from Mr Houldsworth and oral evidence which he gave me at an
     interview with him.




                                               18
        26. First there is a statement in writing which Mr Houldsworth made on 16 May 198_~9
        to~eld Wednesday’s solicitors, which appears in Appendix 3, Part ~. In thisbe
        described the police and club CCTV systems. He said that on the day of the disaster he
        had been called to dea~l with a fault_on police c.~naera 5. He says he rectified the fault and
        the camera then worked OK. He then desocribed his experiences in the club Control
        Room on the day, in particular what could be seen on the club screen showing turnstiles
        A-G (recorded on tape RJH2) and the monitor screen from the police system, which
        was showing output from police camera 1, including the influx of supporters through
        Gate C at 14.52. He continues
ins            "At that point in time I realised, from the numbers already displayed on the
               monitor as having entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles, that a dangerous
ire            situation was being created. I left the room and went down the p~e ]
              p-i~h and just as I did so the Referee stopped the match as I recall. I looked over to


                                                                                                   /
OSS
the            the West Stand area and I saw fans climbing over the fence and my first thought at
               that time was that it was a pitch invasion, and the match had been stopped f-o~th-d[-
              reason."



        27. Finally in this statement Mr Houldsworth deN~he two tapes missing from
        the Club Control Room. I have found an exact transcription of this statement by Mr /
        Houldsworth in the West Midlands Police computer records (HOLMES) of their
 the    investigation. It is dated 27 May_1989.
t,

        28. There are two written statements by Mr Houldsworth~lalexL2KAprJJ2md
        5 December 1989 to West Midlands Police. These statements are concerned with the
age.    tap~~lub Control Room. ~e not material. Thirdly
00,     there is a transcript of an interview which Mr Houldsworth gave~r a Yorkshire’
out     Television "First Tuesday" programme about the disaster, broadcast on 6 February
~pe     1990. This is at Appendix 3, Part 2. It adds very lfttle to his 27 May 1989 statement. But
        he makes it clear that it was the scenes from the club camera pointed at turnstiles A to G
        and police camera 1 of supporters coming through Gate C that caused him concern,
        together w~bers of spectators shown on the club’s monitors as having already
        come into the ground.

        29. Fourth, in an affidavit sworn on 25 November 1996 Mr Houldsworth exhibits, as
        "’GH2", certain comments on th.~e evidence which PC Bichard and PS Goddard gave to
te as   Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquest, and the evidence of PC Ryan given at the Taylor
        Inquiry. I set out the material parts of this document in Appendix 3, Part 3. The most
of      important statement here is numbered 1, where Mr Houldsworth says
              "I was able to see what the police could s~rs and I specifically
              remember checkin~he state of Pens 3 and 4 when the order was given to
              open the gate. I could see very clearly that the pens i~ere-f~t-l~e point of
              overcrowding."
                                                                                                  J
        30. Mr Houldsworth says in this affidavit that he disagrees with th’~ police evidence                i
        that the~~eir camema_5_~ere less than perfect or that the zoom capacity on
        cameras 2 and 5 were not sufficient for clear i-dentjficatii~n o s£N)_e~ators.
                                                                                                         /
                                                   19
31. Finally, I interviewed Mr Houldsworth on 14 October 1997. He repeated the points
rhave just mentioned. The transcript of his evidence is at Appendix 3, Part 4.

The submissions and allegations made by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group

32. Two of the most important issues both at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Inquest
were:
    (a) whether the police in the control box, and particularly the two senior officers Mr
       --Dggk-Ufifield and Mr Murray, ~d that pens 3 and 4 were already full when
         the order was given to open Gate C so that a dangerous situation would arise in
        ~-~m--if a large number of ~ers were to enter them through the tunnel in a
         short space of time; and
    (b) if they did not realise this, whether they should have done so.

33. In the light of this, Mr Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Family Support Group
made a number of submissions to me. These were:
     1. that the police blamed their fai~ to seeX_the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 off the
                  camera 5 was defective (paras 12 and 23 of Counsel’s written
        ~ffbmissidng o~eptember 1997). Their argument is that what the police said
        a bout this was deljberately_f.alse, and that this is shown both by Mr Houldsworth’s


     i  evl"-dence that c-amera 5 was working perfectly and by the "discovery" that the
        police tapes show footage taken by camera 5, which demonstrated that it was
        working (written submissions para 46(viii); oral submissions page 12 lines 15 to
        22);
        that the evidence from the video tapes of what was filmed by camera 5 was
      .
        delibera[tely suppresse~, presumably by-NUS-outh Yorks-gh-i~e and/
        or West Midlands Police, because it would have revealed the falsity of the police
        claim in submission 1. This would, prima facie, be a perversion of the course of
        justice (written submissions paras 52 and 55 and 56);
      °   that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the "missing footage".
          He ought to have summoned West Midlands police officers to explain its
          disappearance (written submissions para 52);
          that PC Bichard, PC Ryan and PS Goddard all_g_ave deliberately falseevidence
                                                                                 ....
      .
          th"a-f~m--gfa 5 was not ~ly--gffdi-figf~-~-eras 3 and 2 werenot good
          enough to sho~ on the faces of those in pens 3 and 4 (written submission
          para. 46); and finally
     5. that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could see and appreciate from
J        the scr-e-e-n~rfi~snitoring t~ cameras (in particular cameras 5 and 3) thfii-
         pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded and that a dangerous situation was likely to arise
         because of the influx through Gate C. The allegation was that this evidence was
         withheld from the jury, presumably aeliberately.




                                             2O
oints       34. The first and second submissions are particularly serious. If they are made out they /;
            might affect the verdict of accidental death and the decision ofthe DPP not to prosecute ///
            for manslaughter. The third submission is a grave allegation against the Coroner even
            taken on its own. If it is to be taken in conjunction with t~second submissions
            it could affect the verdict.                                                                      /(
            35. On its own the fourth submission would ao3_~fect any of the prior proceedings.
            But consideration would have to be given to prosecuting the officers concerned
            (Bichard, Ryan and Goddard). If the last submission is made out, the failure of the
            police to appreciate that a dangerous situation had arisen because pens 3 and 4 were
            already full to their safe capacity when Gate C was opened, could be further criticised if
            Mr Houldsworth realised this simply from seeing scenes depicted from cameras 3 and 5.

            36. I must examine these five submissions in detail.

            Submission 1


Ythe        37. --The central all~n here is that the police blamed their failure to see the
            overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being defective when in fact it was not. In his
            oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that this was crucial to the Group’s                     /
            submissions in relation to the video evidence (transcript 30.9.97 page 12). The
r-~’s       submission involves the proposition that the police in the Control Box were saying that
            they could not see with their own eyes through the windows of the control box tile state
            of the terraces, but were dependent on camera 5WhSgffWas no~--working properly:.
                                                                                                     S
        ) 38. Mr Jones originally put this submission to me with respect to the evidence given by
        /
nd/      police officers both at the Taylor Inquiry and at the Inquest. As to the former, it was
lice     said:
                  !
                  /
                       "[Lord Taylor] accepted the police evidence that they were unable to see the
                       terraces [were overfull by 2.50] because of th~era" (written submissions
                       para 12).


            39.       This is not co___rrect. Lord Taylor made the following findings:
                       "’[The police box] has windows commanding views across the pitch and straight
                       along the west perimeter fence" (Interim Report para 49).
                       ’" The cameras [operated in the police control box] have a ~ to close in
                       on any point of interest. Specifically there were good camera views of the west
                       terracing..." (para 50 and see also para 170).
rise        /          ¯" It should have been cleat" in the control room where there was a view of the pens
            /
as          t          and of the crowd at the turilsdles that the tunnel had to be closed" (para 231).
                       "’[Officers in the control room] had a direct view (of pens 3 and 4) from an elevated
                       position through their window... In the event pens 3 and 4 became more and more //
                       crowded, surges took place, fans were shouting and sig~ess. None of this
                       was seen or recognised in the control room" (para 244).                                /
                                                            21
40. At paragraph 38 of the written submission, after references to the evidence of PC
Ryan, PC Bichard and PS Goddard, none of whom said that defective pictures from
     ra 5 was t         Why they failed to realise that there was a dangerous situation,
Counsel said that
       "Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. . . did n~to any faults with the camera
      s~m. On the 25 May 1989 at page 129 he said that he did not use this zoom
      facility but mainly (my emphasis) looked out of the window--

41. The implication is that Mr Duckenfield was saying that he was partly reliant on the
cameras. This does not accurately represent his evidence which was:



I      Q. "Did you use or was the zoom facilityused at all to have a close look at the
      situation in pens 3 and 4 once it was apparent somebody was climbing over the
      fence?--A. No_tthat I am aware o ,~ir, that may have been the case, but I looked
       through the window".


42. There was abundant evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry that the police in the
control box had a g9od view out of the wi.ixtd~ws (Inquiry transcript, day 8 pages 10 and
47, day 9 page 35, day 20 page 13, day 18 pages 76 and 88--references are to evidence by
Duckenfield, McRobbie and Goddard). PC Ryan said he very rarely looked at the TV
monitors because they were over_his head (day 18 page 59). Superintendent Murray
never suggested that he was reliant on the TV cameras. He had an excellent view out of
the window.                                        --~

43. In the course of his oral submissions to me Mr Jones accepted that the submissi_ on
w~rrect so~ar as the police evidence ~ry was concerned (page
15). But he submitted that the effect of the evidence of those officers at the In--q-u~s-t was
quite different and supported the submission that they had lied about camera 5 being
faulty.

44. In my~ent this submission is equally ill-faunded. So far as Mr Duckenfield is
concerned, he never said anything about a faulty camera 5, still less that that was the
reason he failed to appreciate the overcrowding. Although he pointed out that he was
standing behind the officers seated at the front of the Control Box and did not have
quite such a good view through the windows (Inquest day 68, page 59) he never
suggested he could not see the terraces sufficiently to form a judgement. On the
contrary at (Day 69 page 23C-E) he said:
      Q. "You had the vision from the Control Box, which we have all been to, through
      the windows?--A. Yes.
      Q. You also were able to see the video cameras, the cameras which were showing
      the terrace?--A. Yes.
      Q. They have a zoom facility, do they not, as far as the Leppings Lane terrace
      goes?--A. Yes, they do.         ¯*




                                            22
               Q. You still say that in that period between 2.52 and 3 o’clock you never noticed
               even this huge surge into the terrace?--A, Let me just direct you to where i was and
               what I was doing. Yes, I was in the Control Box and I was standing towards the
               back of that Control Box and when you stand in the back of that Control Box and
               look across you have a view. As you rightly say you have the other facilities, but I
ra             did not see anything untoward on ihose terraces from my position, from my
               viewing position and from the angle at which I was in the Control Box".


         45. At page 45 (Inquest day 69) he gave substantially the same evidence as he gave to
L the    Lord Taylor, to which I have already referred. He said specifically he was "looking with
         my eyes at the scene on the terraces"--not at the television screen.    ~----~---------~

         46. So far as Mr Murray was concerned, he was seated in the front row of seats in the
         Control Box, on the left hand side. He would therefore have an excellent view out of] the
         window. This is shown in photo 52 (Appendix 2). He would not be well placed to see the
         CCTV monitor screens, which were above his head. At Inquest day 67 (page 48F-49B)
         he said:
md             Q. "You in the police Control Box had access to the following, didn’t you? First of
:e by          all you were able to look out of the windows to view specifically the state of the
               Leppings Lane Terraces?--A. Yes. Q, I think everybody has visited the ground
               who needs to visit the ground and I need not ask you questions about what you can
~t of          see because we can observe them, but in addition to that you have access to I think
               it is five monitors, do you not?--A. Yes, that is correct in the Control Room".

ion      47. He was then asked about the cameras that show the terraces. There is no
age      suggestion that they were not workin r ly; still less that that was the reason/ he
was      tailed to realise there was a danger of overcrowding. At page 50C-D:          (
               Q. "So you are in a position in the Control Box not only_ to see that which you can
               se~our own eyes of the terrace, but also, if you so choose, to have the
               cameras so operated that you can look at a particular part of the terrace if you want
eld is         to do so?--A. Yes, I can identify, or the o_Qp~alox_ca.n id~ntify~~ular Part that
e.             we should look at."
Tas

         48. Then at page 78E he says:
               Q. "You were in a position from the Control Box to see the state of the Leppings
               Lane terraces and Mr Duckenfield was too ?--A. I would think we could both have
               looked at the terraces and seen th-~ state of them, yes."


         49. In further written submissions to me Counsel for the Family Support Group stated
         that Mr Murray told the inquest jury specifically that he could not see what was
         ha~aces because of the allegedly faulty cameras. They cite an answer
         he gave at Inquest day 67, transcript page 79F.




                                                    23
    50. In my view this answer is taken out of context. The passage when looked at as a
    wh~ not support the assertion that is made about it. Mr Murray was being asked
    about photograph C326A. Ttais photograph appears at Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s
    interim report. It is a still photograph taken at 2.59 pm from the North Stand looking
    across the Leppings Lane terraces towards the police box and camera 5. The relevant
    extract reads in full (Inquest day 69, page 79 D to G):
          Q. "If we can move to C326A we get an even better view of pen 6 at some five
          minutes later? A.--Yes.
          Q. Going back to the position just before the order was given to order the gates to
          be opened, because we know gate C was opened at2.52, if one looked at the west
          terraces it would be clear that pen 6 had marked empty spaces in it?--A. From
          where that photograph is taken, yes.
          Q. Even without the photograph, the position on the photograph, it must have been
          obvious, must it not, from your use of the cameras you had from the Control Box
          that pen 6 was markedly empty? That was not difficult to see, was it?--A. From the
          views that we were getting from the cameras, from the views that I could see from
          the Control Room, it wasn’t obvious.
          Q. At the end of the day that will be a matter of evidence. You are saying that from
          the Control Box with your use of the videos, the cameras, and you had the ability to
          look along as we have already described?--A. I think you have got to look at the
          individual cameras. I think the colour camera was unfortunately focused onJ, he
          pr blQ_~m area in the Kop__flnd t~tave~about three o’clock. The
          camera on the gantry next to the Control Box was unfortunately not working up to
          its potential. I do not know how that affected it but I can see fFdm the ang e~ that
          photograph is taken, 326A, yes, there is a lot of room on the front of pen 6 but I
          didn’t have that view and if I had had that view it might-
          decisions".


    51. It is true that Mr Murray says that camera 5 was not working up to its potential.
    But he does not claim this as a reason for his failure.tos_ee that_ pen~ was relatively
    empty. On the contrary he says that he does not know how that affecte_d it. His point is
    that although one can see from photo 326A--taken from the other side of the
    ground--that there is a lot of room in pen 6, that is not the view he had from the police
    control box. But at Day 68 pages 26D-27B the Coroner specifically raises this question
    with Mr Murray at the instance of the jury. This very important passage runs:
\         Q. On the day of the disaster were you able to monitor the different parts of the
          terrace at random? I think what the Jury is asking is with the cameras, not with the
          e~es.--A. The camera that would be best equipped for that was the o-~hat was in
          the centre of the South Stand, which would show a slightly oblique picture of the
          terraces and the Kop. Unfortunately for most of the event that was trained on the
          pr~ had in the Koooo~, particularly after some ejections and arrests had
          been made ~at we normally use the cameras for is evidence
          gathering and you can only gather and preserve the evidence of what you are
          actually looking at, at the time. When we foresee problems in a certain part of the
          Gr~reeord-chat particular area for the whole of the event, and that gives
          us the chance to then take still photographs from the video and blow them up later,
          and utilise them as evidence and identify people who are wrongdoers.

                                               24
               Q. The next question is a supplemental one on that really. Did you rely more on
               your own physical view from the Control Box or on the monitors, and I think we
               must be talking about the terracing still because you could not, of course, see
               outside, could you, without looking at the monitors? A. No. We had a good view of
               the terraces from the C~x. We could see the terraces, had a g-d--d-~6b-f vte-i~r-of~--
               the iOrraces. I proba~Tv relied more~bn what I could xee wit~
               anything else. If I had seen a part~r problem I would have tried to get the vi~eo
               operator to zero in but their capabilities are only as good as the actual lens, and the
               better the lens the much more expensive they are. They seemed to be all right for
               our purposes."




                                                                                                     /
         52. I find it surprising that Counsel did not see fit to_Ar~w my atWm~ctaXoXhJsff~sag~.
         Along with Mr Duckenfield, Mr Murray was much the most important officer in the
been     Control Box, since they were the_de¢.ision-makers.
OX
 the
m        53. There is nothing in the evidence of PC Ryan or PS Goddard which supports the

"om
~ty to
         submission that the police could not see whatwas ha t2p_~~s_on_ ........
         ~amera~, I will come in due course to what these officers said about the quality of the
         pictures from camera 5.
                                                                                                         /
e
’he      ~. PC Bichard, of all the officers in the control room, might be expected to be
         watching the screens rather than looking out of the window, since he was the video
p to     operator. He was asked (Inquest day 71 page 82D)
 that
I              Q. "Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor?--A. It is very
               difficult to remember. The view is partially obscured of what is happeningp_ut on
               the terrace because of people walking across the front of my position. I am not
               sure."



         55. I should add that Mr Houldsworth also said, in evidence to me, that the police
         would ~ely on the cameras to see what was happ~the pens. They had a good
         view out of the window. (See transcript of my meeting with him on 14 October 1997,
         page 23 line 33 to page 24 line 38).


         56. The Coroner’s jury had a view of the scene. They went to the police control box.
         They could see for themselves the view which each police officer had. Mr Houldsworth
¯ the    also demonstrated the CCTV cameras to them during this visit, so they could see their
ts in    capability for themselves.

had      57. The evidence of all the police officers in the control room was that they could see
         the west terraces but they did not realise that the central pens were becoming
         dangerously overcrowded. They thought the numbers were normal for a big match. The
the      ma--gt-t~was atzcu~ ately summed up to the jury by the Coroner (Inquest day 77, page 127
gives    of the transcript of his summing-up).                                 "
ater,


                                                   25
58. The submission that the police tried to blame their failure to see the overcrowding
on a fault in camera 5 seemed to me to be so at variance with the evidence given at the
Inquest that I asked Mr Timoth~QC about it. Mr King was Counsel for the
families at the inquest. He said that so far as he~vas concerr~edit had ne r_2_e_L_b_C__~be the
police case that they could not see that pens 3 and 4 were full because their CCTV was
~ctly. The ls~as not whether they could see the state of-the pens,
but whether they appreciated that they were full and what steps they took to deal with
the situation once Gate C was opened.

59. In his further submission put forward on 11 December 1997 Mr Knowles, junior
Counsel for the Family Support Group, advanced another argument in support of this
submission. He said:
       "In his evidence to Lord Taylor Mr Duckenfield admitted that he was concerned
       about the disparity in the numbers of supporters in the centre pens compared with
       the numbers in the side pens. This caused him to request that a Tannoy
       announcement be made asking supporters to move forward (Day 8, p9-14)...
       It is significant that the Tannoy announcement ordered__by_ Mr Ducken~eld
       coincides with a shot from Camera 5 at 14.18.07 (shown on the footage supplied by
       Yorkshire TV), which shows young people standing in space at the front of the
       Leppings Lane terraces. It would therefore appear that the Tannoy announcement
       was made as a result of whathad been observed on the video, and that Mr
       Duckenfield was, in fact, using the cameras to assess crowd build up inside the
       ground."

60. In my view this argument is not well founded. The passage referred to at Day 8 p12
referring to the Tannoy announcement relates to 14.30 (though according to Lord
Taylor the announcement was at 14.15~9 of his Interim Report). It does
not relate to 14.18 and has nothing to do with the scene captured by camera 5 at that
time. There was never any suggestion from Mr Duckenfield that he depended on
camera 5 to see the state of the Leppings Lane terraces. Indeed the contrary is the case
as I have already pointed out. The argument advanced by Counsel is a non-sequitur
even if the timing was correct.

61. In my judgement the submission that police blamed their failure to appreciate thej//
overc _ow--di-ffg onto a-Ta-ulty CCTV camera is quite
                                                                                          ///
Submission 2

62. The allegation here is that evidence of the video tapes taken by camera 5 was
deliberately suppressed and concealed. It appears to be based on the following
propositions:
    1. that the compilation tape had no fc~otage from camera 5.




                                             26
:ling                 that footage from camera 5 had disappeared and was not available at the inquest.
                  .
                      This is based on the following exchange between------PC-Blc~ar--d-an--d-t-h-g-~rone----r, at
                      inquest day 71, page 80A-E:
                      Q. The f!lm we saw this afternoon of the Leppings Lane end, which came from
                      what I have called camera 1, I don’tgknow the camera number.--A. I would know
                      it as camera 5.
                      Q. The one beneath or near the Police Box?--A. Yes, sir.
                      Q. That scene began at about 15.02?--A. Yes, sir.
                      Q. Where was that camera looking before 15.02 as far as you can recollect?--A.
                      My recollections are that the particular camera had been faulty and in fact you saw
                      some of the problems that occurred. You were getting what is called flare. It is
                      reflection of light coloured objects and you lose the picture. The camera was not
                      really being used as much as it would normally be because of the sub-standard
                      picture. It was just left in position. That is why the picture never really moved at all
                      because it was set and left in that position.
                      Q. That is what I am coming to. Given that it started at 15. 02, let us assume I am
¯ d by                right on that time, was that the time you moved it and located it and then left it to
                      take that shot?--A. No, that probably would have been done before that.
nent                  Q. Would it have been recording before that?--A. Yes.
                      Q. So there.--~------°ught to be a fil_m~rior_        to that?--A. I would have thought so, yes.
                                                                                                                         /fi,]
                      Q. Of that same scene?--A. Yes.
                      Q. If I tell you we cannot find it would that make any difference to your
8p12                  answer?--A. I have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was part of the
         {            tape and the tapes were all sealed up at the end of the day."
es                    (The film which the Coroner says was seen by the jury that afternoon was not/
tt                    included in the compilation tape. The jury saw it in addition to the compilation
                                                                                                 /
                      tape, in circumstances I shall refer to later).                            f
"ase
r
                 3. that between 14.18 and 14.23 there is footage taken from camera 5 which shows a
                    number of fans in pen 2 of the Leppings Lane terraces. Pen 2 lay between camera
                    5 and pen ~ clearly shows cam~nd panning. Prior to
                     1 400 there were other scenes taken by camera 5 and recorded on tape TB2 as the


                 l
                    tape flicked from one camera to another. This fo~hat camera 5
                    was operating satisfactorily. It was never shown to the jury. It w~
                    dlsco---’--vered when the Family Suppor’--------~ Grou-----p saw the video material shown to
                    them by Yorkshire Television.
                  . that the purpose of the "concealment" was to prevent the exposure of the falsity
             I
             !
                    of the claim in submission 1, to the effect that the reason why the police could not
                    see the overcrowding was because camera 5 was faulty.                       -


         63. Since, as I have already pointed out, submission 1 is misconceived, it can be said that
         this submission must also fail. There would]aave been no point in the police suppressing
         or concealing the video evidence unless they had a reason for doing s’6. But in fact there
         was never any disappearance or concealment of video footage from camera 5.


                                                                       27
      64. The facts are these. At the end of t~¢ disas~po-s from
      monitors were secured. They were made available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and appear
     ~documerlts 109 (TB1) and 110 (TB2). Lord Taylor’s Inquiry had a
      detailed schedule of the contents of these two tapes. TB1 has no scenes from camera 5.
      It ends at 15.04. ,-
                                                                                                   71
      65. Tape TB2 is automatically switching at intervals between the five police cameras,        wl
      including camera 5, until 1400. There is nothing of note. Between 14.18 and 14.23 TB2        In
      shows scenes taken by camera 5 of fans on the Leppings Lane terrace. The camera              of
      zooms and pans. The police trained camera 5 on this small group of people because they       11
      thought someone in that area had been misbehaving (though there is no sign of that on
      the tape). The schedule for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry described this scene as a "view of
      Leppings Lane and terraces, plenty of room in the pen in view, insufficient detail to
k_    identify which pen". But it is almost certainly pen 2.

      66. TapeTB2 shows scenes from camera 5 again from 15.02 until 15.25. This sequence
      shows supporters climbing over the fence from pens 3 and 4 onto the pitch. The camera,
      once focused on this scene, remains static. The sequence is in "time-lapse", and is
      described in the schedule which the West Midlands Police provided for Lord Taylor’s
      Inquiry.

      67. The incident between 14.18 and 14.23 is referred to in PC Bichard’s evidence at the
      Taylor Inquiry (Day 19 page 45) and also in the evidence of Chief Inspector McRobbie
      (Day 20 page 20). Mr McRobbie was asked about his statement:
            Q. "You say "Police Constable Bichar_d o~erated the camera and I watched him to
            be able to zoom o~to him which I thought was a super facility for spotting
            troublemakers in the crowd. "A. That is correct sir.
             Q. No difficulty with the picture at all?--A. Welt when you say "no difficulty" it
            certainly brought this person closer to us than I think it would have been possible
            for a Police Officer to select the correct person that Control were identifying
            without any problem".

      68. All the exhibits which the West Midlands Police had prepared~ylor
      Inquir~-~-~ncluding_Tapes T_~2 and TB2--were made_ayailable to the lega!
      r.epresantntivas tag!he Inquest. The evidence required for each day was placed in a side
      room at the hearing. The rest of the unused material including tapes TB1 and TB2 and
      the schedule were kept locally at a police station where access was given to any legal
      representative who required it.

      69. I have tried to find out whether the legal advisers then representing the families,
      namely M’-r Hytner QC, Mr Tim King QC, Mr Fraser and Miss Stee_~le can recall whether
      or n L~!ot t~B1 and TB2. Not surprisingly after this lapse of time they cannot.
      However, I think it very likely that some or all of them did so. This is because they were
      exhibits at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the~ere obviously potentially important
      evidence. I would certainly expect the legal advisers to have seen the videotapes relating
      to the build up to the disaster, TB1 and 2. Mr Fraser recalls watching many hours of
      video footage. That being so, he must have looked at those tapes.

                                                 28
lice       -0. I have asked the Hon Mr Justice Collins (then, as Andrew Collins QC, Counsel to
pear       Lord Taylor’s Inquiry~) about this. eI-I-d-cannot recall any specific occasions when the  /
:la        families’ lawyers viewed these tapes. He told me that since they wej_e~xhibits and freely
~a 5.      available, he would have expected the lawyers to have looked at them. I agree.

           -1. None of the camera 5 scen~were inchaded in the compilation ta ep_g__~
ras,       ~hich the West Midlands Police and the Treasury Solicitors made up for Lord Taylor’s /t
"B2        Inquiry. It is quite plain that no-one considered the footage from pen 2 at 14.18, or any
           of the earlier views from camera 5 of the Leppings Lane terrace, to be of any help in
~ they     dlustrating the sequence of events leading up to the disaster.
tt on
f
)          -2. The footage from camera 5 after 1502, showing fans climbing over the perimeter ....       /,
           fence to get out of the fatally crowded pens 3 and 4, is also not particularly helpful from /
           ~.he point of view of illustrating what happened. There was much better coverage of this
           part of the disaster from the BBC cameras, so the compilation tape uses that instead.
tence
rnera,
           -3. During the inquest (Day 69, page 53) the Coroner said that the jury had twice      /
           asked_ab_o~t video evidence of the terraces. He said that the videos (cle~ce /


                                                                                                     /
           to TB1 and TB2) had been looked at and there was actually next to nothing on them
           ~ecause not everything was recorded. There was a tiny bit showing the terraces on the
at the     compilation tape, and another bit from 15.03 for a few minutes. He had had that
bbie-      -clipped" and would show it to the jury. He said it was of poor quality and he did not
           ~hink it would help very much. It became exhibit C539 at the Inquest.
,ira to
           ,4. The jury~xhibit C539 on da_y_71 (transcript page 61). The footage they saw was
           the material from 1502 onwards from tape TB2 (though Sergeant Killock of the West
"it        Midlands Police incorrectly identified it as coming from tape TB1). It extended only to
ible       I5.16, whereas the camera 5 footage on TB2 continued to 15.25. The sequence was in
           time lapse. I have seen the original and I agree with the Coroner’s comment that it is of
           poor quality and not much help. It is this film that PC. Bichard is referring to in the
           passage which I have cited above.


           75. It is plain in my judgement that PC B~was mistaken in thinking that there
 side      was tape from camera 5 of the same scene prior to 15.02.
 and
~al
           76. It has been put to me on behalf of the Family Support Group that the vital parts of
           tape TB2, namely those showing scenes taken by camera 5, were concealed from Lord
           Taylor, the Coroner, and the families of victims, but were later on made available to the
ies,       f~ks~levision. Yorkshire Television have kindly let me have the
hether     tapes they have, and which they previouslEs_h_o_wed to the Family Sup R~hey
           are copies ~-hq-~ade of tapes TB1 and TB2 (also TB3 and TB4). The police had
    were   ~ven these to them to help them make their "First Tuesday" programme (transmitted in
           February 1990). It seems to me to be a bizarre way to conceal or suppress evidence to
elating    make it available to a television company.


                                                       29
    77. In my opinion the allegation that p_9_lice, hid videotape evidence is completely__
    unfounded. The--~ was no suppression or disappearance of footage from the vital tapes
    TB1 or TB2 which were at all times, together with the schedule of their contents,
    available to be seen by the legal representatives of the families.

    78. It is entirely understandable that the compilation tape contains no footage from
    camera 5. It would be surprising if it did, since footage from camera 5 was not helpful or
    relevant in illustrating the causes of the disaster.


    Submission 3


    79. The allegation is that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the
    "missing footage". This submission is unfounded for the reasons I have just explained.
    There never was an2 miss____in~e from the relevant tapes. The two missing club
    tapes have nothing to do with this. The Coroner dealt perfectly properly with the jury’s
    request to see the camera footage of the terraces. He was right to regard the incident in
\   pen 2 at 14.18 as irrelevant.

    Submission 4


    80. The allegation is that Constables Bichard and Ryan and Sergeant Goddard
    deliberately gave false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly. Their
    evidence to Lord Taylor’si-nqulry was as follows:
          PC Bichard (day 19 page 43)
                 Q. "We have heard that on the day in question there was something wrong
                 with that one; is that correct?--A. For a number of weeks we have had
                 difficulty with the camera and theyflave been looking into having the
                 camera replaced or improvements made. IneXact, on the day w-h-en I arrived
                 at the ground Mr Roger Hou_ ldsworth, who_is the-Technical Officer for the
                 Club, was in fact working on that camera to try and upgrade the picture that
                 we were actually getting.
                 Q. What was the trouble?--A. When the system had been switched on, after
                 an amount of time, the picture would go white--you would lose actually
                 what you could see. We believed initially it was in relation to the lighting
                 inside the ground but we seem to think that it may be a problem with the
                 electrical supply to that camera.
                Q. What was the effect of that on the day in relation to your ability to look
                properly at the terraces, the West terraces?--A. On that particular day, the
                picture had been_m the quality had been improved. It was not up to mark
                             lot better than it had be-e~,~We-wefe getting pictures, that is the
                but it was a ...........
                best way of describing it.
                 Q. Could you zoom in in the normal way on to the terraces if you wanted
                 to ?--A. The actual control facilities were fully available."


                                                30
 81. PC Ryan, who was sitting in the front row next to PS Goddard and could therefore
 not easily see screen 5 (which was overhead) said (day 18 page 53) in relation to camera 5:
       A. "Roo~er Houldsworth, yes. He attended and came out and worked on that camera
       for some time. Quite how long eh-d-Wdg-there I do not know. He was certainly there
        working on it for some considerable time. The picture was never satisfactory as far as
       I recall that day although that was not my specific duty to look at that.
       Q. I follow that. When you say the picture as far as you can see was not satisfactory
       what was wrong with it?--A. It was not as clear as you would hope the picture to be.
       Q. Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way inoperative or less
       adequate than normal or...--A. As far as I recall the zoom was operative. It was
       the quality of the picture that was the problem."


82.   Sergeant Goddard did not deal with this point.


83. None of this evidence from Bichard or Ryan persuaded Lord Taylor that there was
anything wrong with camera 5~since he made the specific f!_ndinAgs to which I referred
earlier in this Chapter when I was discussing the Support Group’s first submission
(paragraph 39).

84. At the Inquest PC Bichard’s evidence on this point is that to which I have already
referred (paragraph 62 above). PC Ryan gave no evidence at the Inquest and Sergeant
Goddard. who did, did not deal with this point. As against this Mr Houldsworth, in his
statement of 16-M@-I98-9 (-Ai~pendix 3. Pt 1 page 3) says that after he had made the
necessa~" adjustments the camera was working OK. In his later comments (Appendix 3,
Pt 3) he says it was working perfectly.

85. I have interviewedPC Richard. He told me that while he was operating a particular                 J
camera l:i]-s concentration would be mainly on the screen relevant to that camera and not
on the recording monitors. He said that if he was operating a camera to film some point
of interest, he would record this. He also told me that after he had operated a particular
camera he would normally leave it parked in the position where it was last focused. This
is what one would expect. He maintained that the quality of what he was seeing on
screen 5 was not as good as that on the other screens--he described it as fii-isty-or ...........
foggy thoUgh h-e h~e-pted th-at }he ~ recVc-dgded from camera 5 at 14.18 was
perfectly adequate.
                                                                                                 /4
86. An examination of tapes TB1.2.3 and 4 does show that camera 5 was being used
 (in the sense of moved about) less than the other cameras. Before 14.00 the scenes
recorded from camera 5 were static, as the recording flicks from one camera to another,
though the position of the camera is moved so that three different views of the West
Stand are shown. After 14.01 the only time camera 5 is zoomed, panned, or changes
position in any other way is between 14.18 and 14.23 and for a few seconds at 15.02 when
it focuses on the perimeter fence at pens 3 and 4 (shown to the Coroner’s jury as C539).
It staved there, static, until 15.25.


                                            31
          87. Although there is a half-hour gap between the end of tape TB1 and its replacement
          tape TB4, it is clear in my view that PC Bichard is operating camera 2 (the colour one)
          during this time, except whenfie turns camera 3 onto the Leppings Lane terraces and
          leaves it in the parked position. This can be seen on tape TB2 at 15.25. Camera 3 stays in
          this static position Until 15.59 (seen on tape TB2 until 15.34 and thereafter on TB3).
          Moreover it is quite clear that PC Bichard’s attention prior to 14.58 (when camera 2
          swings from the Kop end to the pens at Leppings Lane end) is concentrated on camera 1
          and what was happening at the turnstiles. It was not directed to camera 5 and had not
          been since 14.23. There is a full analysis of the movement of the police CCTV cameras
          between 14.30 and 15.34, as recorded on videotape, at Appendix 4.

    ’    88. I have some do~hLw_hether the picture~__fxom camera ~ appearing on screen 5 in
         the police Control Box were substandard to any material extent, tho_hqugh there are
l
\
         certaln~fiIy examp~lKU0-fcgmera 5-flaring on tape TB2. But in any event this is largely a
         ~fb-p-fnion an-fi-d-~gree. No-one other than PC Bichard and Mr Houldsworth is
         likely to have looked at screen 5 in the police control box. Mr McRobbie, not
         surprisingly, could not recall whether he saw the incident at 14.18 on screen 5 or the
         monitor. The Coroner’s jury saw the camera 5 extract from 15.02 onwards for
         themselves, though the quality of the copy they saw is not as good as the original.




I
          89. In my opinion, even if PC Bichard did to some extent e×a 9~erate any defect in
        _..what Camera             " " " n~ consequence. As I havealready said LordT-fiylor
          took no note of it and the only circumstances in which it might be relevant, namely if
          any of the submissions 1-3 above were made out, do not arise.

          90. ~There is a difference of o_o_o~inion between Mr Houldsworth and PC Bichard as to
          3~ke degree of~ossible to get with the z-E-6-6~on cameras 2 and 5 for thee
        ~_~_ose of identification. I do not regard this as significant. The Coroner’s jury had the
          cameras demonstrated to them and they could see for t-lZiemselves what the situation
          was. There is a great deal of difference between identifying a single person or a small ¯
          group, each of whom stands out individually, and trying to pick out individuals in a
          large, compact crowd where there is almost constant movement and only a partial sight
          of the face and body.


          91. Moreover having seen the original of tape TB2 at 15.02 when camera 5 is focused
          on pens 3 or 41 am inclined to agree with PC Bichard on this point.

          92. At 14.58 camera 2 swings down towards the Leppings Lane terraces. It is possible
          to identify some of the people on the pitch, for example WPC Richardson, who has a
          distinctive pony-tail and is seen ushering people into pen 2 via its perimeter gate.
          However I do not think it would be possible to identify a person in the centre pens from
          their face and it is certainly not possible to see their facial expressions. Moreover even if
          the police had focused either of these cam~as onto those at the front of pens 3 and 4 at
          the material times, that would not have enabled them to pick out the distress which was
          being experienced.


                                                     32
ent   93. The other matters raised by Mr Houldsworth on the evidence of PC Bichard and
)     PC Ryan are in my view of little consequence for the same reason. In_my__op~on the
      evidence is wholly insufficient to warrant consideration of criminal proceedings against
      any police officers.

      Submission 5

      94. The allegation here is that Mr Houldsworth in the club Control Room could see
      from pictures on the Control Room monitor from police cameras 3 and 5 that pens 3 and
      4 were overcrowded at 14.50, and that the influx of extra spectators through Gate C
      would create a dangerous situation. I have no doubt that it is true that there were times
      v~hen Mr Houldsworth and others in the club control room switched their monitor on to
      see what the police cameras would show of the Leppings Lane terraces.

      95. This accords with the evidence of PC Guest to the Taylor Inquiry. At Day 19 page
      121 he said:
              Q. "But it was obvious at twenty to three that the two wing pens were virtually
              empty, was it not?--A. Yes, sir. As far as I am aware, I don’t know, sir, because I
              wasn’t looking at that particular screen. I was only looking at Leppings Lane on
              the outside; I was not looking on the inside of the ground.
              Q. Are you saying you never saw... ?--A. I did, yes. I did actually look on the
              inside of the ground but this was later. This was after the gates was broken -- well,
              either broken or opened, and once the crowd had got in. It was after the crowd had
              got in, then when I turned to that camera that would cover the West Stand and the
              Leppings Lane.
              Q. Are you saying that prior to the quarter to three, ten to three, you never saw on
              the monitor the inside of the ground at the Leppings Lane end?--A. Yes, I did look
              at it earlier on, before twenty to three, yes, and at that stage it was quite normal.
              Q. When did you last see the terraces on the monitor?--A. I couldn’t be exact, sir,
              but I would think it would be something in the region of probably half past two,
              probably twenty-five to three.
              Q. At tweno, five to three?--A. Something like that.
              Q. At twenty-five to three the wing pens were virtually empty, were they not?--A.
              They were, sir. ’"


       96. I do not however accept Mr Houldsworth’s evidence that he realised fromAooking
        at cgVerageArmn4~olice cameras 3 and 5 tha_~_pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded and that
      --_the influx of p_e_o_pje tt_hr0ug_h Gate C would create a dangerous situation. I reject this
       evidence for the following reasons:
                                                                                                     ¯
                                        if
               It is hard to believe that"    ¯,
                                            t_~his~~           ~,,,la .......~....
                                                              .........     ~. ,, outd-no t4aav~~      f[/]
             .
              much before 1996 (see his comments at Appendix 3, Part 3 para numbered 1). I
              do not accept that he can have been inhibited either in making his statement to
                                                                                                      m
              the club solicitors or in his interview with Yorkshire Television. I do not find


                                                     33
   convincing Mr Houldsworth’s ex l~ation as to why it was only in 1996 that he
  "}’ealised this eZcidence was important. (see transcript of his evidence to me, page
   20 lines 18--page 21 line 17--Appendix 3 Pt 4). There is no record of any
   interruption by the police officer until the end of the interview.
2. What Mr Houldsworth now says is in fact inconsistent with what he said before.
"’Ih--fiis written statement he attributes his concern to what lae could see on the
   police monitor in relation to Gate C and the club monitors of the numbers. (See
   Appendix 3, Pt 1). In the television interview the references to the police cameras
   are throughout to camera 1. It was submitted to me by Counsel that
   Mr Houldsworth’s references to camera i in the first paragraph of Appendix 3,
   part 2 was in fact a mistake for camera 5. The context shows that this is obviously
   not correct, and Mr Houldsworth confirmed this to me when I interviewed him.
   The same reasons are given for his concern, namely what is seen in relation to
   Gate C~ and club monitors of the numbers (his second answer) and an
   appreciation that people coming through Gate C would be likely to go into the
   centre pens (his answer starting "I looked at the monitor" near the end of
   Appendix 3, Part 2).
3. It was not until 15.05 that Mr Houldsworth got onto the pitch. It took less than
    half a minute to get there from the control room. Even so, like almost everyone
    else observing the situation, he thought he was looking at a pitch invasion. He
    could not ve thou ht this, if what he now says about noticing overcrowding on
   the Leppings Lane terrace before Gate C was opened at 2.52 pm were correct.
4. The last shots from police camera 5 which are recorded before 15.02 are those at
    14.23 when it is focused on pen 2 and does not give a view of the centre pens. It is
    unlikely in my view that it was changed from this position until 15.02 when the
   recording shows it trained on the perimeter fence, picking up the fans climbing
    out. This accords with PC Bichard’s evidence to me. It is also consistent with PC
    Guest’s evidence which I have quoted above (paragraph 95). If he could see that
    the wing pen at 2.35 was virtually empty, this strongly suggests that he is seeing
    the same area that was filmed by camera 5 at 14.18--14.23. Camera 3 was trained
    on the Kop end, for which it was primarily designed. I think it likely that it
   remained there till it was swung round to show the Leppings Lane terraces at
    15.25. Mr Houldsworth does not suggest that he saw the state of the pens from
    camera 2. That too was focused on the Kop end until 14.58, when it is focused on
   the Leppings Lane end (TB1). In my opinion it was probably not until Mr
   Houldsworth saw the scenes from camera 5 at some time after 15.02 that he
   realised that there was a problem and went to investigate. This fits with the timing
    of his arrival on the pitch and his belief that there was a pitch invasion.
   At a very late stage of my Scrutiny (11 December 1997) junior Counsel for the
 .
   Family Support Group submitted that Mr Houldsworth’s evidence about s~otting
   the overcrowding from the monitor of the police CCTV system in thex:lub
   ~0m was sup_ported by that of PC Cmest. He referred to PC Guest’s
   statement of 10 May 1989 (which is in identical terms to an earlier one dated 29
   April but on the standard Criminal Justice Act statement form). Counsel did not
    cite the relevant passage. It reads:
         "I then turned to the camera that was inside the ground and covered the area
         o,[_~ West Stand and it ~at the situation was ettin out of
         hand~a~~~-b~s t e fencin o~_he_~erimeter
         of the ground.
                                       34
                     I could see that all available officers were being sent to this area of the
                     ground to assist with the injured and dying."
               This makes it quite plain that what is being shown by the camera inside the
               ~uncl is occ "           (This description might be thought to describe
ore.           more accurately what was shown by camera 2 (colour) after 14.58. But Mr
               Houldsworth said what he saw was on cameras 5 and 3). What is cited by Counsel
See            (in fact wrongly, the incorrect words are in square brackets) is a passage from a
meras          later undated statement by PC Guest, where an additional passage has been
               inserted between the first and second sentences quoted above from the earlier
x3,            statement.
ously                "At the [this]point where [while] things seemed to be getting out hand
lim.                 outside the turnstiles I tried to use my personal radio in order to contact
                     Police Control that further Police assistance was required urgently at the
                     Leppings Lane end of the ground, but each time I tried to use the radio I was
                     blocking others already using the radio, so I did not try further to use it.
                     I then tried to use the internal telephone system to contact Police Control but
                     again each time I tried the line was engaged and could not get through. At
an                   this point Mr Lock then left the video room in order to organise some safety
one                  measures with the security personnel.
  on                 Also present during this time in the video room was a ~.
ct.                  Houldsworth, he is the person who installed all the videos and computer
                     system.
 se at -
;. It is             As he cxtuld also see what was taking place he also left the room in order m
he                   assist in any way he could. ’"
ing            This passage was inserted because of comments made by Hammond Suddards,
h PC           solicitors to South Yorkshire Police, when the force sent PC Guest’s original
; that         statement to them for comment (I shall have more to say about this in Chapter 4,
ing            Part 2 of this report). In a letter dated 25 May 1989, after referring to PC Guests’s
ained          statement on page 2 of the earlier statement that "it was obvious that looking at
               the crowd outside trying to get in, that there would not be sufficient room for all
               to be accommodated", the solicitors said:
~m
ed on                  "I wonder why he did not use either Cl@ radio or the internal telephone
                       system to reach ~ he did not wish to interrupt transmission                    /
                      --~~sonal radio. It may be helpful if PC Guest recalls, as
timing                 accurately as possible, the actual figures for the north stand, west stand and
                       Leppings Lane, when he studied these at, or shortly after, 2.40pro."
the            Unfortunately the inserted passage dealing with this point breaks the continuity _ !
~otting        and chronology of PC Guest’s original statement. Moreover the final sentence of /
               the inserte-dpassage makes it clear that what was being looked at was after 15.00,
t’s            because we know that Mr Houldsworth did not leave the control room until
d 29           about 15.05.
Ld not         Analysis of tapes TB1 and TB2 from 14.30 until they finish shows quite clearly
           .
               which cameras PC Bichard_w_asm~tl~nd concentrating on. In particular
ze area        from 14.35 to 14.49.02 he is operating camera 1. There is theft a brief point at
               14.49 when camera 2 is operated on the Kop end before at 14.49.38 he reverts to
lneter


                                                     35
        camera i which is more or less continuously used until 14.58.42 when camera 2
        pans from the Kop down into the West Stand Terraces. Thereafter he is operating
        cameras i and 2 until 15.0253 when he operates camera 5, which after a very
        short while is fixed on the perimeter fence (the part shown in C.539). This            i
        analysis (Appgiadix 4) supports the conclusions which I have set out in sub-               -’~--¢r
        paragraph 5 above.
        If Mr Houldsworth is correct in what he now says, it is to say the least surprising
    .
        t~ot draw the attention of PC Guest t~ns for his concern,
        hamely that he could see the serious state of the terraces on the monitor screen. It
        is clear from PC Guest’s statements and evidence at the Taylor Inquiry that he
        did not do so. PC Guest has unfortunately since died.
        It was submitted to me at a late stage in my scrutiny by Miss Adlington, Solicitor
    .
        to the Family Support Group, that a comparison of three photographs showed
        clearly that camera 5 had been moved between 14.52 and 14.59 and that this
        supported Mr Houldsworth’s evidence to this point.
        The photographs in question were taken by supporters in the North Stand. They
        show t"-’----he scoreboard off-~hich cam~ ~, together with the
        scoreboard clock. The first two, with the scoreboard clock showing respectively
        14.52 and 14.54, are taken from about mid-way up the top of the North Stand,
        about a third of the way along the pitch from the west (Leppings Lane) end of it.
        The third photograph is timed atA4.59 by the scoreboard clock. It is the one
        which appears at Appendix 5 in Lord Taylor’s Interim Report. It is taken from a
        position higher up the North Stand and nearer to the Leppings Lane terraces.
        Both in the copy of this photograph at Appendix 5 of Lord Taylor’s report, and in
        the copy of it submitted to me by Miss Adlington, it is almost impossible to
        distinguish camera 5. However I obtained the negative and enlarged the relevant
        area.
        Bearing in mind that the..~__ph~hs are taken_Yrf ~ns they do
        ~inion show that camera 5 was moved between 14.52 and I4.59--still
        less do they show this, as I was told, "clearly". On the contrary, although I do not
        attach much weight to the point because it is not sufficiently clear, I am inclined
        to the view that the three photographs show that camera 5 was not moved and
        that it was at 14.59 still trained onto the same corner of pen 2 as it was when it was
        used to take the shots recorded at 14.18 to 14.23 on tape TB2.

Conclusions about the video evidence


97. fin my opinion the importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been exaggerated
                        HOUldsworth’s existence,and his-gVfdence, were known both
~d                      to the Coroner.

98. There is no reason why he should have been cadence, since what he
                                         "~ was dealt with by other witnesses,
was then sag!_ngas_toAhe_p_olice~and~stems
notably PC Bichard and PC Guest.



                                            36
2            99. The only sense in which Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is new and might have an
ating        effect on the previous proceedings is in relation to submission 5. Eox the reasons I hnva
             Nven I am unable to accep_t_that his recollection of events now is accurate. Even if it was
             correct it would not have any effect on the previous proceedings. It would simply have
             been the evidence of one more person who thought that the central pens were full at
             14.52.
ing
             100. The propositions advanced in submissions 1, 2 and 3, which are by far the most
en. It       serious, are in my view untenable.
le


itor          101. There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video evidence that calls for
d            any further inquiry or considerationby the prosecuting or disciplinary authorities or
             Tffrther resort to the DivisJ_o_uakC~rt. The evidence is quite insufficient to consider any
             proceedings against PC Bichard, PC Ryan or PS Goddard.
 hey

 ely

 fit.

 ma


 nd in

 cant

     do
 ~till
     not
 ed
 d
     t was




     rated
     )th



     t he




                                                        37
/~¸ ~
V

    CHAPTER 3



    The Aftermath of the Disaster

    1. During my scrutiny I have heard serious criticisms made of the Inquests into the
    deaths of those who died at Hillsborough. It has been suggested to me that they were
    seriously flawed, because they did not go into the important question of whether more
    could have been done to help the victims or whether the rescue operation following the
    disaster could have been better.

    2. In the first part of this Chapter I describe the conclusions which I have reached
    about the Inquests. In the second part I consider whether there should now be a fresh
    public inquiry into what was done, and not done, to rescue those who were crushed. The
    first issue I must discuss is the so-called "3.15 cut-off point" at the Inquests.

    Part I The Inquests and the 3.15 cut-off point

    3. I have given a brief description of the Inquests in Chapter 1 of this report. The
    inquests on 95 of the victims were conducted by Dr Stefan Popper, who was at that time
    Her Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire, in two stages between April 1990 and
    March 1991. (The 96th victim, Tony Bland, lived until 1993).

    "Mini-Inquests"


    4. The first stage, the so-called "mini-inquests", ran over a two and a half week period
    in April and May 1990. The law governing inquests is the Coroners Act, 1988 and the
    Coroners Rules of 1984. As I explained in Chapter i these require the inquest to answer
    four separate questions about the deceased--who they were, and when, where and how
    thev died.

    5. It was not possible in April 1990 for an inquest to reach a decision about how any of
    the Hillsborough victims had died, because there was the prospect that one or more of
    the senior police officers who had presided over the police operation at the ground

                                                                                         /
    might be prosecuted. It is lawful and perfectly proper for an inquest to be adjourned in
    these circumstances to await the decision of the prosecuting authorities as to whether
    anybody should be tried in connection with a death and--if a trial takes place--its
    outcome.




                                             39



L
    6. However the Coroner could at that stage usefully establish the answers to the
    remaining statutory questions of who the victims were, and when and where they died.
    The mini-inquests resolved th~se questions. For each of the 95 victims the West
    Midlands Police, who had investigated the disaster on behalf of Lord Taylor and the
    Coroner, presented the Inquest with a summary of the facts about them, based on the
    very many interviews that had taken place and analysis of photographs and other
    material about the match.

    7. The Coroner therefore went into very considerable detail at the "mini-inquests"
    into the precise circumstances of where and when each of the deceased died.

    The main Inquest


    8. The remaining question, of "how" the victims died, fell to be answered by the main
    (or "generic") Inquest. This began on 19 November 1990 and concluded, after 80 days of _
    hearings, on 28 March 1991 when the jury brought in a verdict of accidental death in
    respect of each of the victims.


    9.     At the beginning of the main Inquest the Coroner ruled that he would cut off the
    . ~--..~
    mqmry at 3.1~which time he ~onsidered that all those who ched had received tfhe                ~o
    mj~_.unes which caused their deaths. This ruling by the Coron--~ has been subjected to a
    good deal of criticism, not only during my scrutiny but also during the application by six
    of the bereaved families for judicial review of the Inquest in 1993.

    10. The Divisional Court, which heard the application in 1993, upheld the Coroner’s
    decision about the 3.15 "cut-off point". But it has been submitted to me by Counsel for
    the Family Support G~roup that fresh evidence discovered since 1993 undermines the
    Divisional Court’s decision. Before considering this evidence and the submissions based
    upon it, it is necessary to examine the Coroner’s reasoning in more detail since it has
    been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted.
\


    The Coroner’s reasoning


    11. The Coroner’s reasons for introducing the 3.15 "cut-off point" can be summarised
    as follows:
       (a) inconsideringjhe questionof how someone died an unnatural violent death it is
            not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the infliction of the
           1.a~urles wh--’~c-h obvl~--%usl~ res----ult in de~t relevant whether the person died
            instantly at the scene or some time l~er, after medical or other unsuccessful
                                                                                                  ~X
            treatment. Accordingly it is not appropriate for a Coroner to conduct an enquiry
            into the response of the emergency services or consider in any given case whether
            had it been quick~~rEiit-l~-6~g~ifii~-e-d~facilities a person who
            died might have been saved;


                                              4O
                      (b) there was no evidence that any of those who died did so from any cause other
                        ~h or traumatic asphyxia as a result of being crushed in the pens (see note
                           i to this chapter). There was no new intervening cause which might break the
                           chain of causation between the crushing injuries and death. The Coroner rejected
                           the submission of Mr King, who appeared for the families at the Inquests, that
                           there might have been an intervening cause.
                      (c) all those who died received the iniuries from which they died before 3.15 at the
                          latest. This did not mean that they were all dead by then--they may have respired
                          and had a heartbeat for some period after that time, running to hours or days;
                      (d) the effect of the pathological evidence which the Coroner had received was that
                           once the chest of the victim was fixed so that respiration could no longer take
                          place, irreversible brain damage would occur after between four and six minutes.
                      (e) that it was necessary to k~ lnqlle~t within reasonable bounds and to this
                          end a time cut-off had necessarily to be imposed.
~in
es of
              " 12. It should be noted th~ the Coroner did not say that all those who died did so     ]
               ~or that the meciical evidence was to this effegl. In this respect he has been         [J
               .~videly misrepresented. Nor did_hhe say that all those who became unconscious     f)t ~’l.,
                    auhsequently died. The evidence was that it was only-Nose people whose chest~were in//ff/.~
                a state of permanent fixation as a result of the crush for four to six minutes, so that ~/[ (,-~v’J
               -could not breathe at allf~ ~ fi-m~, who-se condition was irreversible. "             - ~//~ t

                 13. In upholding the Coroner’s decision on this point the Divisional Court said that the
                Coroner cut off the evidence at a reasonable and sustainable point, particularly bearing
                in mind the exhaustive public enquiry which had already been conducted by Lord
’S              Taylor (McCowan LJ at page 12 of the transcript of the Divisional Court’s judgement).
[or             The Divisional Court also rejected the grounds ~rdvanced on behalf of the applicants
v               that the Coroner wrongly limited the inquest so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives
tsed            could have been saved by calling the emergency services sooner or providing better
                emergency care for the injured. It concluded that these questions were not relevant to
                the inquiry into how--i.e, by what means--the deceased had come to their deaths.


                    Further evidence

                                                                   " o’-’-’-"
                                     __ the DivisionalCoups’ reasonmgg3s
                14. ~n the lioht~hLg_fof                                       " " to see the relevance of
                                                                          difficult
                further ev~ce that person A was alive at 3.15pm__ but died subseqnent!~t
tis             spectators B. C and D became unconscious in the crush but subsequently recovered,
                w-l:i-et-Ii~Y because of resuscitative treatment received at the ~~l’~il, or that
died            an ambulance driver, E. found a particular policeman ignorant of the situation and
                unhelpful, or that a particular doctor. F, had criticisms as to the availability of drugs or
lirv            other resources. Still less is it arguable that such new evidence affords grounds for //
ther
o
                quashing the verdicts of accidental death_at the inquest.
                                                                                                //
                                                           41



        ~mmb,,.-_
~2




     °.
     15. Nevertheless this is the nature of the new evidence which I have been asked to
     consider during my scrutiny. I must describe it in some detail before dealing with the
     submissions which Counsel for the Family Support Group, and others, have basedupon
     it. It falls into three groups---evidence from Dr Ed Walker, evidence from supporters
     who became unconscious but survived and who, in some cases, believe they were
     considered to be dead at the scene, and evidence from ambulancemen. I was also asked
     to examine an article by Mr Wardrope in the British Medical Journal.

~L
     Dr Ed Walker


     16. Dr Walker’s evidence can be summarised as follows. He was a House Officer in
     Anaesthetics at Rotherham District Hospital. At about 3 pm on the day of the disaster
     he happened to turn on the television at home and saw scenes of disturbance at
     Hillsborough. He realised there might be casualties and thought he might be of
     assistance, so he went to the Northern General Hospital to see if he could help.

     17. On arrival at the Accident and Emergency Department, no one seemed to know
     very much about the situation. The first casualty arrived soon after he did. This was Lee
     Nicol, who was in cardiopulmonary arrest. Dr Walker intubated him, gave him external
     heart massage, and his heart started beating again. Lee Nicol was taken to the Intensive
     Care Unit, but was declared deafftwo days later.

     18. The second patient arrived shortly afterwards. This was Philip Hammond, who was
     also i n_~cardio-pulmonary arrest. Dr Walker carried out resuscitative treatment and the
     heartbeat was restored. In a statement which Dr Walker made near the time he said that
     he established venous access for drug therapy, but in subsequent comments on Dr
     Slater’s evidence, he said that the drugs which had been administered had been
     delivered via the endotracheal tube. In his evidence to me he could not recall which was
     correct. Philip Hammond’s pupils were fixed and dilated, and shortly afterwards he was
     certified dead.


      19. These are the only two patients treated by Dr Walker whom it has been possibl__e to
     identify. In his statement near the time, Dr Walker dealt with the resuscitative
     rtreatment he gave to six other patients. Three died. He believed that one made a good
     recovery but did not know what the outcome was for the other two. Thereafter he went
     to Ward 60 at the Hospital, where he assisted, particularly with two patients who had
     deteriorated neurologically and had to be transferred to the Cardiac Intensive Therapy
     Unit. The effect of his evidence therefore was that he treated five patients who
     subsequently died, most of them later that day. He treated others who were seriously ill,
     but one at least, and possibly more, recovered.




                                              42
  20. Dr Walker made a written statement in the form of an aide-memoire shortly after
  the events. Apart from these matters to which I have referred, he made a number of
  criticisms about the availability of drugs and other equipment at the hospital and the
  delay in activating the major accident procedure. In evidence to me, he said that these
’ points were mainly for internal consideration by the Hospital. On 20 July 1989, he made
  a witness statement on West Midlands Police Criminal Justice Act witness statement
  paper, which was later put on the computer system (HOLMES) which the West
  Midlands Police were using for their investigation. He wrote this statement Out in his
  own language, and he confirmed to me that he said everything in it which he wished to.
  It forms Appendix 5, part 1.

 21. Dr Walker gave evidence to me on 22 October 1997 and a transcript of his evidence
 appears at Appendix 5, part 2. Dr Walker also made written observations to me dated 28
 September 1997 and in later letters. Much of this is in the form of comment and does not
 add significantly to his factual evidence. He did not give evidence at the Inquest.

 Spectators who were unconscious ~ ....
                      .

 22. Counsel asked me to consider evidence about Ian McDermott, Steven Williams,
 Roger Ball and Edward Spearritt.

 23. Mr McDermott’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 3 September
 1997. I can summarise it as follows. He was in pen 3 and was crushed,. He was in-i~i_~ony
 a~_nd could not brc_athe._He lost consciousness and felt he was going to die)~ ~-cov-~gd
 consciousness while being given the kiss of life on the terraces. He drifted in and out of
 consciousness. He was carried onto the pitch and given further mouth-to-mouth
 resuscitation and heart massage.

 24. Mr McDermott was taken to the gymnasium and given oxygen and a drip. He was
 checked by a doctor and sent to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, where he was treated
 and discharged a few days later. His case attracted some publicity in the press when he
 was visited by the Prince and Princess of Wales. He did not give evidence at the Taylor
 Inquiry or the Inquest, but he had made a statement to the West Midlands Police dated
 29 April 1989:He appears to have forgotten about this but it is in substantially the same
 terms as his recent statement, though with less detail. His earlier statement was
 available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the Coroner.

 25. Steven Williams’s evidence is contained in a signed statement dated 12 October
  1997.1~fifi~fimmarise it as f01iowsl He was ~n pen 3~ At about 15:04-(when-B-ea~dsley’s
 shot hit the cross bar) he was pinned for 5-10 minutes against a crash barrier unable to
 move and in pain. He was subjected to crushin--f6¥ ~ii-I~-~igt-31Yminutes and eventuatty~-
"Iost consciousness. He recovered consciousness on the ground, vomiting and in shock
 and pain. He was taken to the Northern General Hospital. X-rays showed fractures of
 two ribs. He was in hospital for three days. In addition to his physical injuries, he
 suffered post traumatic stress disorder. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry
 or the Inquest.
                                            43
26. Counsel for the Family Support Group have also put to me the evidence of
Andrew Worsley, who dragged Steven Williams out from underneath his father. Mr
Worsley says he thought Steven Williams was dead because he was blue in the face and
his eyes were staring. He dragged him out of the tunnel at the back of the Leppings
Lane terrace to a place where there were 15 to 25 bodies dead or unconscious. He there
handed him over to a police officer "who dropped him uncaringly on the floor".

27. That appears to be the last Mr Worsley saw of him. It would seem that Steven
Williams must have regained consciousness fairly soon afterwards, since he was
conscious when he was put in the ambulance. But it is not known what, if any,
resuscitative treatment he received or whether he was seen by a doctor. If Mr Worsley’s
evidence is correct, it shows a callous attitude by the police officer in question. But there
were doctors and ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end who were dealing with
those brought out through the tunnel from the terraces. The fact that Mr Worsley may
have thought that Mr Williams was dead does not mean that those more expert did so,
or that they abandoned him.

28. Roger Ball is the father of Kester Ball, who died in the disaster. He came to see me
in London on 31 October 1997. Mr Ball gave evidence at the Inquest to the effect that
he was in pen 3 and became crushed. Shortly before the game was stopped he must have
lost consciousness. He regained consciousness near Gate C, with someone slapping his
face. He fully recovered, and was not taken to hospital but searched for his son.

29. There has been put before me also a letter from solicitors acting for a Mr Ian Wier
to Mr Ball’s solicitors. It is stated that Mr Wier found Mr Ball collapsed on the ground
and apparently dead. The man next to Mr Ball was dead. Mr Wier says that Mr Ball was
going blue in the face and another supporter trod on his chest to get out of the ground.
He revived Mr Ball by slapping his face.

30. It seems that Mr Ball recovered consciousness without any resuscitative treatment
such as mouth-to-mouth ventilation or heart massage and thereafter seems to have
made a complete recovery. The fact that a wholly untrained person (Mr Wier) thought
he was dead does not suggest to me that the emergency services were making similar
erroneous assumptions.

31., Edward Spearritt is the father of Adam Spearritt, who died as a result of the
disaster. Adam died in intensive car_~e at.16.45 on 15 April. Edward Spearritt gave
evidence at the Inquest. He was in pen 4 and was crushed. He lost consciousness and
was taken to hospital. He too was taken to intensive care, but made a full recovery.
Counsel for the Family Support Group told me that there is no evidence as to what
happened to Mr Spearritt between the time he lost consciousness at 3.06 pm or
thereabouts and 5 pm when he arrived at Hospital. Counsel submitted to me that it was
reasonable to conclude that Mr Spearritt was also left for dead because of what
happened to other bodies (presumably a reference to Mr Ball)




                                           44
i   32. I h~nable to ascertain at what time Mr Spearritt reached hospital, though
    ~~~Most of the serious cases, of which Mr
i   ~-
    " " ""----~"--Spearrltt’s was one, were taken to hospital well before this. No detailed inquiry or
    evidence was collated in respect of victims who, like Mr Spearritt, were crushed but
    survived. I do not think that it is possible to conclude on the evidence that Mr Spearritt
    was at any time "left for dead".

    Ambulancemen


    33. I have been asked to consider evidence from three ambulancemen--Anthony
    Edwards, John Flack and Peter Howes.

    34. Anthony Edwards was ~mployed by South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
    Service (SYMAS). He was on duty on the day of the disaster. He has made four signed
    statements. The first, dated 7 May 1989 to SYMAS solicitors, was put on the West
    Midlands Police Holmes computer and was available to the Taylor Inquiry and the
    Coroner. The second is dated 25 October 1989. The third is dated 5 September 1995 and
    the fourth is dated October 1997. In addition he has written me a number of letters.

    35. Mr Edwards was very anxious to speak to me and he came to see me on
    11 December 1997. He did not give evidence at the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest but his
    part in taking Victoria Hicks to hospital is referred to in the mini-inquest into her death
    (24 April 1990, page 9).

    36. In his first statement, of 7 May 1989, Mr Edwards describes the arrival of his
    ambulance at the Penistone Road end, being ordered onto the pitch by Mr Hopkins, the
    Assistant Chief Ambulance Officer, but being told by police that he could not get
    through. After the intervention of Mr Hopkins, his ambulance was driven onto the pitch
    as the St John Ambulance was leaving. On the way to the Leppings Lane end progress
    was slow. Fans were screaming for the ambulance to stop.

    37. On arrival at that end there was much confusion. Mr Edwards went to assist a
    casualty and vJhilst doing so h.e was deli~-e-I~Id-clced]n his rib. His ambulance was
    eventually loaded with a boy and girl (Victoria Hicks) and another body.

    38. The ambulance left with two policemen, a nurse and two spectators (one of whom
    was Trevor Hicks~Lictoria’s father), and proceeded to tlae-N--~t-ti-eYh-G~n~-fa~--
    ~~e returned to the ground and Mr Edwards assisted with casualties at the
    gymnasium. By this time the serious casualties had been dealt with, he was exhausted
    and was told to go to Casualty at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital because he had been
    kicked. Mr Edwards said that he was unaware of any Hillsborough plan or the role of
    the gymnasium as a casualty clearing centre or temporary mortuary until he was told on
    the day.



                                                  45
                                                                                                 1
39. Mr Edwards’s statement of 25 October 198~ is immaterial, because it simply states
that he does not wish there to be any prosecution in respect of the assault on him. In a
letter to me dated 10 November 1997 he says that file two officers who interviewed him on
21 October 1989 (sic) showed him video tape and photographs of his ambulance on the
pitch. He points out that they must have forgotten this when they interviewed Mr Bruder
on 3 May 1.990 and gave evidence at the Inquest on 4 May. I refer to this later, in Chapter 4.

40. Mr Edwards’s statements of September 1995 and October 1997 add little of
substance to his previous account of his arrival and departure from the pitch, save to
point out that his ambulance experienced no difficulty getting down the ramp. This was
different from the experience of the first two ambulances to go on the pitch. When
treating patients in the gymnasium, he described the scene as chaotic. There was a
shortage of orofarangeal airways, and he noticed how few bodies had these airways in
them. The rest of the most recent statement is comment.

41. John Flack was a leading ambulanceman employed by SYMAS and was on duty
on the day. He made four signed statements. The first dated 5 May 1989 was available to
the Taylor Inquiry. The others, dated 10 August, 23 October and 29 November 1989
were additionally available to the Coroner. Mr Flack did not give evidence at the
Inquiry or Inquest, but his part in taking Lee Nicol and Carl Lewis to hospital was
referred to in the summaries which police gave at their respective mini-inquests.

42. In his first statement Mr Flack describes the arrival of his ambulance at the
Penistone Lane end, contact with Station Officer Eason, driving onto the pitch and
taking a boy (Lee Nicol) who was receiving resuscitative treatment and was
accompanied by a doctor to Northern General Hospital. Apart from the St John
Ambulance this was the first ambulance on the pitch. He returned to the ground and
collected another casualty, but on arrival at the hospital, the casualty was examined by a
doctor and declared dead.

43. He returned to the ground, this time being directed to Leppings Lane (outside the
ground). There were three ambulances already there. He described the scene as bedlam
with police and fans everywhere. He had difficulty in finding an ambulance officer in
charge or deciding where the casualty clearing point was~ He took a third casualty (Carl
Lewis) to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital accompanied by a local doctor and a
Derbyshire ambulance man (Peter Howes). After that he reported to the Herries Road
bus*depot which was being used as the assembly for ambulances.

44. Mr Flack’s remaining statements are concerned with identification of the
casualties, and add nothing of substance.

45.. Peter Howes was a qualified para-medic employed by Derbyshire Ambulance
Service. He was on duty on the day and his ambulance was called to assist. He has made
two written statements. The first dated 15 September 1989 was available to the Coroner
and his part in helping to resuscitate Carl Lewis and take him to the Hallamshire
Hospital was referred to in the mini-inquest. The second is dated 15 October 1997.
                                           46
46. In his first statement he described arrival at the Leppings Lane end. He was unable
to get any clear information and there was no obvious ambulance point. There was a
large number of casualties, some conscious, some not. He described resuscitative
measures on a patient who was lying face down with a shirt over his head. He intubated
the patient and instructed a police officer on heart compression. He was joined by a
doctor who used a defibrillator carried in the ambulance and inserted a canula. He was
then asked to accompany Carl Lewis to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital with Mr Flack
and the doctor.

47. His second statement adds little to the previous one. He comments on lack of
police help in finding the location and the fact that they did not receive a major incident
call which might have prepared him for the horrific scenes.

48. I did not think it necessary to interview any of these witnesses other than Dr
Walker, nor to append their statements to this report. Their statements were available
to the police and are available to the Family SupportGroup and I am prepared to accept
what is said in them.

Mr Wardrope’s article in the British Medical Journal


49. Counsel also referred me to an article published in the British Medical.lournal
(BMJ) in November 1991 by Mr Wardrope--the Accident and Emergency consultant at
the Northern General Hospital--and others. This showed that all 13 Hillsborough
patients admitted to the hospi!_tal_in cardiacarrest died (two after a period in the
Intensive Care Unit), as did the one patient admitted to Royal Hallamshirc in cardiac
arrest.

50. The significance of the article as. f~r.a.s.tJ!_e S._u.pp_ol:t Group were C0ncerncdwas t_!~at_ .........
it also said that ten patients who were unconscious or convulsing orl admission and five .......
w~6-~ge?~-Cb-fifused-vcere admitted tO Intenslve care and survived, though the outcome
in some cases involved severe neurological deficit including two in a persistent
vegetative state (one of whom, Tony Bland, has since died).

51. The article also said that of 15 Other Patients who were admitted w!t!L~).!).istory of
unconsciousness, 12 were admitted to the wards and three-senthome. All excep{ one
made a good recovery.

Arguments for quashing the inquest verdicts

52. Based on the evidence which I have described above, Counsel submitted to me
that a further application to the Divisional Court for judicial review with a view to
quashing the verdict of accidental death would have a reasonable prospect of success.
Counsel cited the following reasons, which I have done my best to summarise.


                                                 47
               The medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the deceased
       .
               had died quick and painless deaths and that they were all dead by 3.15 pm. For
               this reason the Coroner ruled that no evidence after 3.15 could be considered.
               The 3.15 pm cut off was predicated on a number of unrealistic assumptions about
               the time it took for the deceased to be asphyxiated and unconscious. The
               evidence now put forward shows these conclusions and assumptions are false.
               Reliance is primarily placed on the evidence of Dr Walker (written submissions,
               paras 58 &59).
          The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3.15 cut off point
       .
          and shows that people could have been saved. The evidence shows that:
           (a) some of those who died were alive at 3.15 pm. This is a reference to Dr
                   Walker’s evidence (written submission para 76 and oral submission para
                   81, line 31--the reference to Houldsworth is an obvious mistake for
                   Walker).
           (b)     At least one supporter who would otherwise have died was saved by
                   proper medical treatment (this appears to be a reference to the cases of Ian
                   McDermott and Stephen Williams, the evidence of Dr Walker that some
                   of those he treated survived, and the BMJ article by Mr Wardrope--
                   written submission para 76).
      3. That the justification for the 3.15 cut off point was that one can be confident that
         ~when pe~5pie13ecame unconscious-ti~eir-cie-atl~s wouTci-ha-~ f--0Ho~-e-d~, normally
       ..... within six minute_~s_,.pr in s gm~ii.~ases iater, gut- thishMb-e-e~-f-fils-i-fle’~-b-y-new
          "eVidehCe that not all those who became unconscious died. Reliance is placed on
           the evidence of Dr Walker that some patients treated by him survived, the cases
           of McDermott, Williams, and Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ. Had this
           evidence been given or the facts known the whole of this cut off point would have
           been completely undermined (oral submission p66, line 17 and p75 p25).

       .
                The jury at the Inquest were not allowed to know that two people (Lee Nicol and
                Adam Spearritt) died after 3.15. The jury were not told that people who became
                unconscious and were taken to hospital, recovered (oral submission p77).
                That the evidence previously referred to together with the evidence of the
           .
                ambulance men Edwards, Flack and Howes as to the inadequate response to the
                disaster by the police and emergency services was relevant to the question "how"
                the deceased died and the Coroner should have adr~itted this evidence and not
                imposed a cut off time.
      6.~ That it would be open to the Divisional Court to hold that the verdicts had been
       ’ procured by fraud, suppression of evidence or insufficiency of inquiry (oral
         submission p69). That the evidence of Dr Walker (like that of Mr Houldsworth)
         was central and its non-presentation could amount to fraudulent concealment
         (oral submissions p81).

Conclusions on these submissions

53.            In my judgement these submissions are unfounded.



                                                  48
 54. I now set out my reasons for this conclusion. It is convenient to consider the
 reasons advanced in sub-paragraphs 1 to 4 together, since they raise different aspects of
 the same argument. Sub-paragraph 5 is slightly different. Sub-paragraph 6 applies to all
 evidence said to be new.

 Arguments about the 3.15 cut-off point


  55. The arguments advanced in sub-paragraphs 1-3 of paragraph 52 above show ow__m_
 .complete misunderstanding of the Coroner’s reasons for imposing a cut-off point at all
  or choosing the time of 3.15 pm. I have set these out in paragraph 1i of this Chapter,
  particularly sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (e). I do not need to repeat them here,. But
  essentially they were that it is not necessary or appropriate when considering the
  question "how", i.e. by what means, the deceased came to their death to consider what
  happened after the injuries which resulted in death were inflicted. This reasoning was
  upheld by the Divisional Court. To adduce fresh evidence that some of those who died
  did so after 3.15, or that some of those taken to hospital in a state of unconsciousness
  survived does not affect this reasoning.


  56. The answer to the U~l_ue~ion how the deceased came to their deaths was that they
.&suffered-d-f~rom traumatic or crush asphyxia (see note i to thisC-h-fi-p-i-e-r~ as ~-r~i-t-0T-
  being crushed in pens 3 and 4 through dangerous overcrowding with the result that they
  were unable to breathe for a continuous and sufficiently long period of time to cause
  death. They did not come to their deaths because first-aid or medical attention failed to
  resuscitate them.

 57. It was well known to the Coroner and legal representatives of the families, and also
 to the inquest jury, that not all those who died did so before 3.15. So far as the Coroner
 was concerned he said as much in the course of his reasons for imposing the cut off
 (Inquest transcript, day i p16). Mr Tim Kin Eg__Q_C~ Counsel for the families, confirmed to
 me that this was so, as is apparent from his submissions to the Coroner (day l, p9) which
 referred to the case of William Pemberton and the evidence of an ambulance man that
 resuscitation at 15.50 appeared to be successful.
                                                                                                   i
 58. So far as the jury was concerned,they had heardevidence in tile mini-inquests that
 Lee Nico!__died_ on IT Ai)rii~-and flaey heard of the attempts that were made to resuscitate
 him both before and after arrival at hospital. The jury also heard that Adam Spearritt
 and Philip Hammond did not die until after attempts to resuscitate them both before
 and after arrival at hospital failed. They also heard the evidence of Mr Wardrope, which
 I summarise in paragraphs 62 and 63 below.




                                              49
59. It was well known to the Coroner and the legal representative of the families that
not all those who were unconscious as a result of the crushing died. At Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry, evidence was given of successful mouth-to-mouth resuscitation being given to
those who were unconscious (Bradley, day i page 97). Other witnesses gave evidence to
Lord Taylor that they had been unconscious. Mr Hennessey (day 2, page 49) recovered
consciousness in hospital. Mr Clarke (day 2, page 70) was crushed, blacked out,
recovered consciousness on the pitch after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation by a
policeman and was later taken to hospital. Mr Moody (day 3, p98) lost consciousness
and recovered on the pitch. Mr Smith (day 4, p136) was trapped for some minutes,
passed out, and recovered consciousness while being put over the fence.

60. Evidence was given at the Inquest by many witnesses who said that they became
unconscious because of the crush. Two said they recovered consciousness in hospital
(Mr Spearritt [day 34, pll] and Mr Baron [day 35 p12 and 18]). Others regained
consciousness at the ground. Mr Garrett (day 22 p48) said he temporarily tost hearing
and sight. Others were Messrs Crawford (day 25 p18), Anderson (day 27 p33), N J
Langley (day 26 p123), Oyitch (day 32 p97), Jolly (day 35 p96), Ball (day 40
pl09--whom I have already mentioned above), Gray (day 42 p12), L D Lloyd (day 45
p102), and T W Lloyd (day 45 p117, who lost consciousness twice). Mr King also
confirmed to me that he was well aware of this.

61. Mr Wardrope, the Consultant in the Accident and Emergency Department at the
Northern General Hospital, gave evidence at the Inquests. His evidence can be
summarised as follows.

62. He arrived at the hospital at 15.33 and took charge. By then six patients had
 already arrived. At first he gave help resuscitating some patients but soon took over the
job of triaging patients as they arrived. 87 patients were received in the first hour. 13 of
these were suffering cardiac arrest. Some of these were triaged dead on arrival. It is not
 quite clear how many this applied to, but it seems to have been not more than four.

63. Other patients received resuscitative treatment but died. These patients were not
dead on arrival, otherwise resuscitative treatment would not have been attempted. Two
patients, Lee Nicol and Adam Spearritt, were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit but
subsequently died. Of the 87 patients, 17 were admitted to the Intensive Care Unit.

64. Although Mr Wardrope’s article in the BMJ is somewhat more detailed, it does
not differ significantly from this evidence. What is apparent from Mr Wardrope’s
evidence is that a substantial number of patients were not dead on their admission to
hospital, but died subsequently; and that of the 17 patients who were taken into
intensive c~re, and were therefore almost certainly unconscious and seriously ill, the
great majority lived.




                                           50
 65.   In his summing up (day 75, p72) the Coroner told the jury:
        "In order to avoid any possible misunderstandings, of course, you have to
        understand particularly with asphyxial deaths and particularly in the light of what
        the various pathologists said, if you could have got to a particular person or if one
        had got to a person before the irretrievable damage had been done then, provided
        one did resuscitation correctly, that person might well not only have recovered but
        might have been perfectly all right. ~le. Indeed, we have seen several
        people who were unconscious, who told us so, and who are here and ~ho seem
        perfectly all right because the cells in their case fortunately had not been so severely
        damaged as to the irretrievably harmed. That, if you like, is the beauty of the body,
        that you can assault it like that and retrieve it before it is too late and the people
        themselves just recover."

 66. The fact that Dr Walker had treated Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini-inquest
 on him (1 May 1990, p9). It is clear that the rest of the evidence which I have seen from
 Dr Walker, Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams adds nothing to the evidence given at
 the Inquest.

 Arguments about the response to the disaster


 67. I now turn to consider the submission (5 in my summary of the arguments at para
 52 above) that the_inques!yerd!_.ts s.hou!_dJ?_e quas_hed b_.ecau_s.e._the fxesh_eyid~.ce,
~_particularly that of the ambulancemen, shows that lives could have been saved by a
 more prompt and efficient response from the emergency services.                                   !
 68. The fact that evidence was available, from ambulancemen who were not called at
 the T-~-~l;b-r--I~qgl’~, fi-SS-utconfusion, lack of comprehension by some police officers and
 other difficulties, does not in any way undermine or affect the Coroner’s decision not to
 have a wide-ranging inquiry into the response of the emergency services or his decision
 to have a cut-off point into the inquiry as to how the deceased came to their death.
 Indeed it is only to be expected t h.at_eyid.e_n..e r_elating_.m _the rescue operation existed.
 Had the Coroner embarked on such an inquiry, which was wholly unneceSsary for the
 purpose of answering
                 f
                           the question of how the victims met their deaths, it is quite evident
 to me that thelnquest, whmh lasted an extremely long time as it was, would have
 become totally impossible.

 69. As the_Divj_sj_o._na!Courtpointed-ou-t.~ i-t was a matter for the Coroner’s discretion at
 what point he chose to confine the inquiry. Even if there had been no prior investigation
 in, o-tilE- response iSf-fh-~oi~eand emergency services, the Coroner would have been
 perfectly entitled to limit the inquiry as he did. But again, as the Court pointed out, the
 decision was "reasonable and sustainable, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive
 public inquiry which had already been conducted by Lord Taylor" (per McCowan LJ,
 transcript p3). I shall return to this matter in the second part of this chapter.




                                               51
    Fraud or suppression of evidence?

    70. The suggestion that the evidence now put before me on this aspect of the case was
    deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned acted in bad faith is in my
    opinion, wholly irresponsible. The evidence of Mr Edwards and Mr Flack was available
    to Lord Taylor’s lnqmry, lh-~re is nothing surprising in the fact that they were not called
    to give evidence since they did not add materially to that which was given.

    71. Dr Walker’s evidence was available to the Coroner and the fact that he had treated
    Lee Nicol was referred to at the mini-inquest on him. It would be unusual for a junior
    doctor to be called to give evidence of treatment, even if he was the first anaesthetist on
    the scene. The matter was dealt with, as one would expect, by Dr Appleyard, the
    Consultant Anaesthetist in charge of the Intensive Care Unit who was ca!led to give
    evidence. For reasons I have already given, Dr Walker added nothing of any
    significance.

    72. So far as the evidence of Ian McDermott and Stephen Williams is concerned, the
    West Midlands Police took a very large number of statements from Liverpool
    supporters including Mr McDermott. More than 50 were called at the Taylor Inquiry
    and over 100 gave evidence at the Inquest (only 8 of whom had done so before at the
    Inquiry). I think it is worth quoting what Lord Taylor said about the West Midlands
    Police.
            "I pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands Police for their speed and
            dedicatioff-{n-gitth~!~g ~-h)e ev-i-deh-~ an-dh--d~ aii those resp~nst-3rb-iUfO~-processing it.
            The most eloquent tribute io-fairnesJ-h-ff{tTho--F~ghness of the police investigation
            came from.the Secretary of the Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had
            been initial anxiety at Liverpool as to whether that investigation would be fair and
            obfective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness statements themselves.
            Having heard the opening statement by Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the
            evidence gathered by the police, he found that it accorded entirely with his
            Association’s evidence and the initial anxiety was wholly dispelled." (I~]~-erim
         "Report, para 16-6~--.

    73. It is obvious that the police could not take statements from all those who were in
    pens 3 and 4 who survived the ordeal. As I have pointed out the evidence of these
    witnesses did not differ materially from that of witnesses who were called to give
    evidence. The suggestion, if indeed it is made in respect of those witnesses that their
    evidence was concealed or suppressed, is completely unfounded.




/   74. In m~¢ opinion it is quite impossible on the basis of the evidence and submissions
    now advanced to impugn the verdict of accidental death or suggest that the Divisional
    Court should again be invited judicially to review that verdlct-"~ .....




                                                     52
Note 1 (to paragraph 11)

Ihere is a semantic argument based on the difference between traumatic and crush
a~’phyxia.

 Ih,./bre Hillsborough the expression traumatic asphyxia was generally used to describe
m’phyxia due to the application of external force. It covers a wide range of cases from
instant death due to crushing by some enormous weight, strangulation where"
unconsciousness occurs fairly quickly but death only after some period, to cases like the
present where the chest is fixed in position for a period of about 4-6 minutes, so that
throughout that time the victim cannot breathe. As in the case of strangulation, if the
pressure is released before death occurs recovery can take place, though it is not
necessarily always complete. If death has not already occurred, resuscitative treatment in
the form of oxygen or mouth-to-mouth ventilation together with external heart massage is
the appropriate first aid treatment.


7"he problem at Hillsborough was that those who died were unable to breathe for too long
a time, because it was not immediately recognised what was happening to them and the
extreme difficulty of access. It may be that crush asphyxia is a somewhat more specific
description than traumatic asphyxia to describe the cause of their deaths. But the Coroner
used the terms interchangeably and in my view he was right to do so.


Part II The Rescue Operation

75. Should there now be a fresh judicial inquiry into the response of the police and the
emergency services, with a view to ascertaining whether lives could have been saved? In
my interviews with some of the families, this appeared to be what they wanted.

76. I also had some submissions on this topic from Professor Scraton, Director of the
Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice at Edge Hill University College. I was not
initially clear as to what further investigation or inquiry Professor Scraton thought
ought to occur, but in due course it ~ed that this was_oae_o£Xhe_t_7~ a_~ects that he
urged ought tp be inquired into. It became one of the main points in the final written
gu mi ions lC e sent me on 3 December 1997.


77. I cannot agree that there should be a new public inquiry into the rescue operation.
It was extensively inquired into by Lord Taylor. He reached certain conclusions and
made recommendations. I will set out as briefly as I can the nature of the evidence that
the Taylor Inquiry heard, and the findings and recommendations made in relation to
this matter.




                                            53
The evidence heard by Lord Taylor


78. Liverpool supporters spoke of the slow reaction of the police, in appreciating what
was going on in the pens, the failure to open the perimeter gates earlier and their closure
in the early stages. Police officers who had been stationed on the perimeter track, in the
West Stand and in the Control Box, gave evidence as to why they did not appreciate
sooner what was happening.

79. Many police officers and supporters gave evidence to Lord Taylor of attempts to
extricate casualties from the pens and the difficulties involved, attempts at resuscitation
by police and supporters, and the chaotic conditions in the pens and on the pitch.

80. St John Ambulance personnel who were on duty on the day gave evidence about
the rescue work. Mr Wells was the Divisional Superintendent in charge. Mr Hytner QC
who appeared for the families at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry expressly stated (day 19 p19)
that having read hundreds of statements of supporters there was no word of criticism
levelled against the St John Ambulance Brigade. The other St John personnel who gave
evidence were Divisional Superintendent Towler, Mr Godley and Mr Saxton.

81. Two South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS) officers,
Station Officer Higgins and Mr Eason, who were present at the disaster gave evidence
to Lord Taylor. They spoke of the confused situation, difficulty of access and problems
with the radio. Mr Hopkins, the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Officer took over command
on the ground at the Penistone Road end. He dealt at length with the arrangements for
use of the gymnasium as a casualty station, access for ambulances, equipment carried
and the operation generally. He was not cross examined by Mr Hytner. Mr Clarke and
Mr Page, senior ambulance officers, gave evidence about the control of the operation at
Headquarters.

82. Lord Taylor’s Inquiry considered at length the questions of when ambulances were
summoned, why they were not summoned earlier, when the major accident plan was put
into effect and why it was not done earlier. This involved the evidence of the police
officers who had been in the control box and SYMAS personnel at Headquarters. The
question of why there was no request for doctors and nurses to attend the injured until
late on was dealt with, together with the impact on casualties.

83. The Taylor Inquiry also looked at the question of when emergency equipment was
asked for and why it did not arrive until it was too late. The Inquiry went into these
issues witl~ the police and the fire brigade. Altogether five fire officers gave evidence of
the part the brigade played in the rescue operation.




                                           54
Doctors


84. Five doctors, three of whom were Liverpool supporters present at the match as
spectators, gave evidence as to the parts they played in the rescue operation. In the light
of the submissions now made, it may be helpful to refer to some of the evidence given by
these doctors.

85. Dr Byrne was a Consultant Anaesthetist. He went down to the pitch at about 3.20.
He saw that cardio-pulmonary resuscitation appeared to be being carried out efficiently
and that he could be more use elsewhere. On the directions of the police he went to the
gymnasium. There were already two doctors there. He assisted in treating patients and
later gave formal confirmation of death in relation to 16 bodies. His cross examination
by Mr Hytner is important and I set it out in full (Taylor Inquiry day 25 p24).
      Q. Dr Byrne, I am not sure that I got an answer of yours down accurately, If I did, I
      would like you to help us about explaining it; if not, I will not have any questions. I
      think you said that an earlier call for help would not have done very much good.
      Have I got that down accurately or inaccurately?--A. No, that is correct.

      Q. Just for the benefit of the bereaved, I think I ought to ask you to explain that a
      little. Can I take it stage by stage. In the crush, there would have been those who
      immediately or after a while stopped breathing?--A. That is correct.

      Q. There will be those who got on to the pitch still breathing but gasping for breath,
      maybe with rib injuries or something of that sort?--A. I believe there were a few.

      Q. By the time any doctor would have got to the pitch, however quickly, there
      would have been those who were already clinically dead--is that right?--A. That is
      correct.

       Q. No good could have come from any doctor getting to them because they are
       dead?--A. Some of them may have been able to be resuscitated from the cardio-
       vascular point of view but would have suffered such lack of oxygen to the brain
       that had they been resuscitated, they would have severe lack of oxygen brain
       damage.

       Q. When I say "clinically dead" I mean not capable of being resuscitated.--A.
       Well, capable of being resuscitated from the circulation point of view; I am sorry.

       Q. In between, would there have been those who were either finding it difficult to
       breathe or who, though alive, had ceased temporarily to breathe?--A. There would
       certainly be some perhaps finding it difficult to breathe for a number of reasons.
       Most of those reasons would involve slightly more sophisticated equipment than
       would have been available or one would expect to be available at a football ground.

       Q. You see, the comment that earlier medical attention would not have done any
       good would seem to imply logically that once the doctors got there they could not
       do much good. Are you saying that really however heroically people were behaving
       in attempting mouth-to-mouth resuscitation and so forth, they did not actually do
       any good?--A. I think that is my overall impression, yes.

                                             55
     Q. So people who appeared to be revived by mouth-to-mouth resuscitation or other
     means of resuscitation, are you suggesting that if they had m~t had medical attention
     eventually they would have started breathing of their owlt accord? A. I believe
     there are odd patients who have recovered after mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, but
     they would have had to be resuscitated very, very quickly.
     Q. You appreciate I have no medical instructions to challenge anything that you are
     saying. I am simply trying to get some clarification.--A. Yes.

86. Dr Byrne was re-examined by Mr Collins QC, Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry
(page 29)--
     Q. Dr Byrne, can I explore something a little more of Mr Hytner’s questions? Am I
     right in thinking that broadly there are two categories. There are those who have
     already died in the sense that they have stopped breathing as a result of crushing,
     and those you think probably would not have been saved by an earlier call for
     medical assistance?--A. Yes, that is correct.
     Q. Because they would have been crushed on the terraces and would have been
     likely to have suffered, effectively, death before they were able to be got out?--A.
     They would have suffered severe brain complications.
     Q. And the only way of resuscitating those sort of people would have been to have
     got them either mouth-to-mouth or oxygen or whatever in the terraces themselves
     or immediately upon being brought out?--A. That is correct.
     Q. I suppose a doctor present immediately on them being brought out might have
     assisted but he could not, I suspect, have done a great deal more than a trained
     ambulanceman or a trained St John’s person could have done, is that right?--A.
     Yes, in that situation.
     Q. So far as the other sort are concerned, there are those who have suffered some
     sort of crush injuries, perhaps fractured ribs or whatever and who as a result have
     difficulty in breathing. Is that right?--A. Yes.
      Q. And if they are not given treatment, they might cease to breathe altogether?--A.
      There is a condition called tension pneumothorax where the rib punctures the
      lining of the lung and if it happens on both sides, then you cannot breathe and you
      need a seal putting in the chest, involving inserting a special needle in.
     Q. That I can see, but what I am getting at is there may have been people
     presumably brought out from those terraces who had difficulty in breathing, who
     had not ceased breathing but who had difficulty in breathing?--A. There was
     certainly one patient that I saw.
     Q.And there may well have been others?--A. Yes.
     Q. Lord Justice Taylor: On the pitch?--A. No, in the gymnasium.
     Q. Still having difficulty then?--A. Yes. He had clinically obvious rib fractures.
     Q. Mr Collins: And those sort of patients would have needed medical attention? I
     am sorry, that is the wrong question. Such patients could have been assisted by
     medical attention--is that right?--A. My view would be that you would get a
     patient like that quickly to hospital.

                                           56
          Q. I see. That is really all that sensibly can be done?--A. Unless you have this
          special equipment for relieving tension pneumothorax.

          Q. We know that oxygen was administered to a number of people. Is that simply to
          help them when they have difficulties in breathing?--A. The use of high inspired
          concentrations of oxygen in this situation is, I think, probably not very well proven.
          It is more as a device to force something into the lungs. There is 20 per cent oxygen
          in the air and that is usually sufficient, but it has to be got into the lungs. This device
          that has been mentioned is in fact just a way of inflating the lungs but, instead of
          with air, with 100 per cent oxygen. So I don’t think in that situation it’s been proven
          that lOOper cent oxygen is necessarily any better than air.

          Q. So does it boil down to this--that although obviously the presence of a doctor
          helps to tend to a patient to diagnose fractures and to treat the patient in the correct
          manner, what really matters is getting patients in this sort of situation to hospital as
          quickly as possible?--~A. That is my belief."


    87. Dr Ashlon was a Liverpool supporter. He answered the call for doctors and nurses
    and went to the back of the West Stand. The police did not seem to know what was
    wanted or who was in charge. He assisted with the resuscitation and sorting out
    priorities as to who should go to hospital. He was critical of the absence of equipment.
    He was asked (Taylor Inquiry, day 25 p115):

          Q. Well now do you think looking back on it and seeing what was there, that if
          equipment of this nature had been available it would have made any practical
          difference to the number of people who survived?--A. I think it is a very difficult
          question because of the nature of the injuries. It seems to me that a lot of people
          were actually dead when they were brought out from the ground so we are really in
          the realms of speculation. What I would say is if there had been equipment there
          then at least the various medical and nursing people who were there and who
          became involved, many of whom have contacted me, could at least have had a go at
          trying to do something with the equipment.

          Q. Well we have heard today that those people who were not breathing had
          something like four minutes before they were going to be in serious trouble if not
          dead?--A. That is correct.


    88. Dr Ashton arranged for serious cases to go to hospital. Those who were left were
    either dead or had minor injuries. He and another doctor confirmed those who were
    dead at that end of the ground.

    89. Dr Curpen was a Liverpool supporter. He realised there was trouble and went to
    help. The police diverted him to the gymnasium. This was just after 3.20 and he was the
    first doctor there. There was very little equipment at that stage. But later, about 3.30, a
    team of para-medics arrived and there was then all the equipment needed. He then
    examined bodies and confirmed those that were dead.



                                                  57




L
  90. Dr Phillips was also a Liverpool supporter. He went onto the pitch at about 3.10
  and assisted with resuscitation. After that he looked for people who were dangerously
  ill; but he could not find any, they were either dead or slightly injured. He gave evidence
  during day 25 of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, when he said (p 95):
            Q. So far as that is concerned, can you say if there is anybody who might have been
            saved but was not as a result of what you perceived as to the inadequacies of the
            equipment from your point of view?--A. I can only say that there may have been
            because it may well be that the delay in getting people out of the terrace was too
            great and by then it was probably or possibly too late for them and it concerns me
            not that people would have been harmed by a de-fibrillator, that in actual fact
            maybe some severely brain-damaged people may have been revived and we would
            now have a great number of still unconscious, permanently brain-damaged fans.


  91. At page 96 of the transcript he says "If they had not been breathing for [4 minutes],
  then it was hopeless, I agree."


  92. All this evidence was entirely in accord with that iven by the pathologists and Mr

J ~_th
  Wardro~eAnquests. ~ if D-~ Walker’s evidence wag-at variance with i-tvwhich
      y view it is not, it would not jus-ti/y-fl%-~sue being reopened. Mr King f61i] me that
                    e families that if the evidence of the pathologists at the Inquest was to
  be challenged, medical evidence would be required to support the challenge. This was
  obviously correct advice. No such evidence was forthcoming then or now.

  93. In addition to those who gave oral evidence to Lord Taylor a considerable number
  of statements from ambulance personnel, firemen and doctors who responded to the
  call for help were available to his Inquiry. Lord Taylor made it clear that he had taken
  into account many written statements in addition to oral testimony and that he would
  not have been assisted by calling any more witnesses to give evidence in person (Interim
  Report, paragraph 14). I have looked at the written statements which were then
  available, some of which can be found on the body files. In my opinion their effect is not
  significantly different from that of the witnesses who gave oral evidence at Lord
  Taylor’s Inquiry though they are of course all dealing with the particular part which they
  played.

  Lord Taylor’s conclusions about the rescue operation
      ...21 ........................................................
  94. Lord Taylor dealt with the rescue operation in Chapter 5 of his Interim Report. At
  para 89 he said
              "Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord. The rest were
              mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated."




                                                                       58
95. In Chapter 14 of his Interim Report Lord Taylor dealt with the response of the
police. He criticised the slow appreciation of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray of what
was happening. He eontinued (para 251 and 252)
       "Until Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived, there was no effective leadership either
      from control or on the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. No orders were
      given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve pressure. Some officers did this on
      their own initiative. Apart from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no attempt
       was made to clear and mark off a casualty area where first-aid could be given
       without hindrance by fans and photographers milling about between the bodies.
       There was no co-ordination of the early provision of first-aid or of stretcher parties
      or of the rescue effort through gates 3 and 4. No request for help was broadcast to
      doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29pm when it was too late. Probably,
      there was little that could have been achieved in most cases however soon doctors
      had been summoned, but there were marginal cases where earlier attention might
      have made a difference,
       The plight of those behind the fencing and the existence of injuries were known to
       officers at the scene from 3 pm. But the Major Disaster Plan was not started until
       3.06 pm at earliest when the ambulance service was called. No request for cutting
       gear or for the fire brigade was made until 3.13 pm. Again, it is unlikely that these
       services could have saved lives if they had been called promptly, but it is possible."


96. In Chapter 21 of his Interim Report Lord Taylor reported on the first-aid and
emergency services. He said (paras 296 and 297)
      "I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
      response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
      15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
      attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
      did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of
      triage. ~_~_Nas~ be wrong in all three aspects. Unfortunately he had seen fit
      to go on tele-fi~~en-g-Ee said more-lives could have been saved if
      staff and equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as
      to the times of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not
      possible to say whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television
      were irresponsible. The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I
      am satisfied on overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the
      pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the
      risk of injury from the electric charge.
       I find that all three of the emergency services named above responded promptly
       when alerted, that they brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel
       operated efficiently."


 97. Lord Taylor made comments on what it was reasonable to expect in the way of
equi_pment. He criticised the lack of co-operatl~on between police and emergel~cy
 services and dealt with problems of access for ambulances. In his Final Report Lord
 Taylor made specific recommendations in relation to co-ordination of the emergency
 services with the police (para 228), and the sort of first-aid, medical facilities and
 ambulances that should be available at football stadia.

                                             59
Mr Edwards’s evidence


98. I discussed earlier in this Chapter the written statements about the emergency
services response from Mr Tony Edwards, a former South Yorkshire ambulanceman. I
think it is convenient at this point to discuss the oral evidence that he gave me. I had not
thought it necessary to interview Mr Edwards, for reasons which I have already
described. But he was anxious to come to see me and he did so on 11 December 1997.

99. Although he had never mentioned this before, Mr Edwards told me that he was
critical of the response of the ambulance service. He said that, in his opinion,
ambulances should have gone onto the pitch and triaging should have taken place at the
Leppings Lane end of the pitch. He blamed himself for not triaging patients at this end
of the pitch. He said this was his duty as the only ambulance man there. Specifically, he
said that Victoria Hicks should not have been put in his ambulance as she was already
dead, whereas he believed that her sister Sarah was not. But he did not take Sarah’s
pulse or see if her pupils reacted to light.


 100. Mr E~mbulance should have stopped be!ore leaving the
 gro~iid-for-tr~~e_.~aiu n~ had neve~ m~ntion~u tncsc-eriticisms--and
o~g-~-h-iUhlae had--before, because he expected to be called to give evidence and
 cross-examined on them. Mr Edwards did not understand that he could not be cross-
 examined with a view to eliciting matters he had never mentioned. It seems to me that
 his criticism of the operation ignores the fact that there were both doctors and St John
 Ambulance personnel at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch, as well as from time to
 time Mr Higgins, Mr Carpenter and Mr Eason from SYMAS, even though these people
 may not have been there during the relatively short period when Mr Edwards himself
 was there. Mr Edwards’s criticism also ignores the fact that the triaging was taking place
 at the gymnasium in accordance with a pre-existing plan agreed between the ambulance
 service and the police, and that the quite chaotic conditions on the pitch would have
 made it extremely difficult to do it there.

101. It is clear that Mr Edwards has been racked with guilt, at least apparently since
the Cook Report television programme about Hillsborough shown in June 1994,
because he feels that he himself could and should have dcme more. I do not think he
should blame himself. He was obeying Mr Hopkins’ order in going down the pitch to
pick up casualties and take them to hospital as quickly as possible. He would have faced
a vex, y difficult task in trying to persuade Mr Hicks that his daughter Victoria should be
left behind, even if it meant taking Sarah instead. He had already sustained an assault in
the course of his duty and valuable time would have been lost.




                                           60
Conclusion about the rescue operation


102. I~ht of Lord Tavlor’s very full and detailed inquiry, and the specific
findings and recommendations, I cannot see that any useful purpose would be served b7
having any further inquiry into the rescue operation. Even if some ambulance men,
notably Mr Edwards, feel that they or the service generally could have done more in
spite of the very difficult conditions, I do not think this could affect Lord Taylor’s
findings and recommendations.

103. It would clearly be quite impossible to say about any given victim of the disaster
that if more sophisticated or competent aid had reached him or her at some unspelcified
earlier moment, they would have survived. Any wide ranging inquiry such as advocated
by Professor Scraton and some of the families I have spoken to, would clearly impose
enormous burdens on the police, the emergency services and the hospital and medical
staff. But these burdens would in my judgement be to no purpose.

104. In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by the emergency or medical
services. In any event the extent of the legal duty of care on rescue services towards
those who are injured is limited. Their duty is not to create or increase the danger
created by others. They are not liable for an ineffective response to an emergency
caused by others, at least until they have assumed responsibility for the care of a
particular patient (see Capital and Counties PLC v Hampshire County Council [1997]
3WLR 331).

105. I have not understood Counsel for the Family Support Group to invite any
further inquiry into these matters. Instead they made it plain that they accepted Lord
Taylor’s findings and the sufficiency of his Inquiry.




                                          61
CHAPTER 4



Alleged improper interference with witnesses

l. During the course of my scrutiny I have heard allegations that the evidence of
witnesses to the disaster was tampered with. There are two types of allegation of this
sort.

2. The first is that the West Midlands Police, who investigated what happened at
Hillsborough on behalf of Lord Taylor, the Coroner, and the Director of Public
Prosecutions put pressure on three named witnesses - Derek Bruder, Debra Martin, and
Paul Taylor - to change their evidence in various ways. I consider these allegations in the
first part of this Chapter.

3. The second concerns the way in which the South Yorkshire Police obtained
                                                                                              /
e~ about the disaster from their own____officers. I consider this in the second part of
this Chapter.

Part 1 - allegations against the West Midlands Police

4. In their written submissions to me Counsel for the Hillsborough Family support
Group stated (para 103) that:
      "Evidence has come to light which tends to show that some witnesses were
      pressured into changing their evidence (or prevented from adding to their
      e~{U)-~ o]~fFc~-TS--ffom ~-e West Midlands Police. In the main, this pressure was
      brought to bear in order to prevent evidence being put before the jury which tended
      to contradict the theory that all the deceased were dead by 3.15 pm. This evidence
      demonstrates the biased and incomplete nature of the investigation, and the desire
      on the part of those investigating the disaster to keep to a minimum the scrutiny of
    \ South’,Yorkshire Police’s reaction to the disaster."

5. Counsel cited three witnesses who they said had been pressured in this way. Two of
them - Derek Bruder and Debra Martin - made written statements relating to the death
of Kevin Williams. The other, Paul Taylor, had evidence about the death of Victoria
Hicks.




                                           63
    The Kevin Williams case

    6. Kevin Williams’ case was one of the six that the Divisional Court considered in 1993
    during the application for judicial review (see Chapter 1, para 66 (c)) in connection with
    the seventh ground of the application, namely that there was evidence available to show
    that the Coroner and his jury were not given the full picture in the summaries at the
    mini-inquests and the omission of certain relevant facts vitiated those proceedings: The
    factual issue in Kevin Williams’ case was whether he was dead when recovered from the
    pen or whether he died a little later, at some time after 15.32 or possibly as late as 15.55.
\
    7. At the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater, the pathologist,
    said that in his opinion his death had occurred very quickly. Kevin’s case was unusual
    because there were four fractures of the larynx, and it was in Dr Slater’s view a case of
    very severe traumatic asphyxia due to crushing of the neck and chest.

    8. Dr Slater’s view that Kevin had died.quickly was at variance with_th_e_e_y_idence of
    L~9_~itnesses. The first was an off-duty Liverpool policeman, Derek Bruder, who had
    been sitting in the stand watching the match but came down to the pitch to help in the
    rescue operation. The second was Debra Martin, a South Yorkshire Police Special
    Constable who was on duty at the ground.

    9. In a statement dated 27 April 1989 PC Bruder said that he had seen a man, who was
    later identified as Kevin Williams, lying 0nthe pitch near the Kop End of the stadium.
    As Mr Bruder approached him the man had convulsions and his head moved as if he
    was being sick. Together with a St John Ambulance man, Mr Bruder attempted to
    resuscitate him with mouth-to-mouth ventilation and cardiac massage. He could feel a
    slight pulse in his neck.

    10. Attempts were made to stop an ambulance, but it continued down the pitch. PC
    Bruder and the St John man continued to attempt to revive Kevin Williams without
    success. They were then joined by a St John Ambulance woman and shortly after this
    the ambulance man said the patient was dead. Mr Bruder agreed that he was.
                                                              4~


                                                                                                    2
    11. Kevin’s body was then taken to the gymnasium, which was being used as a
    temporary mortuary, by a number of other people. One of these was Special Constable
    Debra Martin. In a statement dated 8 May 1989, she said that Kevin had stopped
    breathing while he was in the gymnasium. She gave him the kiss of life and heart
    massage and a doctor helped. Kevin started breathing, opened his eyes and said "Morn"
    and then died.

    12. A doctor confirmed Kevin Williams as being dead at 16.06.




                                               64
13. During the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 2 May 1990 Dr Slater was asked
about these matters. He said he thought Mr Bruder may have been mistaken in
believing he found a slight pulse. So far as WPC Martin’s statement was concerned,
there was no way in which someone with the severe injury to his voice box which Kevin
had could have said "Morn".

14. The Coroner caused further enquiries to be made. Inspector Sawers of the West
Midlands Police took a further statement from PC Bruder on the 3 May 19~)0. In it he
said that since Hillsborough he had had further training in first aid. In relation to his
earlier statement when he described Kevin Williams as having convulsions, he said:
      "I have thought about this carefully today and with the added benefit of my;
      training I can say that this was not a process that lasted for any time. It certainly
      wasn’t anything similar to an epileptic fit, for example. It was an impression that I
      had which I originally,, associated with the lad vomiting. I will say that I did not see
      the casualty vomit nor did I see any sick on the body or grassed area around him. I
      will correct further references to vomit as they occur in my original statement.
      I refer to feeling for a carotid pulse in the neck and said originally that I thought I
      could detect a slight pulse, however, I now feel that I am able to correct this. I felt
      for the pulse with my first two fingers of my left hand, I believe, to the carotid
      artery. I cannot say absolutely that I felt for the pulse before I started mouth-to-
      mouth or after; nor indeed whether I did both simultaneously. Whilst I would now
      have much more skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute certainly that I went
      accurately straight to the carotid artery.
      For all those reasons, I can say that I felt for a pulse in the region of the carotid
      artery, but I may have also touched the area of the "Adams Apple" or felt
      something in the neck region which I originally thought was a pulse but may have
      been mistaken."


15. Inspector Sawers also asked Mr Bruder about the reference in his previous
statement to trying to stop an ambulance. Mr Bruder maintained that the ambulance in
question was on its way into the ground and going to the Leppings Lane end.

16. WPC Martin had been seen on 17 March 1990 by WPS Appleton of the West
Midlands Police, who took a further statement from her. In this further statement Miss
Martin described how upset she had been on the day and that her recollection of events
was vague and confused. By the time she came to deal with Kevin Williams’ body, which
she was told to stay with in the gymnasium, she was in a state of shock and felt like a
"zombie". She said:
      "I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t want to believe the boy was dead. I didn’t know
      if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to attempt to revive him. I started
      to give him mouth-to-mouth but someone, I don’t know who, touched me on the
      shoulder and told me he was dead. By this time my head had gone, I wasn’t aware
      of what I was doing or what was really happening."




                                             65



                         <,
17. The Coroner resumed the mini-inquest on Kevin Williams on 4 May 1990.
Sergeant Killock told the jury the substance of Mr Bruder’s first statement. Inspector
Sawers then told the jury about Mr Bruder’s second statement. He said that he had
pointed out to Mr Bruder that there appeared to be a discrepancy between what he was
saying about the ambulance which they had tried to stop, and the known times of the
first two ambulances on the pitch. At that point it seems to have been overlooked by
everyone that in fact a third ambulance - driven by Mr Edwards - had come onto the
pitch.

18. The Coroner recalled Dr Slater. He affirmed his opinion that Kevin was brain dead
at the time when he was removed from the pen, but accepted that his body was not dead
until later, when Mr Bruder was trying to resuscitate him. He said (transcript, page 13
B-D):
       Q. "In the light of what you heard and what we have heard now, do you feel that
       this lad died, if you like, in the totality sense, I don’t mean that his skin was dead,
       but in lay terms at the point in time when Mr Bruder was with him?
       A. "Yes, sir, I am quite confident of that. When one speaks to lay people who have
       experienced people dying, a word which is recurrent in these descriptions of death
       is the way that individuals turn "grey", recurring several times. To me as a doctor
       that implied that that was the point of whole body death. In fact I feel that that it
       was probably around that time that Kevin’s whole body died. His brain had died
       twenty/twenty-five minutes before that at the time of the crushing, but his whole
       body died at the time PC Bruder was with him."


 19. Dr Gumpert, a Consultant Clinical Neurophysiologist and Neurologist, was also
 called. He agreed with Dr Slater’s opinion. He accepted the possibility that Mr Bruder
 might have felt a carotid pulse (p17A).

 20. In his judgement in the Divisional Court, Lord Justice McCowan reviewed this
 evidence at considerable length. He said (page 28G of the judgement):
        "We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the deceased’s mother, made
        contact with Police Constable Bruder and Woman Police Constable Martin, and
        they alleged that they had been pressurised into changing stories and that they now
        stuck by their original versions. Where does the truth lie? I see no fault in the
        Coroner in this matter. He made full inquiry. He was not asked by the applicant’s
       ~representative to do more. There was overwhelming medical evidence that the \
       ’deceased was in fact dead by 3.15pro. In my judgement it would not be right to
        quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength of these allegations"
        made against the investigating police officers."


 21. The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation that the
 West Midlands police investigators had put Mr Bruder or Miss Martin under improper
 pressure. The pXg_ceedin_n_gs be f_ore the CQ~rt_ co_ncer_~e_d.the_coadact-og-the Coroner, not
~olice. No criticism could be made of the Coroner, who had investigated Kevin
 Williams’ case with great thoroughness.


                                               66
    22. I have investigmad tho. allegation of improper pressure. This is not because it could /
    affect the verdict of accidental death on Kevin Williams. It plainly could not alter that.
    Nor could it affect the 3.15 cut-off point. The Coroner had sound reasons for making his
    decision about that and these would not have been affected by the question of whether
    Kevin Williams died before then as Dr Slater originally thought, or afterwards as PC
    Bruder and WPC Martin thought.

    23. I have looked into this in great detail because an allegation of improper pressure
    a ag_a~~ce officer to p_ersua~ a witness to change his or her evidence contrary to
    that witness’s recollection and ~ serious matter. But there is all the
    difference in the world between such conduct and seeking to reconcile, if one can,
    apparent inconsistencies between witnesses.                                        ’~

    Derek Bruder


    24. I interviewed Mr Bruder on 6 October 1997. He told me how he came to make his
    second statement on 3 May 1990. He said Inspector Sawers came to see him on that day
    because he (Sawers) wanted to clarify certain medical issues which had been brought up
    in Mr Bruder’s first statement. Mr Bruder told me that because they were both having
    difficulty understanding points, Inspector Sawers telephoned the Coroner’s office and
    spoke to someone there and explained the difficulty. The telephone was handed to Mr
    Bruder who discussed what he had seen with the person on the telephone, who must
    have been Dr Slater. There was a discussion about the movement of the body which Mr
    Bruder had described as a convulsion, the question of vomit and the possibility of
    mistaking the pulse. But he said that there was still some confusion in his mind about the
    medical points.

    25. He then said that Inspector Sawers suggested he might have been mistaken about
    the ambulance, because the video footage did not show it at that time. But he, Mr
    Bruder, insisted that he was right about that.

    26. I took Mr Bruder through his second (3 May 1990) statement. He confirmed to me
    that everything in it was correct, save for where he said that he may have been mistaken
    about the pulse. He said (transcript page 10, line 5):
          "What I am saying is: I went to the lad, felt a pulse and of that I am not mistaken.
          It’s as simple as that. As I say, I hope you don’t think I’m being forward but that
          was the case.
          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: You are an experienced police officer and, I have no
          doubt, you have taken statements from people in the past and you know how these
          things are taken, and sometimes things are put to a witness: are you sure about that
          or may you have been mistaken about that because of something else. What I am at
          getting is that in this statement you actually say: ’But I may have been mistaken
          about that’.
          Mr Bruder: Yes, I may have been mistaken as to the region I took the pulse from,
          i.e. within an inch or two of an Adam’s apple is the carotid artery on the neck.

                                                67



t
           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: But you did not mean that you were mistaken about
          feeling a pulse?
           Mr Bruder: Most definitely not."


    27. Mr Bruder said that he was quite satisfied that Kevin was dead when he gave up
    trying to resuscitate him. He also made it perfectly plain to me that he was not put under
    any pressure to change his statement. At page 15, line 15 of my interview with him he
    said:
           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: So far as the alteration or so far as the amendment of
           your statement is concerned, correct me if I am wrong, I do not get the impression
           that you are suggesting that you were subjected to any improper pressure to alter
           your statement?
           Mr Bruder: Let’s say I wouldn’t say I was bullied or cajoled certainly because I’m
           not that type of chap, I would have shown him the door had that been the case to be
           quite honest. The fact that he was an Inspector didn’t really mean anything to me,
           he was here to do a job, to take a statement.


    28.   And later:
           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith: I am concerned, you see, because there have been
           suggestions that you were subjected to improper pressure to change the statement.
           Mr Bruder: I disagree that I was put under pressure to change the statement.


    29. My conclusions about Mr Bruder’s evidence are these: I did not find Ns__~
\   explanation as to why he had said in his second statement that he might have made a
             -a-b-o ~ ~e pulse, entirely convincing. I doubt whether he really meant that he
    might have been mistaken as to the precise region where he took the pulse. However, I
    am satisfied that he now genuinely believes that he did feel a slight pulse and so believed
    at the time of his first statement. This was accepted by Dr Slater, who said that Kevin’s
    whole body died when Mr Bruder was with him. (inquest transcript 4 May 1990, page 13
    B-D). It was also accepted by Dr Gumpert (page 17 A).

    30. Having seen Mr Bruder I am quite satisfied that he ~as not subjected to any
    improper pressure in making his second statement, which in every respect save one he
    confirmed was correct. As he himself said, he is not the sort of person to be bullied or      T
    cajoled.

    31. For this reason I have not thought it necessary to take the matter further with Mr
    Sawers ovDr Slater. Dr Slater wrote to me. He said he had spoken to Mr Bruder with
    the full knowledge and approval of the Coroner. The object was to enable him to assess
    the strength of his own evidence, in relation to Mr Bruder’s, having regard to the
    difficulty in deciding when a person is alive or dead, particularly the distinction between
    somatic and brain stem death. Although it may be somewhat unusual for a pathologist
    to speak to a witness about his evidence I see nothing improper about it, especially if, as
    Mr Bruder says, he and Inspectors Sawers were having difficulty in understanding the
    medical point involved.
                                               68
32. There is nothing whatever.x~r.o_~ in the Coronermt~mp~c_thc
evidence of Dr Slater with that of PC Bruder and WP(2 Martin. Indeed he__w_oi~! ....
4)£_o-~b]y have been criticised if he had not. If the witness adheres to his or her original
statement, then the conflict cannot be resolved without the decision maker hearing the
evidence. But if the witness expresses doubt, or gives an explanation as to why they may
have been mistaken, or if he or she says that they were confused at the time or may have
been, any conflict is likely to have been resolved. Mr Bruder told me he thought he
should have been called as a witness. This was entirely a matter for the Coroner. In the
light of Mr Bruder’s second signed statement, as the Divisional Court said, no possible
criticism can be made of the Coroner.

33. It is unfortunate that Inspector Sawers appears to have overlooked the fact that
there was a third ambulance on the pitch as Mr Bruder had said. Indeed this seems to
have been overlooked by the Coroner and the legal representatives who were in Court,
including Mr Fraser who wa~ representing the families.

34. There is in fact a problem reconciling the times involved. There is a timed
photograph of Kevin Williams being carried across the pitch, through the centre circle,
at 15.32. This is plainly before Mr Bruder’s attempt to resuscitate him, which took place
further down the pitch, between the centre circle and the gymnasium. The timings given
in PC Bruder’s statements suggest that it was not until about 15.43 that he saw the
ambulance coming onto the pitch and attempts were made to stop it. Yet there is video
evidence that Mr Edwards’ ambulance was on the pitch at 15.36.

35. I think there cannot be any doubt that the ambulance Mr Bruder is referring to is
Mr Edwards’. But this confusion about timings perhaps goes some way to explain why
the connection was not made during the Inquest. In any event no one has ever doubted
that Mr Bruder attempted to resuscitate Kevin Williams. The only question was
whether in truth he felt a pulse. It is quite wrong to suggest that PC Bruder’s evidence at
the Inquest was discredited. It was not and I see no evidence of any attempt to discredit
it--merely to clarify it.

Debra Martin

36. I interviewed Miss Martin on 18 November 1997. She made a statement dated 27
February 1995 in the presence of Miss Adlington, the Hillsborough Family Support
Group’s Solicitor. In this she said that WPS Appleton came to see her on 17 March 1990
and tried to convince her that her original statement of 8 May 1989 was untrue. After
exerting considerable pressure on her, WPS Appleton produced a dictionary which she
referred to while she, WPS Appleton, compiled the second statement. Miss Martin was
unable to read this because of her distress. She said she signed it because of the pressure
exerted on her and because she wanted to put Hillsborough behind her.




                                           69
37. In her interview with me I asked Miss Martin aboutthe pressure exerted on her.
She said WPS Appleton had harassed her with telephone calls at her work and when she
couldn’t get through, at her home. She visited her three or four times, sometimes
accompanied by male officers--Miss Martin said she was literally brow beaten. When
WPS Appleton came to her home on 17 March she accused her (Miss Martin) of lies and
said she had never been at Hillsborough.

38. Debra Martin told me WPS Appleton kept on calling her a complete liar and that
she needed to take a second statement. She didn’t read this statement because she was
in such a state she had to go and speak to her parents. Miss Martin said that although
she had taken statements from witnesses in her work as a Special Constable, and knew
there was a caution at the beginning of the statement, she had not signed this. Her
signature there must be a forgery. She agreed that she had signed the statement at the
bottom of each page and at the end.

39. I took her through the statement which she was said to have given to WPS
Appleton. Much of it she agreed she had said. But in every case where the statement
records that she was confused, did not have a clear recollection and was like a "zombie",
she said that was untrue and that WPS Appleton had made it up, though she accepted
that she had used the phrase that "she was acting on auto-pilot".

40. Miss Martin insisted to me that she had a clear recollection of the events on 15
April 1989. She told me that she had never read the statement she gave to WPS
Appleton. When I pointed out that this appeared to be inconsistent with her statement
of 22 February 1995 to Miss Adlington, she accepted that she must have read it on that
occasion but had no recollection of it. She told me that she was very distressed and upset
by the events of the day of the disaster and had made a claim against the South
Yorkshire Police in respect of her post traumatic stress, but had been pressurised to
drop the claim.

41. Mrs Martin, Debra’s mother, also gave evidence to me. She too said that WPS
Appleton had been to the house three or four times previously. She was not present
during the interview on 17 March 1990--but had been in the next room with her
husband. They could hear raised voices but not what was said. She said there came a
time when her daughter came and spoke to them and said, "I can’t take any more, she is
bullying me all the time, she is calling me a liar". Both she and her husband told Debra
not t6 sign anything, but in spite of this she went back into the lounge and signed the
statement. She told me that Debra had been deeply disturbed by Hillsborough and still
was. She agreed with me that her daughter was very emotional.




                                          70
42,~In my judgement Debra Martin cannot be regarded as a reliable witness. Her first
statement (8 May 1999~-iS ve@ conf~sedan~i in- Conflict-witl~ ali the 0ther evidence-
relating to events at Hillsborough. In it she said that at about 2.50 pm she was on duty at
the Penistone Road end (that is, the other end of the ground from Leppings Lane where
the Liverpool fans were arriving). She said that there was a great deal of trouble at that
end with drunken Nottingham Forest fans so that mounted police were forced against
the wall. A large blue gate (which she told me was somewhere near the entrance from
Penistone Road by the gymnasium) was opened and the large majority of the crowd
pushed their way into the ground. She was carried along by the crowd and pushed to the
floor.

43. She found herself inside the ground at the bottom of the Spion Kop, with tlie gates
closed behind her. She managed to get out into the road again, where she found herself
surrounded by drunken fans screaming abuse. She then made her way to the Leppings
Lane end (she told me she had gone round the North side of the ground and along Vere
Road). Ambulances and police cars were rushing to that end of the ground (the first
ambulance arrived at that end at 15.13). There was, she said, a vast crowd of about 4,000
fans trying to get into the ground. Next thing she got into the ground, apparently
through a blue gate and found herself on the pitch, she could not remember how.

44. Miss Martin is the only witness who speaks of a crowd of disorderly Nottingham
Forest fans surging through a blue gate at the Penistone Road end. Her mother told me
that when Debra had given her an account of what had happened, she understood that
this had happened at the Liverpool end. I found Miss Martin to be highly emotional; she
was obviously deeply upset by her experiences that day. She told me in her interview
that she had felt Kevin Williams’ pulse and felt a faint one. I can find no trace of her
ever having said that before.

45. In fact her two statements of 8 May 1989 and 17 March 1990 are not contradictory.
But the second one explains why the first may not be reliable. I am satisfied that her
statement that Kevin Williams was alive and said ’Mom’ to her in the gymnasium cannot
be relied upon. It is contrary to the evidence of PC Bruder and also contrary to the
medical evidence, both of Dr Slater and the pathologist Dr Iain West (who advised Mrs
Williams and said that it was unlikely that with the injuries to his throat Kevin could
have said ’Mom’).

46. I am also confident that Miss Martin signed the caution at the beginning of the
second statement.               "-------




                                          71
    47. By contrast I found WPS Appleton a most impressive witness,. She told me that she
    had been asked by the Coroner to see Miss Martin because he found her account of
    Kevin Williams dying in her arms difficult to reconcile with the other evidence and he
    wished to make sure that she was correct about it. She telephoned and made an
    appointment. She had only been once to the house--she remembered this as she had
    difficulty finding it. She said other officers may have been previously with a view to
    tracing the movements of deceased supporters from photographic material; but she had
    not done so, (In fact this is correct--there are two statements by Debra Martin, dated 12
    July and 5 September 1989, taken by police officers other than WPS Appleton, dealing
    with identification of victims).

48. So far from being anxious to discredit Miss Martin, shee would have liked to be able
to confirm what she said in relation to Kevin~ because she realised that it might be of
s~b~Williams. The interview was perfectly amicable though like many
pe-6]~] e involved with Hillsborough Miss Martin was upset, particularly when talking
 about Kevin. WPS Appleton said she explained the problem about the inconsistency
with other evidence in relation to Kevin. She had not appreciated that the earlier
 account of the entry of a crowd at Penistone Road was inconsistent with all the other
 evidence, and she did not ask about it. She did not call Miss Martin a liar and did not
bully or browbeat her. Miss Martin dictated the fresh statement and she, WPS
 Appleton, took it down. Miss Martin signed the caution at the head of the statement and
 initialled two corrections in it.

    49. WPS Appleton told me that she was shocked when she heard for the first time the
    allegations made by Miss Martin in the "Cook Report" television programme in 1994. I
    accept the evidence of WPS Appleton and prefer her account to that of Miss Martin, or
    that of Mrs Martin to the extent that she supports her daughter.

    50.   I deal further with the case of Kevin Williams in Appendix 9.

    Paul Taylor

    51. The third witness who I was told had been pressurised into ch~idence is
~   Paul T~r. Mr Taylor, a Liverpool supporter, was near the centre of the crush-- - - - in pen 3
    of the Leppings Lane terrace. Although badly affected by the crush himself he helped or
    tried to help a number of other people who were caught in the pen.

    52. The allegation is that there was an attempt to prevent Mr Taylor from adding to his
    original statement relevant matters concerning the death of Victoria Hicks.

    53. I have interviewed Mr Taylor. He made three statements in writing. The first is
    undated, which he told me was made on 4 May 1989 because he had been asked by the
    survivors’ group to record his recollections. The second was to West Midlands Police
    dated 8 May 1989, and the third is dated 23 September 1997. He also gave oral evidence
    at the Inquest.

                                               72
54.   In his first statement (4 May 1989) he described dealing with a girl in pen 3, He said
        ’7 then spotted a girl with her legs trapped and lying over backwards so I pulled her
       out and carried her to one side. I put her down and went to give her the kiss of life
       and then smelt the odour coming from her mouth. I realised then she was dead but
       I still did it out of instinct. I then pulled her arm out of her cardigan and pulled it
       over her face and left her, and went to help anyone else I could".


55. His next statement, of 8 May 1989, is substantially the same, but also includes a
description of the girl and her clothing. It appears that Mr and Mrs Hicks were told of
this description and thought it was their daughter Victoria. As a result, Mr Taylor told
me that he had a telephone call from Mr and Mrs Hicks four to six weeks after the
disaster, when he described how he had found their daughter and what he had do’he. In
his statement of 23 September 1997 he said
       ’7 told Mr and Mrs Hicks that when I lay the young boy next to Victoria a young
      police officer wearing gloves came along. He felt for a pulse in both Victoria and
      the boy. He told me to leave both bodies as they were dead... Mr and Mrs Hicks
      were keen that I added this information to my earlier statement. I therefore received
      a visit at home from DC McCombie, the West Midlands Police Officer assigned to
      the Hicks’ case. I explained what I wanted to add to my earlier statement. He told
      me that unless I knew the name and number of the police officer that I would be
      committing perjury if I made another statement. He told me I could go to jail for
      committing perjury. At the time my wife had just had a baby. I was frightened by
      what DC McCombie was saying to me and agreed that I would not make another
      statement. I did not want to put my family at risk. I did not refer to any of this when
      I gave evidence at the Inquest."


56. In fact when he gave evidence at the Inquest he did refer to the incident; but he did
not mention that the person who said Victoria was dead was a policeman or was wearing
gloves. He said (transcript, day 32, p74E):
       A. "I saw she had bits of rust in her mouth when I slightly opened her mouth and I
       realised then it was from the pole off the barrier when it had been thrown over. I
       had seen all the stuff earlier and it must have gone on her and it was around her
       eyes and speckled on her face, and I just took a few bits off her lips and then just
       tried to blow into her mouth, and then someone said, ’Leave her, she’s dead’."
       Q. "You thought she was dead. She looked dead to you, did she not, or did she?".
       A. "Her lips were rolled back and her eyes were really wide open".




                                            73
57. In cross examination, Mr Fraser who was acting for the Hicks family, brought out
that the girl Mr Taylor was referring to was Victoria Hicks. But no further question was
asked as to who the "someone" was, or how they knew she was dead. This is hardly
surprising. In a letter, dated 13 November 1990, a copy of which was sent to the
Coroner, Mr Hicks records the meeting between himself, his wife and Mr Taylor, and
what Mr Taylor had told him. So far as is material this is as follows:
      "He went on to describe how Victoria was pinned by her legs and was bent over
      backwards on the top of the pile of bodies and how she was removed in a semi-
      conscious state. He went on to say how she was laid on her back on the terraces;
      he/others removed her blue cardigan when he had been told she was beyond help.
      He claimed he did not know how to do mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, he was put
      off by the smell of vomit from her mouth and rust from the barrier on her face and
      the fact "she was only a young school kid". He described how he sat and cuddled
      her for some minutes before she was passed on to the pitch--this six minutes could
      have been vital to Victoria’s survival had she received proper attention at that time."

58. It is noticeable that in this account there is no reference to a policeman. The
account is also inconsistent with Mr Taylor’s first written statement and recollections
where he says that he thought Victoria was dead, not semi-conscious, and there is no
reference to cuddling her.

59. In his evidence to me, (transcript page 7, lines 10-26), Mr Taylor said that
Detective Sergeant McCombie
      "asked me if I could describe the police officer, and I said, like, I knew he was a
      young police officer and not an old man. He said, "well, did you recognise his badge
      number or anything like that?" I said, "well, I can’t recollect because everything was
      hectic at the time". It was just a case of trying to get on with what you were trying to
      do. He said then, "have you ever heard of the word "perjury’". I said, "’Well, I think
      so. I don’t really understand what it means". He explained if you say something and
      put it down in the statements and then it’s found not to be true you can actually go to
      prison for committing perjury. He said, "I’d have a think about this" and then he
      went, and I spoke to my wife after he went because he said on the lines that you’re a
      young family. Our Michael was only about l2 weeks old at the time, and he was
      emphasising about perjury and you could actually go to prison."
                                                           2
60. Mr Taylor did not mention that the police officer was wearing gloves when he took
the pulse until he was specifically asked this. I am not so much concerned with whether
Mr ~Taylor’s recollection about the policeman wearing gloves is correct, but with
whether he was actually threatened in the way he describes.

61. I interviewed Detective Sergeant McCombie on 2 December 1997 and he sent me
a further Written statement, dated 17 December 1997, elaborating certain matters. He
told me that he had been contacted by the Liverpool Social Services. Mr Taylor had
been in touch with the Hicks family and it was established that one of the people he had
dealt with was Victoria Hicks. Mr Taylor had told them that while he was giving
Victoria Hicks the kiss of life a policeman said, "Leave her alone, she’s gone", without
feeling her pulse. This had caused upset to Mr and Mrs Hicks.

                                             74
62. DS McCombie went to see Paul Taylor on 31 May 1989. He said that Mr Taylor
was confused, upset and emotional, and said he’d been suffering from the stress
syndrome. He went through Mr Taylor’s original statement with him and what he had
apparently told Mr and Mrs Hicks. He said that Mr Taylor retracted what he had said to
the Hicks family about the policeman. DS McCombie said that he would try and check
his involvement through the photographic evidence. To this end he filed an "Action"
dated 1 June 1989, asking if there was any identification of Mr Taylor in the crowd, for
his involvement to be assessed and whether his continuity to Victoria Hicks could be
established. The "Action" recorded the above account of what Mr Taylor was supposed
to have told Mr and Mrs Hicks, that he had retracted it and was suffering from the stress
syndrome.

63. West Midlands Police pursued the matter. They found two photographs which
showed Mr Taylor in pen 3, but these did not show him in any involvement with Victoria
Hicks. When I spoke to him DS McCombie could not recall whether he had visited Mr
Taylor again or spoken to him on the telephone to tell him the result of the further
enquiries.

64. Mr McCombie told me that at no time did he threaten Mr Taylor with any question
of perjury. He did not bully or intimidate him. He was very well aware of the trauma Mr
Taylor had been through. He was anxious that things should not be said which might
upset the Hicks family unless they were correct. But it did not matter to him whether a
South Yorkshire policeman behaved as Mr Taylor had told Mr Hicks.

65..After more than eight years it is impossible to be sure precisely what happened.
On balance of probability I would conclude as follows. Mr Taylor was undoubtedly very
u~set and emotionally disturbed following Hillsborough. This is confirmed in his
original recollections of the treatment he received. DS McCombie was anxious that
things which might upset Mr and Mrs Hicks should not be put forward unless it was
reasonably certain that they were correct. To this end I have no doubt that he went
through Mr Taylor’s original statements, and pointed out that there was no reference to
a policeman saying Victoria was dead without taking her pulse, and pressed him as to
whether he was sure of this. He also said that he would have a check made to see if any
photographic evidence could link him with Victoria. I am satisfied that Mr Taylor said
he was not sure, and DS McCombie took this as a retraction. I am certainly not satisfied
that DS McCombie in any way bullied or intimidated Mr Taylor or threatened him with
a charge of perjury if he insisted on adding to his statement anything about the matter.

 66. I think the most l~xplanation of Mr Taylor’s belief that there was a reference
 to er~rv_is that m~de bv DS Mer?nmbie~n his statement to me of 17 December 1997
~at when the police took from Mr Taylor his statement of 8 May 1989, they may
 have explained the formal caution at the top of the statement to him in terms of a
 prosecution for perjury if the witness making the statement wilfully says in it which he
 believes to be false or does not believe to be true. Alternatively, in going through this
 statement with DS McCombie, Mr Taylor may have asked what the caution meant, and
 DS McCombie explained it to him in that way.


                                          75
67. It should be noted that Mr Taylor’s account of his conversation with the policeman
in pen 3 has varied over the years. In his original very full recollections and statement,
there is no mention of it. His account, as recorded by Mr Hicks in his letter of 13
November 1990, also makes no mention of a policeman. The next account, at least as
recorded near the time by DS McCombie, is that the policeman said, "She’s gone",
without taking Victoria’s pulse. This account however appears to be hearsay on hearsay.
At the inquest he said, "Someone said", "Leave her, she’s dead" with no mention of a
policeman or of a pulse being taken.

    68. In his statement of 23 September 1997 Mr Taylor said the policeman took
    Victoria’s pulse. It is not clear whether he means that the policeman was wearing gloves
    at that time. In his evidence to me he did not initially mention him wearing gloves when
    he took the pulse, but in answer to a direct question at the end of his interview said that
    he was.

    69. It is quite plain that despite the situation which he himself was in Mr Taylor did his
    best to help other spectators who were trapped and in some cases dying in pen 3. I
    intend no criticism of him - very_much the reverse. But in the light of the inconsistent


!   statements he has made over the years I cannot regard his evidence as reliable. I can see
    no reason why I should not accept DS McCombie’s account, supported as it is by the
    contemporary documents. No complaint has, so far as I am aware, ever been officially
    made about DS McCombie’s conduct to the Police Complaints Authority and the first
    time it appears to have been raised is very recently in 1997. In my view the evidence is
    wholly insufficient to justify any action being taken against this officer.

    70. Neither WPS Appleton nor DS McCombie had any reason or motive to try to
    bring pressure to bear on Miss Martin or Mr Taylor. The suggestion that they did so as
    part of a biased and incomplete investigation and "for the purpose of keeping to a
    minimum the scrutiny of South Yorkshire Police’s reaction to the disaster" (see para 4
    above) is clearly untenable.

    71. Miss Martin’s evidence about the last moments of Kevin Williams has nothing to
    do with South Yorkshire Police. West Midlands Police gathered and presented to Lord
    Taylor and the Coroner extensive evidence critical of South Yorkshire Police. Even if
    DS McCombie had done what is alleged, which he did not, it is difficult to see how
    omitting to mention questionable conduct (taking a pulse with gloves on) by one police
    offieer in the terrible circumstances of the epicentre of the disaster could amount to an
    attempt by its investigators to minimise the faults in the South Yorkshire Police reaction
    to it. Nor is there any indication here of an incomplete investigation. On the contrary,
    when the point about the policeman saying Victoria Hicks was dead was raised, DS
    McCombje very properly looked into it.




                                               76

                                                                                                  "1
             J


Part 2


Collection of evidence from South Yorkshire Police Officers

72. In his written submiss~ofessor Scrntan slated that there was a "range
of claims that witnesses were subjected to pressure in giving their statements". When he
came to make oral submissions to me I asked him to tell me what these claims.were. In
addition to the three cases which I have dealt with in the first part of this chapter he
invited me to consider the evidence of Mr David Frost, whom he brought to see me.

David Frost


73. Mr Frost was a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police on duty at
Hillsborough. He was in Serial 21, which was at the Penistone Road End. He assisted in
arresting a drunken fan and taking him to the charge room. He returned to the Penistone
Road End. At 2.55 his serial was called inside the ground and sent to the Leppings Lane
Terraces where he assisted with the rescue operation. Like other officers Mr Frost was
asked to write out his recollections. He did so in his own handwriting and this appears to
have been typed up into the form of a statement d~t~B-9-1Wffy--1-g89. It was s-~b-~itted to
the South Yorkshire Police solicitors, as a result of which a number of deletions and some
alterations were made. (Appendix 6 is the amended version, showing the alterations).

74. I can see noth~ take excep_ffQn t~in these amendments save possibly in three
¯               ~-             .... 7 ~ ....            2--’- . ....
lnsta~eference     in the.---"
                           third’page        to the radio   being garbled frantic.    . ---
                                                                                    might   be
considered both fa~ztual and material, though other officers had also spoken of the
difficulties with the radio. On the fifth page the word "bottleneck" possibly amplified the
sentence that follows. A reference on this page to the late arrival of certain officers to
organise the rescue might be regarded as factual, though the language is not appropriate.
But none of the deletions or alterations in my view alter the substance of the statement.

75. Mr Frost was asked to sign the amended statement. He told me he refused to do so.
He said that other officers also refused to sign their amended statements, though he was
unable to name ,iany. He said he would let me know their names, but he has not done so.
He also told me that others were "asked/impelled to sign things that they didn’t want to
that had been changed". I asked him if he had witnessed any one being impelled to sign.
He said that he personally had not, but he knew officers who had. Again I have not been
supplied with their names. He accepted that his original statement was not in a suitable
form to be a witness statement. He said that he himself was not put under any pressure
to sign, he was left alone. He told me:
         "This was an attempt by senior management to sanitise and protect themselves; and
         any honour that the South Yorkshire Police, which I thought at the time was
         con~siderable, d~s@peared for me.
         That is why I left the force. I was medically pensioned off. I couldn’t wear a
         uniform after this sort of thing took place" (transcript page 14, lines 13-19).


                                               77
76. He suggested to me that the reason why officers were asked to submit statements
on plain paper as opposed to writing up their notebooks or making statements on
Criminal Justice Act forms was so that they could be doctored.

77. On the strength of this evidence and that which I have dealt with in part 1 of this
Chapter, Professor Scraton submitted to me that officers’ statements had been taken in
a manner which was
       "highly irregular and leaves itself open to accusations of widespread and
       institutional malpractice; it does smack of "getting our stories right before they go
       to the investigation force" and pressure, no pressure, but people are expected to
       make changes in their statements to their recollections".


Collection of police evidence


78. I have investigated the facts surrounding the obtaining of statements from South
Yorkshire Police officers. At a meeting of senior officers including the Chief Constable
at South Yorkshire Police HQ on the 17 April 1989 it was decided that the officers
principally involved should set down their recollections of events in writing. On the 25
April Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones, who was in charge of the Inquiry on
behalf of West Midlands Police and the Taylor Inquiry, was told that the South
Yorkshire Police were obtaining "self-serving" (ie self-written) statements by police
officers down to Inspector level, and also from all officers at the Leppings Lane End of
the ground.

79. At a meeting on the morning of 26 ~89 Chief Superintendent Wain told a
group of South Yorkshire Police officers who were E-oncerned with the ifiquiry that it
was&_necessary to obtain self, Written statements from the relevant officers. These would
be on plain paper and not take~-fi-ffffd’e-g-Criminal J us-gt-i~-A-ct-rules. It was said that "our
job is merely to collate what evidence South Yorkshire Police officers can provide to their
 Chief Constable in order that we can present a suitable case, on behalf of the force, to
subsequent inquiries". An aide memoire produced by Chief Superintendent Wain
setting out the matters to be dealt with appears to have been distributed. These included
the time of coming on duty, to whom the officer was responsible, and where they were
deployed and what they said and did. It appears to call for a factual account.

80." At 2 pm that day there was a conference between senior South Yorkshire Police,
the solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police, Messrs Hammond Suddards, and
leading and junior counsel. A note of the meeting made by the solicitors records that in
the course of it Mr Woodward QC advised that the operation undertaken by South
Yorkshire Police should be regarded as an evidence gathering operation for the
information of the legal advisers. He said that any statements taken for this purpose
would be privileged, and that writs were expected. He suggested that some officers
might "want to put all their thoughts and expressions of that day down on paper, as a
sort of catharsis". The process was a confidential one and the legal adVisers would
choose what they wanted to leave in or leave out.


                                              78
  81. In a letter dated 7 May 1989 ACC Jones told the Chief Constable of South
  Yorkshire that he had been asked by Counsel for Lord Taylor’s inquiry to request
  statements from a selected number of officers of their recollections of the day. This was
  in addition to the statements of senior officers which had already been sought. In a
  telephone conversation referred to in an attendance note dated the 9 May, this request
  was discussed between Mr Metcalf, a partner of Hammond Suddards and Chief
  Superintendent Denton of the South Yorkshire Police. Statements from some 120
  officers were being sought by the West Midlands Police; of these about 100.had already
  written their accounts. It was agreed that many of these might be suitable to be handed
  over as they were, but some might include comment and speculation and might have to
  be redone. The solicitors were to consider them. Mr Denton sent a number of
  statements under cover of a letter of the same date. He said "no doubt you will advise
  me on the propriety of supplying these documents to the West Midlands Police.""

  82. Over the next 5 weeks in excess of 400 statements written by South Yorkshire
  officers were submitted to the solicitors. Of these, 253 attracted no comment at all. In 60
  cases the comment was confined to pointing out some minor error or ambiguity.

  83. As the work of supplying material to the West Midlands inquiry continued, South
  Yorkshire Police themselves suggested alterations to some officers’ statements,
  adopting the same basis for amendments as the solicitors had recommended to
  statements that had been sent to them previously.

  Police statements amended pursuant to recommendations by solicitors


  84. At that time no official guidance appears to have been given by the Law Society or
  the Bar Council as_to, reparation of witnes~gt~i-t~fii~i~-fst-d-be-ctisclosed to oth-~ ....
                                                                                                        /
~_p__~~~dance has subsequently been given by the Bar Couffd~-ih-1997_Ifi-h-i-s-- ......
  submission to me Mr Metcalf summarised what he considered were the appropriate
  principles to be applied. I accept these, though I have made some alteration to para. 4
  which I have underlined:
     (1) The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but exclude inadmissible
          hearsay, comment and argument.
     (2) It shotild be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and unnecessary elaboration, and
          should not serve as a commentary on documents.
           It should contain all wi’tness’ s evidence in chief; it should not be edited so that it no
           longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would be expected to give in
           response to viva voce examination in chief.
     (4)   Great care should be exercised in the exclusion of material that is unhelpful to the
           parties case. No material should be excluded which might render a statement
           anything other than the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by
           leaving in fact A while excluding fact B in such a way as to render untrue or
           misleading anything which remains in the statement. The overriding duty is to assist
           the Court or Tribunal in the administration of justice.


                                                   79
    !




t
      (s)    The exclusion of unfavourable material, other than in such manner as to amount to
             a failure to comply with guideline 4, is a matter offudgement.
      (6) It is permitted and appropriate to draw a witness’ attention that what he proposes to
             say appears in conflict with other evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to
             accept, but if the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines 1-5 above
             apply.


    85. I have examined approximately 100 amended statements where on the face of the
    comments by the solicitors something of substance might have been referred to. In 74
    instances the amendment is of no c.onsequence. Of these, there are some cases in which
    the solicitor’s recommendation was not adop~ted and the suggested amendments were
    not made. In others, adverse comment on fans’ behaviour, intemperate language,
    personal feelings or hearsay have been removed or the statement has been made clearer
    or ambiguities or inconsistencies put right.

    86. In the remaining 26 cases comment and opinion are excluded¯ These are generally
    cn~ police operation and’in the main fall under three heads: complaints
    about lack of radios, lack of information on the radio and difficulty of communication
    by radio due to interference; apparent shortage of police on foot at Leppings Lane; and
    lack of organisation by senior officers in the rescue operation. Not infrequently the
    factual matters underlying the criticism are apparent from the rest of the state-fiient. In a
    factual statement these comments and opinions would not normally occur and the

~   solicitors cannot be criticised for recommending their removal.

    87. ,,Of the 26 amended statements which I mentioned in the last paragraph there is a
    total of ten on w---h-i-dlCi-i should make specific comment, and I dothat in Appendix 7. In
    five of these cases - Creaser, Crawford, Eustis, Powell and Huckstepp - factual matters
    were excluded which arguably should not have been. (The amendments ~ they
    appear to have suggested to PC Huckstepp’s statement were not in fact made,
    apparently due to administrative error - see Appendix 7).

    88. In four others - Brookes, Ramsden, Walpole and White - although what is
    excluded is comment, factual matters are implicit in the comment and it might have
    been better to elucidate these rather than simply exclude the comment¯ I also comment
    in Appendix 7 on the alterations to a statement by PC Groome which, other than the
    statement by PC Frost, has more changes made to it than any other I have examined¯
            ¢,,



    89. The solicitors were un~_~_s_e_yere time constraints in giving their advice._sin_ce the
    statements were urgently required for Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. In no case does what is
    ex"-£-~ded render the rest of the statement misleading¯ In those cases where factual
                been excluded I accept that the solicitors had to exercise judgement as to
    whether material unhelpful to the police case should be excluded. I have indicated in
    Appendix 7 that at_least~ some cases it would have been better if it had not been. But I
    would categorise this at worst as an error of judgeme-6t, i certainly do not think the
    solicitors were guilty of anything that could be regarded as unprofessional conduct¯


                                                   80
 90. A ~ of officer~ concern over the alterations to Mr Denton and /
 those officers under him who were responsible for obtainin~-~a-~ments. With --/
 ~Wapproval of the solicitors an explanation was circulated on about 23 May 1989. I    t
 exhibit a copy at Appendix 8, pl. The recipients are identified in the document and I \
 have no doubt that the explanation was passed on to those who had expressed concern. \

 91. It appears that in some cases, because of the short timescale before the Lord
 Taylor’s Inquiry got underway (it started on 15 May 1989), some statements’were sent
 to the inquiry team and circulated by them to representatives of the parties before they
 had been vetted by the solicitors. As a result one police officer was cross-examined at
 the Inquiry (day 16) on the basis of a criticism containe4J in his original statement but
 later excluded. This was a matter of concern to ACC Jones, because it was contragy to
 an arrangement which he had made with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. The
 matter was taken up with the Treasury Solicitor, who replied on the 7 June. A copy of
 this reply is in Appendix 8, p2.




                                                                                             p
 92. This letter shows that Counsel to the Inquiry and the Treasury Solicitor were well ir
 awaYe that selt-wrlttengtatements were being vetted by Hammond Suddards. Mr Justice ’
-Collins, ~ho was Leading Counsel to the Inquiry, and Mr Whitehurst, Assistant
 Treasury Solicitor and part of the Inquiry Team have both confirmed to me that that
 was the case. So also has Chief Superintendent Foster who was in charge of the
 investigation by the West Midlands Police.

 Privilege

 93. I do not think statements which came into existence prior to 26 April 1989 were
 subject to legal professional privilege. There is no evidence that they were obtained so    /



                                                                                             (
 that the legal advisers to the Chief Constable could advise, as opposed to the officers
 being asked to record their recollections while matters were fresh in their minds. Those
 that came into existence following the conference with Counsel may well have been
 privileged, though there may have been difficult questions relating to the dominant
 purpose for which the statement was obtained.


 94. In the event I do not think t!ke4mint is of any consequence since the questio__ n o_~f
 l~a! privilege only relates to the non-production of documents in
 litigation. Nor do I think there was anything improper about asking officers to record
 their recollections in their own words on ordinary paper, rather than in their notebooks.
 The occasion was wholly exceptional and a notebook is not a convenient form in which
 to write what, in many cases, was likely to be a very long statement.




                                           81
  Timescale

  95. While it might have been preferable for statements to be taken in the usual
  Criminal Justice Act form, I doubt whether this was practicable having regard to the
  time constraints. Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was working to a very tight timescale in order to
  allow the Home Secretary to have a report by the beginning of the next football season
  in August.

  96. It would probably have been difficult for South Yorkshire Police to take these
  statements from their colleagues in the time available. It is quite clear to me that the
  West Midlands Police could not possibly have taken such statements in time for them to
  be available for consideration by the Inquiry team. The Inquiry team, including Lord
  Taylor, were clearly well aware that original self-written statements were being vetted
  by the solicitors and in some cases altered. I have no doubt that they either knew or
  suspected that criticisms of the police operation or conduct of senior police officers were
  being excluded on the basis that such criticisms were comment or opinion.

  97. These alterations were made on the advice of the solicitors, though in many cases
  they simply advised that the passage in question be reviewed. This process of submitting
  statements to solicitors before they were sent to the Inquiry did not materially differ
  from that adopted by the Club and the Ambulance Service. In their cases the respective
  solicitors took the statements and forwarded them to the Inquiry team.

  Statements which were amended without reference to the solicitors


  98. There were also a large number of statements which South Yorkshire Police
  obtained from their officers which they did not send to their solicitors for comment. The
  reason for this seems to have been that they were not available until the latter part of
  May 1989. The force examined these statements but suggested no alteration to most of
  them.

     99. I have examined 51 of these statements where some alteration was made. In many
   /of these the alteration is quite trivial and of no consequende whatever. In others,
  ]comments have been excluded, for the most part of the same kind as those I have ’
                                                                                                l
  /referred to in paragraph 86, that is to say criticism of the shortage of radios and
 /infori:nation, and of the lack of organisation 6f-the-r-e-s~fie.-TTl~ my opinion ~hese
/comments were properly excluded and I have not found any instance in which the
     factual content of the statement has been altered so as to render it misleading.




                                             82
Cover-up?


100. Havingregard to Mr Duckenfield’sdisgraceful lieabout GateC bein~ forced
open by fans and the fact that some shocking stories about the behaviour of fans, said to
have emanated from some police officers, were reported in the press (see Lord Taylor’s
Interim Report, para 257), I have considered this matter critically because of the
                                                                                              /
allegation of a cover-up. I have no doubt that in the days following Hillsborough the
South Yorksh~ perceived themselves to be on the defensive. This was also the
~their legal advisers. There was an understandable desire not to give
anything away.

101. For the most part the suggestions for a                  -- rs are not open
t~~m. i-n-a few cases however I think it would have been pr~fo.rnhle if th~ deletion
had not been made. Trig ameiadments whi~c-hSouth Yorkshire Police suggested
t~s, without reference to the solicitors, are in my view unexceptionable. What
was happeni_~ng was well known to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry team, though not the detail of
the amendm_ents, except in tho.~e cases wher~ i he lmamen~fed version was forwarded
a--ue~ressure of time.

102. I have made enquiries of a number of the officers whose statements I refer to in
Appendix 7, to see if they were subjected to improper pressure as Mr Frost suggested.
One, PC Groome, told me that he had been told that unless the alterations were made
his evidence would not be forwarded to the Inquiry, and so, reluctantly, he agreed. He
might perhaps have sent his unamended version in to the Inquiry of his own accord if he
had really wanted to, but in any event the alterations to his statement - though extensive
- are in my view unexceptionable (see Appendix 7). Otherwise any reluctance the
officers may have had seems to have been allayed by the explanation to which I referred
earlier (see Appendix 8). I have not come across any statement that is not signed by the
officer, and that includes Mr Frost’s.

..!103. In fact I think the whole effort may have been counter productive. Had more
 attention been paid to the comments and opinions of the junior ranks, the Force might
 have av~b_uke_~hich they received from Lord Taylor. At para 285 of
 his Interim Report he said:
       "It is a matter of regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South
       Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at fault in
       what occurred. Mr Duckenfield, under pressure of cross-examination, apologised
      for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
       case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk, and to blame the Club for
      failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal crush was not caused by the
       influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a being defective. Such an
       unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt.
       It would have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if responsibility
       had been faced."




                                            83
l
104. I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team were in no way inhibited or
impeded by the exclusion of material from the original statements. They were well
aware of the criticisms that were being raised by junior officers. All the questions on
which comments were ~ade and excluded were matters which Lord Taylor investigated
and made findings - on the basis of the facts - which were adverse to the police. This
applies to all the cases I have commented on in Appendix 7. Mr Justice Collins has
confirmed to me that this was so.

105. I have not found anything in the material excluded in this way that might have
ivfluence’~----d the jury at the Inquests to bring in a different verdi’ct. The legal
representatives of the families at the Inquest were well aware of Lord Taylor’s
conclusions on the points at issue. Equally I am quite satisfied that the exclusion of these
comments could not possibly have affected the Director of Public Prosecutions. As I
have already stated, Counsel advising the Director proceeded on the basis that the
evidence before them supported Lord Taylor’s findings.

106. ~.In my opinion the allegation made by Professor__S_~xatnn of irr~.gu!,l:i.t_y and
malpractice (paragraph 77 above) is not substantiated.




                                              84
CHAPTER 5



Other matters of concern to the victims’ families

1. As an important part of my scrutiny I visited Liverpool in early October to meet the
families of victims of the disaster and listen to the matters which concerned them. I held
an open session to which I invited all the families of those who died, and I was pleased
that many were able to attend. I then held sixteen prirvate meetings with families who
had asked for them. I had two other meetings with family members later, at the serutiny
office in London.


2. Many of the relatives of victims whom I saw during these meetings raised questions to
do with the video and medical evidence about the disaster, which I have discussed in
Chapters 2 and 3 of this report. But, both in my discussions with them and in writing,
victims’ families have made other allegations as well. To summarise them briefly, they are
   _ there were inconsistencies between the way in which the police summarised the
      facts about each individual death at the ’mini-inquests’ and evld~-at
      actually happened to that person;
   _ the Coroner was biased;
   _ Liverpool supporters were treated unfavourably and in a hostile manner when
      Ch-ey-ga~ e-~-vq’--d~n-e-e--~rtti~ ih~-ge~, ..................
   _ South Yorkshire Police have failed to give families documents to which they are
      entitled;
   _ victims were confirmed as being dead on the basis of cursory examination;
   _ the West Midlands Police investigation team was biased in favour of South
      Yorkshire Police;
   _ South Yorkshire Police hale never apologised for the disaster.


3. I consider these points in this Chapter.

Inconsistencies in the evidence about individual deaths

4. One of the most common complaints which families had was that they had not been
able to find out precisely when and where their relations died, in some cases because the
evidence was very sparse and in others because it was said that the evidence was
conflicting, or did not support the summary given about their relative at the mini-
inquest. I fully understand the families’ anxiety to know all the facts as far as possible.
But it is only right to point out that the West Midlands Police were faced with a massive
task in collecting the evidence, seeking to identify individual deceased from
photographic evidence, and reconciling, in so far as it was possible, the inevitable
conflicts of evidence.
                                           85
5. Inspector Layton of the West Midlands Police described how they had set about this
task on the first day of the mini-inquest (18th April 1990, transcript pages 37-47). He
said


      "Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have attempted to identify each
      person’s position at the ground, where possible, before and after their deaths. The
      search for such information has been exhaustive, but the degree of success in
      achieving an accurate picture for each individual does vary greatly. In some cases
      the information obtained has been very limited and in some instances it has not
      been possible to confirm with any degree of certainty some of the identifications
      made."


6. Mr Layton then described the photographic source material. There were 71 hours of
video, from police, club and BBC. There were about 600 colour still photographs taken
by the police for normal intelligence gathering purposes and a further 1800 photographs
from Press, freelance agencies and the public. Much of the photographic material is
timed (i.e. the time at which it was taken, down to the minute or the second, appears on
the print).

7. West Midlands Police investigators showed this material to over 300 South
Yorkshire Police Officers, 10 officers from other forces, 21 members of the South
Yorkshire Fire Service, 19 members of SYMAS, and 169 spectators and other civilian
witnesses who said that they had had some involvement with people who had died.

8. Initially, the police had been reluctant to involve the families in the identification
process, because of the distressing nature of the photographic material. However,
following consultation with the Social Services and the families themselves the policy
was changed. Eighty families wished to see the evidence and take part in the
identification, and were able to do so.

9. Altogether West Midlands Police interviewed over 600 people, with each interview
lasting a minimum of 2 hours.

10. The possible misidentification of pictures and other evidence about those who died
was,a problem. Inspector Layton told the Inquest:

       "I should point out that on a small number of occasions it has subsequently
       transpired that both police and civilian witnesses have made mistaken
       iddntifications. Although I would again stress they were made at the time with the
       genuine belief that they were correct."




                                            86
y-




     11. West Midlands Police created a file, known as a ’body file’, for each of the people     l
     who died. These files contain the following material:
           (i)     a single-page summary report, prepared by the West Midlands Police,
                   setting out the name of the person, where he or she died, and other formal
                   details;
           (ii)    an analysis or summary of the witnesses, tracing the movements of the
                   deceased from the time they left home on the day of the match right up to
                   the autopsy, also containing details of visual evidence and the~’blood
                   ethanol analysis;
           (iii)   statements of witnesses, referred to in the analysis. In many cases these
                   statements dealt with other matters and contain only a short passage about
                   the person who is the subject of the file;
           (iv)    visual evidence (photographs and video stills) taken from the sources I
                   have mentione~t, together with plans identifying so far as possible where
                   the deceased was last seen alive, and where he or she was found apparently
                   dead, together with supporting photographs; and
           (v)     A continuity chart, showing what happened to the individual hour by hour
                   during the day.

     12. A police officer presented a summary of the evidence, based on this material, at
     the mini-inquest on each of the victims. I~maries would often include excerpts
     from the witnesses’ statements. The summaries were prepared in advance and sent to
     the solicitors for the families so that they could be checked for errors and corrected if
     need be, though the supporting material was not then made available.

     13. The Coroner made it clear that if from time to time it became apparent that
     corrections had to be made, they would be made at a later stage. This happened in some
     instances.

     14. Before the main Inquest began the Coroner told the lawyers for the families that
     he would consider questions they had about the facts which had come out at the mini-
     inquests sympathetically, so that the Inquest dealt properly with inaccuracies or
     omissions in the evidence about what had happened to individuals. He invited the
     solicitors for the Hillsborough Steering Group, who represented the families, to submit
     the questions they wished to raise (transcript of business meeting, 30 October 1990,
     p.13).

     15. There followed considerable correspondence between the solicitors and the
     Coroner, lasting from November 1990 until the main Inquest began in March 1991.
     Some of the questions the families’ lawyers had about the precise facts of particular
     deaths were dealt with in correspondence or not persisted in. In other cases the Coroner
     agreed to call witnesses requested by the families to deal further with the questions
     where and when their relatives had died. Paul Taylor -- whom I mentioned in the last
     Chapter -- is an example of such a witness. He gave evidence about Victoria Hicks.


                                                87
16. In other cases it would seem the Coroner considered that the problem could be
taken no further. It seems to me that he did his best to resolve the queries that were
being put to him.

17. The Divisional Court upheld the Coroner’s decision to conduct the mini-inquests
in the way he did. Equally in my opinion, even if there were inconsistencies in the
evidence .and d_discr-epan~es_b_eJ~~y and the supporting evidence, that
cannot affect.the Coroner’s decision about the 3.15 cut-off time or the verdicts of
accidental deaths.


18. I did 1w-best-to-~Lthis out to t~es who raised these points when I met
the~m_But I appreciated that this was a matter ok g~fir e-og-c-e-t-6-t~id I would
do my best to resolve the inconsistencies or discrepancies which they pointed out to me
(although I very much doubt whether this was within my terms of reference).

 19. Some of the relatives I spoke to did4ell_me the nature of the inconsistency or
 discrepancy which concerned them, for example in the cases of Kevin Williams and
~Irfi-illp H~_0-therl~eople told me that they could not specify the problem at that
 stage, either because they had not received copies of the body file from the police or had
 not had it long enough to deal with the points. I urged those families who had not yet
 sought copies of the body files to do so without delay:

20. I am afraid that I have not been able to resolve relatives’ concerns about conflicts
of evidence in every case. It seems to me that that is inevitable given the nature of the
problem. What is clear, however, is that no further inquiry involving examination of the
witnesses could be of any help. No one is likely now to have a recollection beyond what
was written in their statements at the time and if they did, it would be likely to be
suspect after eight and a half years.

 21.   However I deal as best I can with individual cases in Appendix 9.

 Bias and conflict of interest on the part of the Coroner

 22. The Divisional Court was specifically asked to consider whether the Coroner was
 biase~d or had a conflict of interest. It found that he did not and I have seen no reason to
 disagree with that assessment. A criticism that the Coroner visited the ground with the
 juryis not correct.

 Hostile treatment of Liverpool supporters at the Inquests

 23. The allegation has been made to me during my scrutiny -- but without any
 particular examples being cited -- that Liverpool supporters who gave evidence at the
 Inquest were given a difficult time. I have read most of the supporters’ evidence.

                                            88
24. I can find only two possible examples of cross-examination which might fall into
this category. In one case Counsel tended)o ask repetitive questions and was stopped by
the Coroner. The second case is of a witness who said that he and two friends had been
drinking and pushed their way from the back of pen 3 (in his statement he used the word
"forced") to the front and through the gate onto the pitch, ignoring appeals not to push
and regardless of the plight of others. In these circumstances it is hardly surprising that
the cross-examination was less than sympathetic.

25. In view of the criticisms that have been made of the Coroner on this score I should
record that on 30 April 1991 Miss Steele, the solicitor acting for the Hillsborough Steering
Committee wrote to him thanking him on behalf of the Committee and their clients for
his kindness. She said "the care and sensitivity and in particular the arrangements made
for the families at the individual Inquests was very much appreciated both by them and
us". She also said that the families’ lawyers concerned appreciated his unfailing courtesy,
consideration and ready response to problems that they raised.

Police failure to let families have documents

26. One of the complaints which families have made particularly strongly to me is that
they have been unable to obtain copies of relevant documents from the South Yorkshire
Police. It may help if I set out the background to this complaint.

27. South Yorkshire Police have an extensive archive of material about the
Hillsborou h£~_disaster. There is a substantial storeroom full of investigation files,
statements, photographs, videotapes and computer records. They have given me and my
team unrestricted access to their archive for work on this scrutiny. It contains two types
of material. First, there are the "body files", of which there is one for each individual
who died in the disaster.

28. I have described the content of these files in paragraph 11 of this Chapter. The
police keep these on behalf of the (current) Coroner for South Yorkshire, and access to
them is at his discretion. There is a right of access to some of the material in them under
Rule 57 of the Coroners Rules 1984, which so far as relevant reads
       "A coi’oner shall, on application and on payment of the prescribed fee (if any),
       supply to any person who, in the opinion of the coroner, is a properly interested
       person a copy of any report of a post-mortem examination.., or special
       examination, or of any notes of evidence, or of any document put in evidence at an
       inquest...
       A coroner may, on application and without charge, permit any.., properly
       interested person to inspect such report, notes of evidence, or document".


29. The approach which the South Y_or_ks_h.ire Police have told me they adopt, with the
COllsent of the C              sts-from relatives for material from the body files is to
send copies of all of it to them, uncut and without charge, so long as it is not material
which they have sent to the relative before.
                                            89
   30. The rest of the material in the archive is not covered by the Coroners Rules and
   access to it is at the discretion of the police. It includes all the statements taken both
   during the investigation by West Midlands Police and by South Yorkshire Police
   themselves (including, in the case of amended "recollections" and statements by South
   Yorkshire police officers, both the original and final versions) and other material such
   as videotapes, photographs, and the West Midlands Police report of their investigation
   to the Director of Public Prosecutions. Some of the statements and photographs, and
   stills from the videotapes, are included in the body files.

   31. South Yorkshire Police told me that they send relatives copies (free of charge) of
   material falling into this second group which they say they would like to see. There are,
   however, some exceptions to this. The most important ones are that they do not send
   out copies of statements which are not contained in, or referred to, in the body files
   unless the person who made the statement agrees that it should be released (or has since
   died) and that they will only send photographs or video stills showing a dead body to
   someone who is a relation of that person. This means that they will sometimes trim the
   print which they send to relatives of a photograph which contains a picture of more than
   one dead body. I think this is a reasonable step for them to take, since sending out a
   picture uncut would mean that a picture of other bodies Shown on it would go to
   somebody who was not a relative of those people.

   32. Some of the families I met said that they could not be sure that the police had
   supplied them with all the information from the body files. Others assumed that they
   had not done so. I was anxious from the outset of my scrutiny that families who wished
   to do so should be able to see the material in these files, and from what I have seen of       D
   the way the South Yorkshire Police have dealt with families’ requests I would surprised
   if these criticisms were true.
                                                                                /



J 33. Nevertheless I invited those families who said they had not received all the
   material in their relative’s file, or that they might not have had it all, to let me know
   what they had so that I could check and see what was missing. Two families did so. I
   checked the relevant files and I am satisfied that nothing of significance was omitted.

   34. Quite apart from any of th!s~_wi_tness s~tatem_ents_ by pe. ~ o_ple who gave evidence at
   Lord Taylor’s Inquiry were nfacte available at that time to the legal re-~&entatives of        /
   the parties, including the families. Transcripts of the evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry
   and the main Inquest are in the public domain and have been available to the families at
   all material times.

    Confirmation of Death

    35. Some of the families whom I met said that they did not think that their relatives
    were necessarily dead when they were examined at the ground by doctors who
    confirmed to the police that they were so. They said that the doctors’ examinations were
    cursory and that mistakes might have been made.

                                              90
36. This very serious criticism was in particular made of a Dr Bull, who examined 20
people and stated that they were dead between approximately 3.50 pm and 4.20 pm (Dr
Bull’s statement gives a time of 4.15, but this seems to be wrong because the timing of
his last examination was 4.20 according to the police officer who had been placed in
charge of the body concerned). Relatives have told me that proper examinations could
not have been conducted in this time.

37. No expert medical evidence has been tendered to me to support this c~iticism.
Nevertheless I thought it right to interview Dr Bull. He told me that the times in his
statement were an approximation based upon what the police told him. He did not look
at his watch.

38. He and a Dr Redgrave divided a certain group of casualties between them. These
were all people whom the police, or ambulance staff, or other doctors had thought were
dead and who had been placed in rows in a particular part of the Hillsborough
gymnasium, which was being used as a casualty clearing station and temporary
mortuary. Dr Bull said he looked for a pulse in the neck of each person and listened for
heart and breath sounds. He had not brought a stethoscope with him, but he shared Dr
Redgrave’s. This was possible because they were working in close proximity to each
other.

39. He also examined each person’s pupils for reaction to light. He did not have a
torch, which he would normally use but in each case he closed the person’s eyelids and
then opened them and looked for a reaction. The gymnasium had bright overhead
lighting and he considered this was as good as looking with a torch. He felt under no
pressure of time. The police had asked him to check and make sure of death. He said he
had no doubt that he had done so correctly. In some cases when using the stethoscope to
listen to heart sounds he could hear footsteps reverberating through the body, so he had
to make sure, after these ceased, that there was no heart sound.

40. Dr Bull did not complete any paperwork as he would have done in a normal case
of certification of death, but told the police officer who was allocated responsibility for
each body that the person was dead. At that stage the identity of most of the bodies was
unknown. His recollection was that he looked at one line of bodies, that Dr Redgrave
examined the’ adjacent line, and that having done so he checked Dr Redgrave’s cases
and vice-versa. He did not leave the ground until 5.45 pm.

41. Dr Bull was at the match as a spectator and had gone onto the pitch to help when
he saw that things were going wrong. He had administered first aid to a number of
people before being asked by the police to go into the gymnasium. He had no
connections with the police or with Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as some
relatives have claimed to me.




                                           91
42. I have discussed what he told me with a senior Accident and Emergency
consultant. I did not do this because I was in any doubt about what Dr Bull had said but
because of the very grave nature of what was being alleged about him and the other
doctors who unexpectedly had to carry out this difficult and demanding task on the day.
The consultant confirmed to me that the procedures Dr Bull adopted were proper and
reliable and I see no reason whatever to doubt that this was so.

West Midlands Police biased in favour of the South Yorkshire Police

43. Chapter 4 deals with allegations that the West Midlands Police tried to distort
evidence or bully witnesses in favour of the South Yorkshire Police. Even if there were
signs, which in my view there are not, that individual officers exerted undue pressure in
those cases, it does not support the contention that the West Midlands Police as a whole
favoured the South Yorkshire Police. ~’-

44. The other suggestions that were made to me on this score were wholly
unsubstantiated. I see no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as to the
impartiality of the West Midlands investigation which I cited in Chapter 4.

No apology by the police

45. One frequent complaint made to me by victims’ families was that the police had
never apologised for the part they played in the disaster. I have discussed this with Mr
Wells, who took office as Chief Constable in mid-1990. He drew my attention to a press
release by his predecessor, Mr Peter Wright, issued on 4 August 1989, the publication
day of Lord Taylor’s interim report. Mr Wright said
         "I accept the findings and the conclusions of the Inquiry in so far as they relate to
         South Yorkshire Police. The fact that we are held to have contributed to the terrible
         tragedy of Hillsborough is a matter of profound sadness to all members of the
         Force, and both personally         and O~hi~irilb-_~~cSe_~ff~cxte~-J_d~y heartfelt
                           ..........................
      , regret to those who have lost loved ones or suffered injury".

46. Mr Wells said that he often uses the occasion of pubiic speeches to express his and
the Force’s regret. He gave me some examples (and there are many others).
      ,g,



47.     In a press release on 28 March 1991, the day of the Inquest verdict, he said:
            "If there seems to be any sense of relief in South Yorkshire Police today it should



 I
            notre mistaken for celebration. I have the profoundest sense of sorrow for the 95
            deaths that occurred, any sense of relief that we do feel is diminished by the
            desolation of the families who lost loved ones. We have come to the end of another
            phase of the long, slow process of understanding and healing."




                                                 92
48.   In a television interview on the same day there was the following exchange:
       Trevor Hicks: "I was gladdened when I heard his announcement earlier where for
       the first time publicly I have heard the Chief Constable publicly apologising and
       expressing regret to the families .... "


The interviewer asked Mr Wells if it was true that he had said on behalf of the Force
that they were sorry. Mr Wells said:                                           ..
       "I would not have said it if it wasn’t true.., as I say, as a parent with all the feelings
       that I can muster,------TO-Mf-Hl~sTig--dh-d everybody else who has lost loved ones here, we
       are, not just the Chief Constable but all of the officers involved are terribly sorry. It
       is an inexpressible grief to have to bear and I know words don’t count for muck but
       they are sincerely meant."


49.   In the Yorkshire Post for 29 March 1991 Mr Wells is recorded as saying:


       "I can’t bring back their children. I wish to God I could. I can Only say sorry so
       much, but by God, we are sorry."


50.   In a letter to the Yorkshire Post dated 25 January 1992 he wrote:
       "The truth is that Lord Justice Taylor described the failure of the police to order the
       closure of the tunnel leading to the terracing as a_"blunder of the. ~first magnitude".
       South Yorkshire Police has consistently and unequivocally accepted the truth of
       this finding. I repeat it now. How can anyone fairly describe this acceptance of
       responsibility as evasion?
                                                                                                     J

                                                                                                     /
       Not only the police were to blame. You will recall that Lord Justice Taylor
       concluded that there were many factors that contributed to the disaster -- the layout
       of the crush barriers, the dangerous congestion arising at the turnstiles, inadequate
       signing -- were some .... I repeat that blame apportioned by Lord Justice Taylor
       has been accepted by South Yorkshire Police."


51. Following the broadcast of the Granada Television film ’Hillsborough’ Mr Wells
issued a press release whose last paragraph reads:
       "I am on public record as saying sorry to the bereaved families for the police’s part
       in the tragedy and I repeat that every time I have the opportunity. We were found
       wanting and have faced up to our responsibility for our role, but we were not the
       only ones who played a part in it and it is time for others, including the fans, to do
       the same and for the families to try to start building bridges."




                                              93
     J
 /
i/
52. At my meeting with him Mr Wells made it plain that since Lord Taylor’s Interim
Report he had acknowledged on behalf of the force that there had been four main
errors:
        (i)   failing to delay the kick-off in the light of the large crowds at Leppings
              Lane;
        (ii) not noticing or taking full account of the fact that the central pens were full
              by 2.50 pm;
        (iii) not foreseeing where the supporters would go once Gate C was opened
              and not blocking off the tunnel -- this was the critical mistake; and
        (iv) not distinguishing distress from disorder and consequently not reacting
              sufficiently quickly or effectively to the situation.

53. But Mr Wells also pointed out that others had been criticised by Lord Taylor (see
Chapter 1, paras 47 and 48) and that the police did not bear the sole responsibility for
the disaster although he accepted that they took the largest share. This is in accordance
with Lord Taylor’s findings and is reflected in the apportionment of liability reached in
the settlement of civil proceedings.

54. I do not think it is reasonable to assert that the South Yorkshire Police have never
apologised or accepted responsibility for their share of the blame.




                                            94
     CHAPTER 6

     Miscellaneous

     Television programmes
                    I- ......................



     1. Not unnaturally the Hillsborough disaster has attracted a lot of media’coverage over
     the years. Three television programmes I think are particularly significant, and I think it
     right to offer brief comments on these.

     2. The first is a "F’~programme, "Disaster at Hillsborough", broadcast by
     Yorkshire Television in February 1990. It is in my view a fair and balanced account,
     using much original material, including scenes taken from police camera 5 after 15.02
     (being part of the clip shown to the jury as C539). The commentary closely corresponds
     with Lord Taylor’s findings.

     3. The second is an episode of the "Cook Report" (Yorkshire Television) shown in
     June 1994. This concentrated on the case of Kevin Williams. A number of statements
     made in the course of the programme are in my opinion not substantiated, for reasons I
     set out when discussing the Kevin Williams case earlier. For example:
            Roger Cook "Evidence previously disregarded or altered with duress and
            witnesses previously ignored demonstrate that Kevin and others could be alive
            today".
,!          Sir Malcolm Thornton MP "The truth seems to have been suppressed --policemen
            and women on the spot were "leaned on" by their colleagues to change their
            evidence."
           Roger Cook "If evidence that (Kevin) was alive at five to four had been allowed to
           stand, events after 3.15 would have had to be investigated" (by the Inquest).


I    4. The third is theA3xanada~elevision programme ’Hillsborough" shown on 5
     D~!996. This is a highly emotive and powerful drama based on Hillsborough
     and the InqUest. It portrays most graphically the appalling grief of the bereaved and
     their disillusion with the Inquest. It is not always easy for the viewer of this programme
     to tell what is reconstruction and what is original video footage taken on the day.

     5. I do not have much doubt tha, Lthis progr__amme p_lay_ed_a_substan~-t-in_the
     d~m-y-se-r-utiny. It is not for me to comment on the accuracy of the
     impressions which it gives as a whole. But in so far as it suggests that police videotapes
     were suppressed or destroyed i~t is not accurate. The programme also relies on Mr
     Houldsworth’s assertions, made for the first tim~" at about this time, that he could see
     from police cameras 5 and 3 as relayed in the Club Control Room that pens 3 and 4 were
                                                                                                  l
     already full before Gate C was opened. For reasons I have set out at length, I do not
     accept this evidence.                                                     "
                   / .....



                                                95
Ten unresolved questions?

6. At the time ofthe "Hillsborough" television programme in 1996 the programme
makers, Granada Television, wrote to Mr David Maclean MP, then a Minister at the
Home Office, with a list of what they said were ten unresolved questions about the
disaster. Most of these questions were in my view clearly answered by Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry. Nevertheless I have looked at them and set out the answers in Appendix 10.

The state of the ground

7. At a late stage of my scrutiny I was invited by the South Yorkshire Police to
consider the evidence of Mr Noel Burne, BSc(Eng), ACGI, FICE, FI.Struct.E., FCIOB,
FFB, ACI ACG, FBAE. Mr Burne is a structural engineer who was instructed in July
1989 to report on and advise the South Yorkshire Police Authority on the safety and
structural aspects of the Hillsborough ground, in particular with a view to the       \
anticipated civil proceedings. He produced a report, dated August 1990, and gave oral \
evidence in the contribution proceedings heard before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt which
began on 2 October 1990. His evidence was therefore not available at the time of Lord
Taylor’s Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest.
                                                                                 \



Mr Burne’ s evidence


      In  his Report Mr Burne dealt with the following matters:
 .

     (a) Turnstiles -- poor labelling and inadequate number
     (b) Lack of proper direction signs in the concourse
      (c) Lack of control system for monitoring numbers in each pen
     (d) Overall capacity of Leppings Lane Terraces overestimated
     (e) Incorrect slope of the tunnel
     (f) Exits from the pens not signed and inadequate for emergency evacuation
     (g) Crush barriers -- poorly placed, too low, of inadequate strength and insufficient


      ,g,
         in number
                                                                                             1
9. In Mr Burne’s view there were many breaches of the advice and recommendations
contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Green Guide) to such an extent
that his overall opinion was"
       "A~ a whole, the West Terrace was unsafe by reason of neglect to conform to the
       primary recommendations and obligations of the .Green Guide, among others."




                                            96
10. On 5 October 1990 Mr Burne gave evidence before the Hon Mr Justice Jowitt in the
contribution proceedings. Before his evidence was completed or tested in cross-
examinfition, the proceedings were settled. It is reasonable to assume that Mr Burne’s
opinion was a material factor in persuading the Club and Eastwood and Partners to make
a substantial contribution to what was then estimated to be the overall cost of the claims.

11. For the most part the matters that Mr Burne criticised were fully considered by
Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and Lord Taylor made a number of findings consisteht with Mr
Burne’s criticisms, some of which I have referred to in Chapter 1 (paragraphs 47 and
48). But there are two matters which Mr Burne pointed to which the police suggest were
either not considered or not fully considered at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.

Height of the crush barriers

12. The first relates to the height of the crush barriers. The recommended height for
crush barriers in the Green Guide is between 1.02m and 1.12m with a preferred height
of 1.1m. This is measured above the nosing of that part of the step immediately behind
the barrier. According to Mr Burne, adopting this method of measurement, the effective
height of crush barrier 124A (the one which collapsed in pen 3) was between .865 -
.915m, and more importantly the height of the barrier immediately behind, namely 136,
was only .745 - .775m; barrier 136A (which was diagonally between barrier 124A and
the entrance to the tunnel) was .765 - .785m.

13. Mr Burne identified three disadvantages resulting from too low a crush barrier. First,
if the barrier is at the level of the upper leg and below the groin it is not anatomically in
the best position and the person behind it cannot use his arms to push away from the
barrier. This is not particularly relevant in the circumstances of extreme overcrowding.
Secondly, the upper part of the body of a person behind the crush barrier is not restrained
by it, so that the load is transferred from those behind to those in front, thereby imposing
an excessive load on the next barrier. Finally, there will be a downward component in the
forces exercised on the barrier in addition to a horizontal one, which tends to make it
more vulnerable to collapse under conditions of extreme pressure.

14. There is’little doubt that the failure of barrier 124A contributed to the substantially
larger number of deaths in pen 3 and in particular in the area between barrier 124A and
the perimeter fence. These points could therefore be of some significance.

15. Dr Nicholson, who was a Chartered Engineer and Deputy Director of the
Research and Laboratory Services Division of the Health and Safety Executive, made a
written report to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. He also gave evidence at the inquest. He did not
deal with these specific matters; but in his oral evidence at the inquest he considered
that one of the important causes of the collapse of barrier 124A was that there was a gap
in the barrier behind, between barriers 136 and 136A, with the result that there was
nothing to break the density of the crowd bearing on barrier 124A, and it may well be
that this is a more important factor in causing the failure of barrier 124A than those
suggested by Mr Burne relating to the height of the barriers.
                                            97
Capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace                                                        t
16. The second matter which Mr Burne pointed to relates to the overall capacity of the
Leppings Lane terrace. The overall capacity for the terrace had been calculated by
Eastwood and Partners, the consulting engineers to Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club, and accepted by the City Council at 10,100. This was divided between 2,900 to the
North West Terrace and 7,200 for the remainder, calculated at the rate of 54 spectators
per 10 sq meters. The size of the area in question was not based on a survey of the
ground by Eastwood and Partners, but on a drawing produced by the Club. In
December 1989 (after Lord Taylor’s interim report) the area was measured and this
revealed that the size of the North West Terrace as shown on the Club’s drawing was
too great. Adopting the correct measurement, at the rate of 54 spectators per 10 sq
meters the capacity of the North West Terrace was only 2,242. There was therefore an
excess of 658 or 22.6% allowed in this area.

17. In paragraphs 137 to 142 of his Interim Report, Lord Taylor dealt with the correct
calculation of the capacity for pens 3 and 4. These had been calculated by Eastwood and
Partners at 1,200 for pen 3 and 1,000 for pen 4. These figures would have been too high
even if the terraces complied with the Green Guide recommendations. If they had
complied with the Green Guide the figures should have been 1,015 and 1,036
respectively. But they did not and Lord Taylor calculated that the capacities of pens 3
and 4 should have been 822 and 871 respectively, a total of 507 less than the 2,200
allocated.

18. It is not clear whether the other pens on the Leppings Lane terraces, numbers 1, 2,
6 and 7 complied as to layout, position and size of crush barriers, means of access and
gangways with the Green Guide. It seems unlikely that they did. But even assuming that
they did, and that it was appropriate to calculate the capacity of these pens on the basis
of 54 spectators per 10 sq meters, it is apparent that the capacity overall was
overestimated by 1,165, ie 658 in the North West Terraces and 507 in pens 3 and 4. The
result would be that an excessive number of tickets were sold over the safe capacity.

19. The individual pens were not segregated and did not have separate turnstiles, and
spectators naturally tended to congregate in the central pens 3 and 4 because these were
the ones behind the goal. The overstatement of the capacity of the Leppings Lane
terraces is clearly therefore a matter of some importance. Lord Taylor was aware of part
of the problem, but it does not seem that he was aware of the overstatement of the size
of the North West Terrace and it is not clear whether an adjustment for non-compliance
with the Green Guide should have been made in relation to the pens other than 3 and 4.




                                          98
  2(1. These matters do not give                 - " _ the Judicial Inquiry or any other
  pro~t is not suggested by the police that they do. Lord Taylor might, if
  he had known of them, have critici~__sed Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, their
  consultant enters, and those responsible for licensing the ground in more stringent
  !er~d, but I do not’-c--o~ider that there would have been any question of his
¯changin~g   his central conclusion, borne out as it is by~the-overwhetmingmaxs of the
  evidence, that the primary cause of the disaster was a failure of police control. However,
  if the respor~sibility of the Other parties was somewhat greater than had earlipr been
  appreciated, that might have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings
  against police officers.

 Further complaints about the Inquest

 21. In further very late submissions dated 11 December 1997, Junior Counsel for the
 Family Support Group raised two further complaints about the Inquest. The first
 concerns the Coroner’s summing-up. Counsel said that in relation to the state of the
 central pens at 14.52 he directed the jury to reach "a factual conclusion which was in
 direct conflict with the conclusions reached by Lord Taylor" and by so doing he
 distorted the evidence.

 22. This has nothing to do with any fresh evidence and strictly speaking therefore does
 not call for comment from me. But lest it be given credence it is I think only fair to the
 Coroner that I say something. Counsel cites three passages. When his summing-up is
 read as a whole, it seems to me that the Coroner dealt fully and fairly with all the
 evidence.

 23. He did not direct the j.u_ry to make particular findingsof fact and he did not usurp_
~ad he done so, I have no doubt that it would have been challenged
 in the Divisional Court. Complaint was made there of his directions to the jury on law,
 but not of his summary of the facts.

 24. Secondly, Junior Counsel for the Family Support Group criticised the Coroner’s
 ruling about the use of transcripts in cross examination. This again has nothing to do
 with fresh evidence. It is a point which, if there was any substance in it, could and should
 have been raised in the Divisional Court.

 25. Under cover of a letter dated 17 December 1997 the Solicitor for the Family
 Support Group sent me "an analysis of the major variances between the findings of
 Lord Justice Taylor and the summing-up of Dr Popper". The analysis does not contain
 any fresh evidence. Moreover it appears to confuse the function of Lord Taylor in
 weighing conflicting evidence and making his findings according to his view of its
 reliability, and the function of the Coroner who has to sum up the evidence so that the
 jury can reach their verdict. The two things are quite different.




                                            99
26. The fact that there is evidence both consistent and inconsistent with Lord Taylor’s
findings is a consequence of having an Inquest which covers much the same ground as
the Inquiry. I comment on this below.

27. It is perhaps some indication of the substance of these points that they were raised
for the first time on 11 and 17 December 1997.

An Inquest following a Judicial Inquiry

28. I do not agree with the criticisms of the Coroner and his conduct of the Inquests
advanced by the families (most of them had already been rejected by the Divisional
Court) and I have found no fresh evidence to justify reopening them. But I have come to
the very firm conclusion that it is unsatisfactory to have an Inquest into the question of
how the deceased came to their deaths where there has been a major disaster and an
inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge, which will inevitably have covered the same
ground and indeed, as in this case, ranged much wider.

29. I have read the Report of the Home Office Working Group on Disasters and
Inquests (published in March 1997) and concur with their recommendation that in such
cases the role of the Coroner should be limited by securing the adjournment of the
Inquest when a public inquiry is established and limiting the circumstances in which the
inquest can be resumed. I also agree with the Working Group’s reasoning for making
this recommendation. I would like to make the following points specifically in the case
of Hillsborough:
   (a) At the Taylor Inquiry 179 witnesses gave evidence over a period of 31 days. Of
       these over 50 were Liverpool supporters. Their evidence occupied about four
        days in total. Their evidence was graphic, clear and substantially to the same
        effect. By contrast at the Inquest over 200 witnesses gave evidence over a period
        of 72 days. Of these over 100 were Liverpool supporters and included only a few
        of those who gave evidence before Lord Taylor. I estimate that their evidence in
        total took in excess of 15 days. Again their evidence of the critical events was
        often graphic and substantially to the same effect. But it took much longer
        because it was not concentrated on the vital points and much of the questioning
        was repetitive.                       "
        Dr Popper told me that he considered it necessary to call so many supporters so
       ,that their side of the case should be fully put. While I understand this desire, it
        must be open to question whether in considering the question "how" a deceased
        came to his death, it is necessary to call so many witnesses whose evidence is
        essentially the same.
   (b) Although the issues at the Inquest are likely to be of far more limited scope than
       at a judicial inquiry, and in particular questions of civil liability and individual
       criminal liability are not matters for the Inquest, in practice it is very difficult for
       the Coroner to draw the line, especially if, as in this case, there are a considerable
       number of parties legally represented, all of whom have interests to pursue or
       protect.


                                             100                                                  p
      (c)   In practice it is the decision of the DPP that is important in determining whether
            or not there should be a prosecution for manslaughter, though the DPP can
            reconsider a decision not to bring a charge if further evidence not previously
            considered emerges at an Inquest and the jury reach a verdict of unlawful killing.
      (d) It is most unlikely that a Coroner will have experience comparable to that of a
          High Court Judge in controlling an Inquiry of this magnitude. It is an extremely
          onerous task.
                                                                              ’3
      (e) A Tribunal of Inquiry is an inquisitorial body, usually charged with the
          responsibility of finding out what happened and why and making
          recommendations to avoid similar disasters in future. The tribunal will make
          detailed findings of fact and very probably express an opinion as to where~
          responsibility or criticism lies. It seems pointless to go over part of the sarrie
          ground again, especially having regard to the limited scope of the Inquest and
          available verdicts. Although as I have already said the perception is
          misconceived, there i’s no doubt that a number of the families have perceived the
          verdict of accidental death as in some way reversing or negating the findings of
          Lord Taylor.
      (0 Quite apart from other considerations, a major inquest of this sort involves very
            considerable expense both in time and money. Witnesses have to attend; local
            taxpayers have to bear the expense of the Inquest, interested parties the expense
            of legal representation for which legal aid is not available.
      (g) There is distress and anxiety caused by the delay. In this case it was over two
          years before the verdict at the Inquest. Not infrequently in this type of case, there
          is a challenge in the Divisional Court which increases the delay and adds to the
          uncertainty. If the challenge is mounted by legal advisers who did not appear at
          the Inquiry or Inquest, points may be taken which could not have been taken by
          those who had appeared before, possibly giving rise to false hopes of the
          applicants. It is not only the bereaved who suffer from this long drawn out
I         process. Those whose conduct has been called in question should not have the
          anxiety hanging over their heads indefinitely.

J   30. In the case of Hillsborough the Coroner was confronted with a most formidable
    task. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of him and complimented him
    on his summing up. The undue prolixity of the proceedings flowed in part from the
    difficulties in’ controlling such an Inquiry with many parties represented and in part
    from the Coroner’s understandable desire that the Liverpool supporters’ side should be
    fully presented to the jury. It is not the sort of case which a Coroner should be asked to
    undertake where there has already been a full judicial inquiry. But as the law now stands
    he has no option.

q
t
                                               101
    CHAPTER 7



    Summary

    1.   In this chapter I summarise the findings which I have made.


    2. Before doing so I must make it clear that anyone who is familiar with the terrible
    events of 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough is bound to have great sympathy with the;
    relatives of those who died and the spectators who were injured~I_have now spent many
    weeks studying the evidence of what happened and considering the representations and
    Sub-m~ssions made by the families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to
    imagine anything more horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and
    those who lost their children, relatives and friends.

     3. That 96 people, the majority of them young, should set out in high hopes and spirits
     on a fine Spring day, and yet within a space of less than half-an-hour suffer crushing
     injuries from which they died, is nothing less than appalling. I have the most profound
     sympathy with all the families and friends of those who suffered in this way, many of
     whom I have met. I also understand the dismayl that they have that no individual has _
     personally been held to account, either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
     even to the extent of losing his or her job.

     4. I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them, especially
     since they had had their hopes raised that something more could be done. But I cannot
     allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and
     objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which had
     previously been considered.

       5. Having done so, for the reasons I have set out, I have come to the clear conclusion
       that there is n9 basis upon which there should be aY~yther JudicialJ.nqllir~r a
       reopening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is no basis for a renewed application to the
       Divisional Court or for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners
       Act 1988. I do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
       Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might caus    e
 /
 \     them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider that there is
 \     any justification for setting up any further inquiry into the performance of the
\      emergency and hospital services. Ihave carefully considered the circumstances in which
 \ alterations were made to some of the self-written statements of South Yorkshire Police
     \officers, but I do not consider that there is any occasion for any further investigation.

     6. None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to the
     evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests.

                                                103
                                                                                             Y
Video evidence


7. Chapter 2 of this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My conclusions
about that are that there is no new video evidence of it or video evidence which was not
available to Lord Taylor, the Coroner, or the other authorities who examined the
disaster at the time.

8. ,___Two video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing. They
were tapes of pictures from CCTV cameras operated by Sheffie~Td-~ednesday Football
Club. They were not police tapes and would not have shown anything significant. Their
theft is unsolved. The suggestion that the police tried to blame their failure to spot
overcrowding on the terraces onto faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not
blame the CCTV equipment. The police controllers had a good view over the terraces
from their control box and did not pretend otherwise.

9. The allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded, and
the allegation that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of this ’missing’
police footage is equally unfounded. Police officers did not give false evidence about the
state of the police CCTV system at the ground, and I do not accept the evidence of
Roger Houldsworth, video technician at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he
realised from looking at police CCTV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time Gate C
was opened at 14.52 that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.

The aftermath of the disaster

10. I deal in Chapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the deaths of
those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there should now be a
public inquiry into what was done, or not done, to help them and others who were
crushed.

11. I do not consider that the. Inquest was flawed~Most of the criticisms relate to the
so-called "3.15 cut-off point". I do not agree with these criticisms. The Coroner
considered the questions of who the deceased were and When and where they died at the
mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of matters long after 3.15. It was only in    A
relation to the question of how, i.e. by what means, the deceased came to their deaths
that the Coroner imposed a cut-off point of 3.15 pm. He had good reasons for deciding
to limit the inquiry in this way and the cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.

12. Questions of whether the response of the emergency services was adequate were
not relevant to the task the Coroner had to perform. It was suggested to me that the fact
that Dr Walker, Mr Houldsworth, and others were not called as witnesses at the inquest
amounted to fraudulent concealment of their evidence. That suggestion is false and I
regard it as wholly irresponsible.



                                           104
    13. Lord Taylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published in his
    report. He made criticisms of the slow response of the police and recommendations for
    the future. I cannot see that any useful purpose would be served by having any further
    inquiry into the rescue operation. In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by
    the emergency or medical services. Any wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the
    disaster would place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.

    Interference with witnesses

    14. Chapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses to the
    disaster was tampered with, so that the truth did not emerge either at Lord Taylor’~
    Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types - that the West Midlands
    Police put pressure on Derek Bruder, Debra Martin, and Paul Taylor which affected the
    evidence they wished to give, and that the way in which the South Yorkshire Police went
    about collecting evidence from their own officers who were at Hillsborough and
    witnessed the disaster was unacceptable. I have interviewed Mr Bruder, Miss Martin,
    and Mr Taylor and have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no improper
    attempt to affect their evidence.                                                            /
    Mr Bruder

    15. So far as Mr Bruder is concerned, I am quite satisfied that the West Midlands
    Police, in seeking to confirm details of his statement relating to Kevin Williams, did not
    subject him to improper pressure. He told me himself that they did not. His statements
    were accurately summarised at the inquest on Kevin Williams and there was no attempt
    to discredit him.
i   Miss Martin


V   16_ I did n~lLfind~dis~t-i-n-a-re4m .......... ss. Her statement about events at
    Hillsborough, where she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at variance
    with the account of everybody else who was there. She remains plainly - and
    understandabl~ - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories of the day and of
    subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I think that she gave her
    account of Kevin Williams sitting up in her arms and saying "Morn" in good faith. But it
    cannot be relied upon. It contradicts Mr Bruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the
    pathological findings.

    17. I interviewed the West Midlands police officer who Miss Martin claims bullied her.
    I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see that she had any reason to
    discredit Miss Martin, and she told me that she did not bully or browbeat her. I accept

i   her account and prefer it to Miss Martin’s.




                                              105
    Mr Taylor


    18. As far as Paul Taylor is concerned, I do not accept his evidence that he was bullied
    or intimidated by a West Midlands officer. His account of what he saw at Hillsborough
    has changed in various ways over the years, and he does not appear to have raised any
    complaint about the conduct of this officer until 1997. I prefer the evidence of the
    officer, which is supported to some extent by the contemporary documents. In any event
    he had no reason to put pressure on Mr Taylor.

    South Yorkshire Police statements


    19. I have looked with great care at the way in which the South Yorkshire Police
    obtained written evidence from their officers who witnessed the disaster to put before
    the West Midlands Police investigators and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. Soon after the
    disaSter officers were asked to write out in their own words their recollections of the day
    and of the part which they themselves had played. Many of these statements were
    submitted to Hammond Suddards, solicitors to the force, to advise whether they were in
    a suitable form for submission to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry.


/   20. The solicitors made no comment on the great majority of these statements, and in
    others their advice was confined to clearing up ambiguities and removing hearsay,
    comment or inappropriate language. In a very few cases, which I have referred to in
    Appendix 7, what has been excluded is either factual or comment in which factual
    matters are implicit. In these cases I think it would have been preferable for the factual
@   matters not to have been excluded, or the comment elucidated.

    21. It was well known to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team that the statements were being
    vetted in this way. The process did not materially differ from the way in which
    statements were taken from witnesses who were employed by Sheffield Wednesday FC
    or the Ambulance Service.

    22. Towards the end of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for
    collating the evidence of officers in the Force began to suggest amendments to
    statements without referring them to the solicitors. The suggestions they made were on
    the same basis as those made by the solicitors. I have looked at all the statements that
    were altered in this way. In most cases the alteration is trivial. Where comment or
    opinion is excluded the amendments cannot in my opinion be criticised. In no case is the
    statement rendered misleading.

    23. I am quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in any way inhibited or



/
    impeded by what happened. Lord Taylor was well aware of the criticisms made by some
    junior officers. His Inquiry examined these issues and he made findings about them
    which were adverse to the police.



                                               106
24. I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these comments did not affect the outcome



                                                                                                /
of the Inquests, or the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to bring
criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that there is any question of
misconduct either by the solicitor who gave the police advice upon the statements or by
the police officers who suggested alterations to the statements without referring the
statement to the solicitors.

Other issues

Inconsistent evidence


25. It is clear that there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
some of the people who died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are inevitable
given the scale of the disaster. The Coroner did his best to resolve these questions at the
Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of those which remain and which
the families of those who died have asked me to look into. I have not been completely
successful in this. What is clear however is that no further inquiry involving examination
of the witnesses could help after this lapse’of time.

The Inquests

26. The Divisional Court found that the Coroner was not biased and had no conflict of
interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no evidence to support the
suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave evidence at the Inquest were given a
difficult time in the witness box.

27. I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the Coroner and the
way in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of the Home
Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the Coroner should be
limited in circumstances such as these. I have reached the firm conclusion that is not
satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths caused by a major disaster when an
Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has already covered the same ground.

The police


28. Some of the families of those who died have told me that they have been unable to
obtain copies of documents to which they were entitled from the South Yorkshire Police
archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me with material to enable me to check
on this. In neither case did I think the complaint was justified.

29. The investigation of the disaster by the West Midlands Police was not biased in
favour of the South Yorkshire force.


                                            107
                                                                                       Y
30. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised for the
disaster on behalf of his force.

Examination by doctors confirming death


31. Criticism that doctors who examined bodies at the ground did so in a cursory or
inadequate manner is wholly unsubstantiated.

The state of the ground

32. There are two questions to do with the state of the Hillsborough football ground
which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord Taylor’s
otherwise very full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the height of the crush
barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster happened and the overall
capacity of that terrace. I do not consider that they give grounds for reopening the
Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.




                                          108
APPENDIX 1



People who helped me in my scrutiny

1. This Appendix lists the people who have assisted me in my scrutiny. The~y fall into
three categories;
  (a) those who made written or oral submissions to me;
  (b) those who gave evidence to me, orally or in writing; and
  (c) those whom I consulted, mainly about what happened at previous proceedings.

Submissions

2. The relatives of victims who put submissions to me in connection with my scrutiny
were:
      Mr & Mrs Aspinall (parents of James Aspinall)
      Mr Roger Ball (father of Kester Ball)
      Ms Louise Brookes (sister of Andrew Brookes)
      Mrs Christine Burke (widow of Henry Burke)
      Mrs Corrigan (mother of Keith McGrath)
      Mr & Mrs Church (parents of Gary Church)
      Mrs Fox & Ms Lynne Fox (mother and sister of Thomas Fox)
      The Glover family (family of Ian Glover)
      Mr & Mrs Hammond (parents of Philip Hammond)
      Mr & Mrs Hankin (parents of Eric Hankin)
      Mrs K Harrison (widow of Gary Harrison)
      Mr & Mrs Hicks (parents of Sarah and Victoria Hicks)
      Mr Howard (father of Thomas Howard and grandfather of Thomas Anthony
      Howard)
      Mr & Mrs Lewis (parents of Carl Lewis)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Gary Jones)
      Mr & Mrs Jones (parents of Richard Jones)
      Mr & Mrs Joynes (parents of Nicholas Joynes)
      Ms Deborah Matthews (sister of Brian Christopher Matthews)
      Mrs Joan McBrien (mother of John McBrien)
      Mr & Mrs G McDonnell (parents of Peter McDonnell)
      Mrs Irene McGlone (widow of Alan McGlone)
      Mr & Mrs Pemberton (parents of Roy Pemberton)
      The Roberts family (family of Graham Roberts)
      The Robinson family (family of Steven Robinson)
      Mr Harold Rowe (brother-in-law of Alan McGlone)
      The Sefton family (family of Andrew Sefton)
      Mrs Sinclair and Jane Sinclair (sister and niece of Michael Kelly)
      Mr & Mrs Spearritt (parents of Adam Spearritt)
      Mr & Mrs Steele (parents of Philip Steele)

                                         109
      Mrs Sandra Stringer (mother of Paul Carlile)
      Mrs Thompson (mother of Stuart Thompson)
      The Traynor family (family of Christopher and Kevin Traynor)
      Mr & Mrs Whelan (parents of lan David Whelan)
      Mrs Anne Williams (mother of Kevin Daniel Williams)

3. All these people both wrote to me and saw me in private session, apart from those
whose names I have put in italics, who did not seek private meetings with me. I also had
oral and written submissions from the following:
       Alun Jones QC, Counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group
       Mr Julian Knowles, Junior Counsel
       Ms Ann Adlington, Solicitor to the Family Support Group
       Professor Phil Scraton, Hillsborough Project, Edge Hill University College
       Ms Sheila Coleman

Evidence

4. The witnesses who gave me oral evidence (in most cases in addition to written
statements) were:
      Police Sergeant Julie Appleton, West Midlands Police
      Police Sergeant Trevor Bichard, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Derek Bruder
      Dr Matthew Bull
      Mr Donald Denton, former Superintendent, South Yorkshire Police
      Mr Tony Edwards, former South Yorkshire ambulanceman
      Mr David Frost, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Roger Houldsworth
      Ms Debra Martin, former Special Constable, South Yorkshire Police
      Mrs J Martin
      Police Sergeant Graham McCombie, West Midlands Police
      Mr McRobbie, former South Yorkshire police officer
      Mr Paul Taylor
      Dr Edward Walker

5. Witnesses whose written statements I consulted at the request of the families or the
                                                                                           t
police, but whom I have not seen, were:
       Mr Ian McDermott
       Mr Andrew Worsley
       Mr Steven Williams
       MvJohn Flack
       Mr Peter Howes
       Dr James Burns
       Dr Iain West
       Mr Noel Burne



                                         110                                               !,
    Assistance

    6. People whom I consulted to assist me on various aspects of my scrutiny included:
          The Hon Mr Justice Collins
          Mr Christopher Dorries, presently Coroner for South Yorkshire
          Detective Chief Superintendent Foster, West Midlands Police
          Mr Douglas Fraser
          Mr Benet Hytner QC
          Mr Tim King QC
          Mr Peter Metcalfe, Hammond Suddard Solicitors
          Sir David Parry-Evans, St John Ambulance Brigade
          Dr Stefan Popper, former Coroner for South Yorkshire
          Dr David Slater
          Her Honour Judge Elizabeth Steele
          Mr James Wardrope
          Mr Peter Wells, St John Ambulance Brigade
          Mr Richard Wells
          Mr Peter Whitehurst
          Dr David Williams

    Correspondence

    7. At the beginning of my scrutiny, in July 1997, I wrote to all the families whose
    relatives had died asking for any information they wanted to give me. I also wrote to the
    FA, Liverpool, Nottingham Forest, and Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs and to the
    Director of Public Prosecutions, the Attorney General, the Crown Prosecution Service,
    and the Police Complaints Authority.


    8. I have had a number of letters from members of the public expressing views about
    the disaster.




                                             111



l
APPENDIX 2

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB
HILLSBOROUGH GROUND




                                                                                                                           Gymnasium
                                                                                                                                                    I
                       \
                            \\
                                 \\


                                                                                                                   NORTH STAND




                                       Gah~




                        I                                          Gate
                                                                                             II
                       /                                       C




                                                                                                                                  Players
                                                                                                                                  Tunnel




                                                                                                                   ¯              ¯
                                                                          Lighting4
                                                                          To~ver         Control                 CCTV 2          CGTV 3
                                                                                                                       SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                        30-3Z   3w,-36

                                                                                                                                                I
                                                                                                                                       Entra~
                                                                                                                                                                         \

              SCALE                                                                   . . :~. -:, .. .......... )o~~~.:.:.:::.. ::..- .......-:~ ..- ".
              0                   ~5                50me,res                           .:..’,:..,~.. R I V E R "-" ’"
              I                        /         1                                                                               D O N :" ""
              0       50               100      150 feet                                               "-:." .. . . ." ..’ : ¯




                                              113
PHOTOGRAPH 52




     115
PHOTOGRAPH 48




     116
    APPENDIX 3

    ROGER HOULDSWORTH

    PART 1--Statement, 16 May 1989


    STATEMENT

    I, ROGER HOULDSWORTH of .....(address deleted) ....... WILL STATE:--

    I am 42 years old and up to the week commencing 10 April I was employed as Technical
    Director by M.W. (Technology) Limited of Sheffield. I had been employed in that
    capacity for some 2 years until I resigned my position. I hold an H.N.C. qualification as
    an Electronics Engineer. Prior to working with M.W. (Technology) Limited I had
    previously worked for more than 10 years abroad, in the electronics field.

    When I returned from working abroad, in 1986, I was approached by the then Company
    Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Dick Chester, who asked me to assist
    in relation to certain problems the Club were having with their closed circuit television
    systems (CCTV). I understand the CCTV system then installed had been put in place by
    Philips Alarms in about 1984 but that Company had subsequently gone out of business.

    I did look at the system at Mr Chester’s request and as then designed and installed it was
    not working properly.

    Shortly afterwards I joined M.W. (Technology) Limited and whilst their employee I
    completed my examination of the existing system and re-designed it to improve the
    system and also the computer system related to it. I also re-designed the CCTV system
    which had been installed by the Club for Police use--this being a separate system from
    that operated by the Club for its own purposes.



i   The Club System

    This consisted of a number of static TV cameras situated at strategic points around the
    ground. As a result of my examining the system I arranged for some additional cameras
    to be installed to enhance it, particularly when the Spion Kop part of the ground was
    re-opened in 1986.




                                              117
Being a static system the cameras are in a fixed position and focus on a particular fixed
area. They were in fact positioned at strategic points to view the turnstile entrances, and
there was also a camera covering the players’ entrance. Within the CCTV room,
situated in the south stand near the players’ entrance, there is a bank of 20 monitors plus
a monitor for the computer system. This computer system records the number of
spectators who come through the turnstiles for each separate area of the ground. Of the
20 monitors within the control room, 19 display the scene as depicted in the Club’s static
system. The remaining monitor is connected to the Police CCTV system.


Each of the monitors connected to the Club system is in turn connected to a VCR so
that we have the facility to tape the film shown on those monitors, on a video tape. Of
the 19 static cameras however 1 was not in commission at the time because a wall had
been constructed after the camera had been installed, which obstructed that camera’s
view of the relevant turnstiles. The turnstiles in question were those numbered 9--16
which will be referred to later in this Statement.


The Police System


This consisted of 5 fully functional remote controlled cameras--ie those cameras could
pan tilt through 360°, and zoom on a 16/160 lens. They are controlled from a Police
control box which is fixed in position at the south west corner of the ground, adjacent to
the western end of the south stand. The cameras for the Police system are positioned as
follows:--
      1 on the upper south west corner of the west stand;
      2 are positioned on the top of the south stand, 1 at about its centre point and the
      other to the eastern end of the stand at the top;
      1 at the top (rear) of the roof of the Spion Kop;
      1 at the south west corner of the ground, mounted on high near the score board
      and close to the Police control box.


Within the Police control box there are 7 TV monitors. 5 of them are dedicated, 1 to
each of the CCTV cameras. The other 2 are connected to special time lapse Video
Recorders, and you can switch from camera to camera by means of a passive switch
within the control room so that the Officer in Charge can record the scene being
dispJayed on any 1 of the 5 cameras. The remaining 2 monitors are used so that the
Officer can check which of the 5 cameras are being recorded at any given time. PC
Trevor Bishop (sic) (Bichard) was the Officer who worked the CCTV system for the
Police but it was not usual for him to be alone in the control room--there might perhaps
be 3 or 4 other Officers in there with him at any given time for their own reasons--eg to
watch a s4"ction of the crowd from an elevated position.


Within the Police control box there is also a telephone land line which is part of
Sheffield Wednesday FC’s internal telephone system, and the Police have their own
separate telephone land lines installed also.


                                         118
The events of Saturday, 15 April 1989

Although I had previously resigned my position as Technical Director of M.W.
(Technology) Limited I was asked by Graham Mackrell to attend at the ground on that
day in case my assistance was required. We knew that the FA Cup semi-final between
Liverpool FC and Nottingham Forest FC was a sell-out all ticket match and I arrived at
the ground fairly early on the Saturday morning to check that everything was in order. I
was in fact asked to rectify a fault on one of the Police CCTV cameras, the on’~ at the
south west corner near the score board. I checked it, found it was not functioning
properly and I made the necessary adjustments to the iris controls within the camera
and thereafter checked that it was working OK. Late in the morning I then went to the
CCTV control room where PC Harold Guest was also in attendance, as usual. In ::~
addition there was present Doug Lock, the Security Officer for Sheffield Wednesday FC
and Geoff Plane of M.W. (Technology). PC Guest, as a matter of routine, would have
ensured early in the morning that cassette tapes were inserted in the 19 VCRs--1 of
course would not be recording a picture because the camera was out of action but PC
Guest would nevertheless routinely load all 19. The authorised crowd capacity figures
for each section of the ground was part of the data stored in the computer, and the
display monitor for the computer would show how many spectators came through each
of the turnstiles in operation as the day went on. The system was so designed that when
the turnstiles for a particular area had admitted 90% capacity to that area, the total for
that section would flash on the TV screen and if, for example, one part of the ground
was being filled up quickly and there was capacity in another part (subject to
segregation of supporters) that would enable the Police to be aware that they should
direct remaining supporters to a different set of turnstiles. Each of the turnstiles was
also fitted with an infra-red ray sensor, so that if spectators tried to climb over the
turnstiles but within the turnstile enclosure, that would also be recorded on the screen,
under a separate heading. I produce [Exhibit 1] a copy of the print-out from the
computer monitor for the game in question. Numbers climbing over the turnstiles within
the enclosure would be shown on the column headed "Check Total". The first heading
"Gate" is the turnstile number through which the fans entered, the "Gate Total" shows
the number who entered through each of those turnstiles and there will be sub-totals for
each section.


I was present i~ the CCTV control room from about 11.30 am that morning when the
turnstiles were opened and spectators were entering the ground. The Spion Kop and the
south stand had been designated for Nottingham Forest supporters, and the north stand
and west stand (including Leppings Lane) were reserved for Liverpool supporters. The
authorised capacity for the various sections of the ground was as follows:--
      Spion Kop                                         21,000
      South Stand covered                                5,524
      South Stand uncovered                              3,310
      West Stand                                         4,465
      Leppings Lane                                     10,100
      North Stand                                        9,702




                                        119
                                                                                               y
By about 2.45 pm the Kop and the south stand areas were full of Nottingham Forest
supporters but the north stand and the west stand areas were only about 2/3 full at that
time and it was noticeable from the static camera covering the Leppings Lane turnstiles
that there was a build-up of fans outside the turnstiles in that area. I produce [Exhibit 2]
a plan of the ground showing the Leppings Lane entrance to the west and the turnstiles
(7 in number) which admit spectators to the terraced area of the west stand are
designated A/G. It will be seen that to the south of those turnstiles runs a concrete path
which leads around eventually to the south stand. That path is bounded on the one side
 (the south) by the river Don and on the north side by a high brick wall. Situated in that
wall just immediately beyond the turnstiles--ie to the east of them--was an exit gate
designated Gate C which is a double gate of the concertina metal type which was kept
closed. One of the static cameras of the CCTV system was situated on a post just east of
that gate, the camera being positioned so as to show the area of the turnstiles A/G.

It was through the monitor showing the scene depicted by that camera that it was
possible to see the build-up of supporters outside the turnstiles. The Police had erected
some barriers across the pathway a short distance east of Gate C so that spectators could
not walk along that pathway to get across to the south stand. The build-up of Liverpool
supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance was such that some had been forced
beyond the entrance to the turnstiles outside Gate C and some of those supporters were
visible within the field of vision of the static camera.

The position was such that I recall commenting, at perhaps 2.50 pm, "For God’s sake
why don’t they delay the kick-off" and I made that comment in the presence of Doug
Lock and PC Guest. We were all, as I recall, in general agreement that it would be
sensible to postpone the kick-off to enable people to get into the ground, although I do
not recall that anyone in the CCTV control room attempted to contact the Police by
radio or telephone to suggest that. The Police of course were monitoring the situation
themselves from their own CCTV system, and in particular using the camera on the
south west corner of the west stand roof. We could of course see that that camera was
trained on the Leppings Lane turnstiles because we were able to monitor the Police
pictures on one of the monitors within our control room, although we did not have the
facility to record that picture.

There came a time when Gate C appeared to be opened, .and a number of spectators
rushed through into the "reservoir" area between the turnstiles and the rear of the west       7-
stand. An examination of the video recording appears to indicate that this occurred
whefi the Police opened the gate in an effort to eject one of the spectators that way, and
a number of the fans pressed through from the outside. It would appear that several
hundred got through before the gates were again closed.

Subsequently the static camera picked up the fact that a number of fans climbed up over
the structure housing the turnstiles, and jumped down into the reservoir area inside,
That is, it seems, further indication of the pressures building up outside the turnstiles
although a steady flow of spectators was coming through those turnstiles at all times, in
the normal way.


                                           120
I recall that after the first influx of several hundred spectators through Gate C, Doug
Lock left the CCTV room to go outside presumably to report the matter to the Club
Secretary, Graham Mackrell, and/or to check the position for himself on the ground.

Some time later, I am unsure of the exact time, I heard over the Police radio (we had
one in the CCTV room) a S~nior Police Officer make a request that a gate be opened at
the Leppings Lane entrance. Police control asked which gate he wished opened and he
repeated his request 2 or 3 times. On about the fourth occasion he said "Sorfleone is
going to die here. Open the gate" and Police control replied "If someone is going to die
open the gate, open the gate".

As appears from the video tape recording the scene the gate was then opened
apparently by a uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans flooded into the area.

At that point in time I realised, from the numbers already displayed on the monitor as
having entered from the Leppings Lane turnstiles, that a dangerous situation was being
created. I left the room and went down the players’ tunnel to the pitch and just as I did
so the Referee stopped the match as I recall. I looked over to the west stand area and I
saw fans climbing over the fence and my first thought at that time was that it was a pitch
invasion, and the match had been stopped for that reason. The perimeter fencing at that
point is high and not easy to climb over. I sat down in the stand area behind the dug-out,
and watched the situation for a little time--perhaps 2 or 3 minutes before I realised
what really was occurring. One of the Sheffield Wednesday ground staff came down the
tunnel holding 2 stretchers and I grabbed one from him and ran across with it to help
ferry the injured people to the gymnasium area where the first-aid room was situated. It
was in fact only after I had ferried 3 or 4 injured people in that way that I then realised
that there were many people who had died as a result, and the gym was in fact
designated as a temporary mortuary.

After helping on the pitch as much as possible at about 4.15/4.30 pm I went back to the
CCTV room where Geoff Plane and PC Guest were present, and I had a cup of coffee
and a cigarette. Subsequently I took print-outs of the attendance from the computer
monitor, and ejected the tapes from the VCRs leaving them in the machine in the
ejected position so that I could later know exactly which tape related to which monitor/
area.

I normally take 3 print-outs from the computer for the attendance figures, 2 of which go
to the Secretary, Graham Mackrell, and the third will normally go to the Ticket Office
staff. However on this occasion, since it was an FA Cup semi-final, all ticket, I did at first
give the third print-out to PC Guest at his request, since he said his superior officers
might want it. Later however Graham Mackrell said that he wanted to keep all 3 in his
secure possession and I therefore retrieved it from PC Guest.




                                            121
At about 6.15/6.30 pm Graham Mackrell asked me to ensure the video room was
properly secured. Geoff Plane and PC Guest had left the ground at that time. I went to
the CCTV room, locked the cupboard doors where the VCRs were and then locked the
room and activated the alarm system for the room. I kept the key in my possession
overnight. On locking the cupboard doors where the VCRs were I do not recall
specifically checking that all the tapes were still in the machine but I do recall that as I
finally left the ground at about 7.30 pm that night, with my fiancee who works as a
receptionist at the Club, I asked the Security Guard at the players’ entrance to ensure
that no-one entered the CCTV room overnight. He promised to do so.

I returned to the ground at 9 am on the Sunday morning and checked the room where it
was still locked and the alarm operative. However when I opened up the room and
checked the VCRs I found that 2 tapes were missing. One of those was the tape relating
to the camera which looks over Gates 9--16, and the other was from the VCR which
had not been activated at the time. I have no idea who removed the tapes--I mentioned
it to the Security Officer, Doug Lock, and he was surprised and had no knowledge of it.

I have read this Statement and it is correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.

Signed:                 R HOULDSWORTH
Dated:                  16.5.89
Witnessed:              R O’CALLAGHAN
Dated:                  16.5.89




                                                                                               ak




                                           122
Part 2mRoger Houldsworth, interview with ’First Tuesday’ (broadcast February 1990)


ROLL 62

lntervieweemROGER HOULDSWORTH (RH)

A police officer was present with Mr Houldsworth and the interviewer.


RH: From approximately quarter twelve, twelve o’clock when we set the videos going
and it was quite normal inflow of people right the way up to approximately about two
fifteen although I didn’t really look at the time. Then we could see through looking,
especially on this monitor which comes down from the police system, I’ve linked the
video inputs down to here so that the policeman, Harold Guest and Wednesday’s own
security man can see what the police are actually looking at. We put it on to camera one
which is the West stand camera which overlooks the Leppings Lane end and you could
see that the crowd was building up. This kept continuing up to about approximately two
thirty, two thirty five where we could see that from that camera and also from the
camera that is part of the Wednesdays own system, it overlooks turnstiles A to G and
gate C, that it was a very, sort of abnormal build up. Really my brief, I am down here
purely as a consultant in case anything goes wrong on the day. So apart from that I
cannot say anything to the police or advise in any way, shape or form. So it was just a
case that we watched it happening. At approximately twenty to three, somewhere round
about that region, we did notice that gate C was open and an influx of people came
through the gate. Eventually the police got that under control by putting a police horse
across gate C to allow them to close it again.

INT: Can I just interrupt you at that point and ask you, you say it was an abnormal
build up, can you tell me what made you think it was abnormal. What you saw on the
monitors?

RH: Well what we saw on the monitors was the mass of humanity that was outside the
gates and looking from the monitors themselves and from the inputs that were going
through on the computer system that there was no relationship between the two. There
was, there seemed to be less people as though they’d got only a small crowd outside
coming through the turnstiles. So that led us to believe, or led me to believe, that the
crowd outside were forcing so much pressure against the entrances to the turnstiles,
instead of being like an orderly queue you don’t look for the type of problem that
obviously did occur, but you could see that there was a problem. Now what the cause of
that problem was I honestly didn’t know but I had my own thoughts that too many
people had come too late as opposed to last seasons gate, which I was also in attendance
in the same position here, it was a more steady flow from an earlier hour.

INT: Did you talk with the policeman who was in here with you and what was the
conversation that you had with him. Was he aware of the problem?


                                          123
     RH: The policeman was aware of the problem but again I don’t think really either
     myself, the policeman or Mr Lock sort of took any cognisense (sic) of what was
     happening outside. You could hear the police radios and they were breaking down. For
     what reason that was I do not know. Because it seemed to be as if there was an awful
     amount of static on the police radio.

     INT- OK so let me ask you then Roger. Not talking about the very early part of the
     day but from when the crowds really started to build up. If you can tell us what you saw
     on your screen when you saw the crowds building.

     RH: Well what I saw on the screens from both the camera on A to G and from the
     police monitor that the others. A large build up of people outside the Leppings Lane
     turnstiles which sent (sic) very abnormal, we came to the realisation that a lot of people
     had arrived late and they were all trying to get into the ground obviously before the kick
     off at three o’clock. The crowd outside bore no sort of relationship to the people who
     were actually going through the turnstiles as I say which led me to believe that there was
     a build up which would not allow the normal flow through. At about twenty to three,
     somewhere in that region, gate C was opened, at the time we didn’t know why it was
     opened, just that it was opened. A large amount of people came in to the ground from
     gate C which relieved the pressure a little bit on the people outside. Eventually the
     police got control of that situation by putting a police horse across the gate and they
     managed to close it. It continued the same as it had before up to about I would say ten
     to, five to three when we heard that gate C was asked to be opened by the police, the
     command was given for gate C to be opened. It was opened and the flow of people came
     through. It came through first fairly steadily. It built up to a surge, died of for a short
     while and then it built up again and it built up then and it was at the point then that I left
     the room to go down to the entrance, to the players entrance, just to see exactly what
     was happening in the central pens.

     INT: Why did you do that?


     RH: Because again from the police system we could see that there was a ... and from
     the computer system we could see how many that were supposedly to be allowed in that
     end of the ground and we knew that we were getting somewhere near the limits that
     obviously the computer system then was virtually useless. Because I could not count the          i_
j~   people on the computer system coming through gate C.

     INT: So effectively this whole system had been bypassed by the opening of the gate.

     RH: By~’the opening of the gate the system had been bypassed. As far as accounting is
     concerned and keeping account of crowd control from that point of view.

     INT- At what stage. I mean can you sort of describe what you saw on that monitor
     when gate C opened, by sort of referring to the monitor, like I was sat, I looked at the
     monitor ...?

                                                124
RH: I looked at the monitor and as I say we heard the command at gate C, open the
gate and the gate was to be open. Gate C was opened. When it was open a huge surge
went through and that eventually tailed off to a steady flow for a minute or so. After
that the surge surged again and a whole load of people came through. I mean we could
see from the monitors that they were coming down right from the top end of Leppings
Lane and they were bypassing the turnstiles and coming straight through gate C and I
could see from the way that they were heading from, cos’ I know the bearing, of the
relationship of the cameras to the layout of the ground, that the majority o~people were
heading towards the central pens.

INT: What did you say to the policeman who was with you?

RH: I didn’t really in all honesty say anything because he was trying to get through
himself to the police control box as the police radios were not working properly and the
land, we have a landline here which is through Wednesdays internal telephone system
and that was blocked as well.

INT: So effectively you were isolated?

RH: At that point in time yes.

INT: Can I ask you finally what you saw when you went outside and looked at the
pens for yourself.

POLICE OFFICER: Hang on is this in your statement?

RH: No this is not in my statement.

POLICE OFFICER: He can only talk about what is in his statement ..........

CUT




                                          125
II


     Part 3--Comments by Roger Holdsworth on the evidence about the video cameras


     25 November 1996

     "I went to the club at about 8.00 am because I’d been asked by Graham Mackrell to give
     the cameras a final check. We’d had a problem with the camera on the scoreboard.

     I switched on all the cameras at the police control box, and checked the irises were
     working properly, monitors and VCRs were OK. It would have taken about three
     quarters of an hour."

     The "faulty" camera

     "There had been a flaring problems with the camera on the scoreboard--an electrical
     fault when the scoreboard came into use. It wasn’t a problem with the quality of the
     picture. I had been there all day the day before to sort it out. On the day of the disaster
     itself I phase-locked the camera, which cured the problem, and to save any more
     potential problems, I disconnected the earth to the camera which suppressed the
     electrical supply. By the time I had finished the check, everything was working OK.

     Graham Mackrell came and talked to me when I was up the ladder and I said it was all
     working properly.

     Mick Ryan also came in when I was checking them. I would have shown Ryan and
     Goddard that they were working when I had finished."

     Evidence given by police re cameras:

     PC Mick Ryan (in charge of phones and public address system in control box) says
     camera 5 faulty



     Mick Ryan says in his evidence to Taylor p 52E re camera 5 "there was an apparent fault
     on the camera to the West stand.., the one that is mounted on the electronic
     scoreboard".

     He also specifically describes this camera at 53E to say "It is principally directed
     towards the West stand terraces".




                                                 126
He goes on on p53A to say "the picture was very distorted". He says that he contacted
Roger Holdsworth himself about it, and Holdsworth "was there working on it for some
considerable time".

He then says "The picture was never satisfactory as far as I recall... It was not as clear as
you would hope the picture to be... It was the quality of the picture which was the
problem".

RH: The quality of the picture was never a problem--and fixed the flaring problem by
disconnecting the earth that morning.

Sgt Mick Goddard (in charge of radios in the control box)


(1)   Couldn’t see pens 3 and 4 full


Goddard says in his evidence to Taylor p95B that it wasn’t possible to tell that the pens
were full from the control box.

He says that at no stage before he saw people climbing over the pens did he notice any
overcrowding in pens 3 and 4.

"3 and 4 were getting full, were full. From my vantage point, they were not
overcrowded".

RH: "I was able to see what the police could see on their monitors, and he specifically
remembers checking to see the state of pens 3 and 4 when the order was given to open the
gates. I could see very clearly that the pens were full to the point of overcrowding".


(2)   "Blind spot" made it difficult to see crushing


Goddard also talks on p96 about a "blind spot", down at the front by the fencing,
obstructing the first two rows of the terracing.

"Even though your view is obstructed, basically you see figures, although.., you would
not be able to pick them out individually".

RH: "This evidence does not make any sense to me, based on my knowledge of the
control box."




                                             127
     PC Bichard (in charge of cameras and videos)

     (1)   Camera 5 faulty

     In his evidence to the Taylor Inquiry (June 12), P43 Trevor Bichard claims, like Mick
     Ryan, that there was a problem with the scoreboard camera which overlooked the .....
     terraces. He says that "for a number of weeks we had been having difficulty with the
     camera, and they had been looking into having the camera replaced or improvements
     made., when the system had been switched on, the picture would go white--you would
     lose what you could actually see.. we seem to think it may be a problem with the
     electrical supply to the camera. On that particular day, it was not up to the mark, but it
     was a lot better than it had been. We were getting pictures, that is the best way of
     describing it".

     At the Inquest, P80, Bichard admits that camera 5 was trained on the Leppings Lane
     end, but says that the camera "had been faulty and in fact you saw some of the problems
     that occurred. You were getting what is called flare. It is reflection of light on coloured
     objects and you lose the picture. The camera was not being used as much as it normally
     would be because of the substandard picture."

     Inquest P89B Bichard says that from 2.05 onwards there was only one camera trained
     on Leppings Lane, which solicitor Mr Manning summarises as being "a small screen and
     not a very easy picture to distinguish and differentiate".

     At the Inquest, P93A, Bichard again describes the camera as "inadequate".

     RH: "Bichard gives an accurate description of what the problem had been, but I
     disagree that "it was not up to the mark". As far as I was concerned, the camera was
     working perfectly after I had fixed it that morning."


     (2) No close ups available with camera 5

’2   At the Inquest P9- Bichard says that it is not possible to get what he would call a "close
     up" ~iew of the centre pens from any of the cameras. He is defining "close up" as no
     more than 6 or 7 heads and shoulders on the picture.

     Inquest p9~fiD/E/F, Bichard agrees with the comment that it is not possible to zoom in so
     that one can clearly identify a given individual if one wishes to do so. He also denies that
     you can zoom in and see clearly facial features with the camera.




                                                 128
RH: "With camera 5, you wouldn’t get 6 heads at the far end of the ground, but you
would get them in the central pens.


It &possible to pick out facial features with the camera. [Th& & borne out by the evidence
of the families and lawyers who went to the ground]. It would be more difficult to pick out
facial features while events are happening, but this is not the specific question that Bichard
was asked."

(3)   Camera 5 was not only faulty, it gave a distorted view of the terraces


Bichard describes the close up that is available of the pens from this particular camera
(5). He says to Taylor P43E.

"A close up is available to move into those centre two pens. However, because of the
position and the angle, it does give you a false impression about the crowd that is in
there. It is quite low down andit isset at 90 degrees to the pens rather than looking face
on... The picture it creates is a bit of an illusion about the crowd that is in there. You
may be looking at somebody who is stood in the far corner of pen 3, and it may give you
the impression that in fact he is stood at the far corner of pen 4. It is because of the angle
of the camera .... The physical position it is in is difficult to assess that the pens would be
getting overcrowded".

RH: "Th& explanation does not make any sense at all. You cannot get optical effects
with crowd density. Even looking at an angle you’ve got reference points. You’ve got a
perceptive depth which would give you an indication of density. I had focused each of the
lenses along the focal plane, so they were virtually in focus all of the time. A CCTV
camera doesn’t auto-focus, would also disagree that it was difficult to assess that the pens
were getting overcrowded from that camera".


(4)   Colour camera (camera 2) does not provide a very close picture of the terraces


Taylor P44D Bichard says of the colour camera that "although it does provide a better
angled view of the terraces it does not provide as close a picture as the one mounted on
LL itself."

Taylor P63D, Bichard says that the zoom facility of the colour camera was not good
enough to see whether or not people were being crushed against the perimeter fencing
in pens 3 and 4.

Bichard admits that it enables you to see the fence, but not to get a close up of the
people at the fence.



                                              129
"We must define what you mean by a "close up". It is closer than it is closer than in its
extreme, yes, but it is not a close up of an individual. You would probably only get 30 or
40 heads and shoulders at best on this picture".

At the Inquest, P77B Bichard says of the colour camera "If you were to take pictures of
people below the camera in the uncovered seating area, you would get identification
because they are so close to the camera, but once you get to the end of the South Stand
area, Leppings Lane, the magnification available on that zoom was insufficient to create
identification".

(He admits, however, at 77F that it gave you a "reasonable view" of pens 3 and 4).

RH: "The colour camera had the same magnification as the camera on the scoreboard.
The magnification was reasonable (1:10). After all, it was designed for identification
purposes. This evidence is contradictory and not altogether truthful. It depends where on
Leppings Lane you are talking about. The shots of the very far side would obviously not
be quite as detailed. But the camera was designed to give a view of the Leppings Lane end.
You could certainly identify individuals with it, and distinguish their clothing. A shot
would give you 6 or 7 heads and shoulders, depending on the crowd density".


(5)   Camera 1 provides large and general picture when zoom is on


P47E, Bichard describes the camera that could look down Leppings Lane (camera 1)
"when you are using your zoom facility the picture you are getting at the extreme is a
rather large and general one".

RH." "That the camera had been replaced 6 months earlier, and was so good that he
could pick out a car number plate at the end of Leppings Lane.


(6)   Why there is no video evidence from camera 2 before 3. O0


At the Inquest 79C Bichard says "when the colour camera came into use, the tape had
expired". Bichard also says that the colour camera was also trained on the Spion Kop,
aloffg with camera 3, and camera 2 was not retrained onto the terraces till after 3.00.
                                                                                             !
(7)   Why no video recording of the terraces before 3.00

Taylor P51D, Bichard admits that there was a video going of the situation on the West
terrace from about 2.30, [yet no pictures from this camera were ever made available to
the Inquiry or the Inquest].



                                            130
At the inquest, p80D, Bichard can offer no explanation of why there is no video
material available from camera 5 before 3.02. He admits that it would have been
recording before then.

Taylor P69D Bichard claims that of the 2 VHS recordings that were made, one expired
just after 3.00 [this does not explain why there was no evidence available from this tape
before 3.00]. He says (Taylor p69H) that it finished at 6 minutes past 3.

"The other tape, somewhere between 2.30 and 3.00, the actual function of the tape, the
mode of operation, altered inadvertently. The assumption is that when the radio repair
man came into the control box, Mr Duckenfield actually came and stood to myd:ight
hand side, behind the controls, and I would then move to the left hand corner and I have
caught the video with my knee--the actual operating button.

RH: "The buttons in the front of the machines are tiny. They don’t stick out. It is highly
unlikely that he could have knocked it with his knee. More importantly, it is actually
impossible to flick a switch and go into time lapse mode if, as Bichard claims at 69G, the
machine is already recording".


(8)   "Pictures shown to jury at inquest greatly enhanced"


At the inquest P73F, Bichard says that the video pictures shown to the jury of Leppings
Lane end of the ground were "greatly enhanced". "What you must consider is that the
screen we are looking at is only 12 inches...(the tapes shown to the jury) gave a false
impression about the accuracy of the picture you were seeing". He agrees with the
coroner that the image seen by the jury is "infinitely clearer".

RH: "The screens in the control room were 14 inches, not 12. They are 5ft in front of the
camera operator. The size of the screen is in relation to the position of the person watching
it in the control room. You get the same information as you would do if you showed the
picture on a larger screen, as they do in the court. It is irrelevant if the image is blown up.
It is simply not true that you get more information on the screen if the picture is enlarged".

At the inquest p74D Bichard says that the pictures the court have seen (which he
initially claims that he did not recognise as his own) was running on a time lapse system,
and was not running at the same speed as they would have seen it on the camera.

[From p80A, we know that the pictures shown to the court were actually taken from
camera 5, the allegedly faulty camera, and showed the Leppings Lane terraces].

RH: "You only get the time and date imprinted on the recording if things are recorded at
normal speed."


                                              131
(9)    Camera 3 not trained on Leppings Lane end


P77G Bichard says that camera 3, the one with maximum zoom facilities, wasn’t trained
onto the Leppings Lane end because there had been an incident at the Kop end. He
agrees on p78A that the camera remained on that location--then goes onto contradict
himself at 78D by saying that it was retrained onto the Leppings Lane end, but it was not
recorded.

At 78B, Bichard says that this particular camera would not have been good enough to
enable identification of individuals at the front of Leppings Lane terraces "it would give
you an overall picture only".

RH: "This camera was extremely powerful--and had magnification facilities of l:500. It
would have been able to give a very clear picture of the Leppings Lane terraces".


(10)    Why pictures from camera 3 did not become part of the recording


At 78D, Bichard says that the reason the pictures from camera 3 when it was retrained
on the Leppings Lane end did not become part of the recording was as follows.

"The system operated whereby at 2.301 should have replaced both tapes. Because of
what was happening on Leppings Lane end I didn’t replace those tapes, and eventually I
think it ran out just after 3.00. The camera was used, but it was not taping".

RH: "It is very unusual for them to have needed to replace both tapes at 2.30. It would
suggest that they had been recording everything in real time since 11.30 am.




                                           132
THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

                CONDUCTED BY

        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


                    HELD AT
                    Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                London SWIH 9AT


                         on

             Tuesday, 14 October 1997




     MR C F BONE (Secretary to the Scrutiny)




                   Also present:
                   Ms Ann Adlington
  (Solicitor for Hillsborough Family Support Group)




      Transcribed from the shorthand notes of
               Harry Counsell & Co


  EVIDENCE OF MR ROGER HOULDSWORTH




                         133
                                                                                2.00 pm
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Good afternoon. In what capacity are you here,
Ms Adlington? Are you here as Mr Houldsworth’s solicitor?
   MS ADLINGTON: I am solicitor for the Group, but Mr Houldsworth requested that
I attend with him.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are acting as his solicitor for the day?
  MS ADLINGTON: Yes, but not in an official capacity, I must say.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I hope that he will not need any legal advice. I
do not think that it is likely that any of the questions that I will ask him will put him at
risk or anything of that sort.
   Anyhow, it is very nice to see you. I wanted to have a word with you about one or two
matters afterwards, if we may.
  MS ADLINGTON: I have seen the checklist of outstanding documents.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is really more of an aide- memoire than
anything else.
  Mr Houldsworth, it is very good of you to come and see me. I have read the various
statements that you have made. It might help if you have a copy in front of you. I do not
want to go through them all word for word, because I have read them and I see what you
say.
  What I am going to do is to simply ask you questions about various things that arise
on them.
   Could you look at your statement, which starts at page 72? That is the original
statement that you made and it is dated on the last page 16 May 1989. I imagine that this
was made to the West Midlands Police.
                                                                                               I
                                                                                               ,




  MR HOULDSWORTH: No.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: To who was it made?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: It was made to Sheffield Wednesday’s own solicitors.
                                                                                               t
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can I just clarify one or two matters? If you
look at page 12, which is the last page, you are dealing with the two tapes that were
stoten or which disappeared. You say that one of those was the tape relating to the
camera which looks over gates 9 and 16. I think that that must be turnstiles 9 to 16.
                                                                                               !
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct.
  LORD~ JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: The other was from the VCR which had not
been activated at the time.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is also correct.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If you turn on in the bundle, you will find a
statement which is made to the West Midlands Police, dated 28 April.

                                          134
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: On page 3 of that, again you say (halfway down
the page), "The tapes concerned are (1) a blank tape from a camera that was not
operating; (2) the tape concerning turnstiles 9 to 12." I just want to check that that was
correct, because there appeared to me to be a slight inconsistency with what you say on
page 3 (page 74) of the first statement. You had been dealing with the Club system and
at the top of page 3 you say, "Of the 19 static cameras, however, one was nQt in
commission at the time because a wall had been constructed after the camera had been
installed, which obstructed that camera’s view of the relevant turnstiles. The turnstiles in
question were those numbered 9 to 16, which were referred to later in this statement".
   Those two statements cannot be correct, can they?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: How the system was operating from those turnstiles 9 to 16,
there were two cameras in that area. They overlapped. You have the drawing of the
ground, do you?

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Yes.

  MR HOULDSWORTH (Indicating on the drawing): You are looking at this end of
the ground.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are pointing to the west end of the
ground?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: The Leppings Lane entrance?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. These were the turnstiles that...
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Here are 9 to 16.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct. There were two cameras that were looking
at that area and they did an overlap because of the angles of the camera. Then a wall
was put across here, so it could not see that part...
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: There is really then no inconsistency?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, there is no inconsistency as such.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Thank you. Could you turn on to the next page,
page 4 of the first statement? You are dealing here with the police system. "Within the
police control box, there are seven TV monitors, five of them are dedicated, one to each
of the CCTV cameras. The other two are connected to special time-lapse video
recorders and you can switch from camera to camera by means of a passive switch
within the control room, so the officer in charge can record the scene being displayed on
any one of the five cameras". That I follow.
  "The remaining two monitors are used so that the officer can check which of the five
cameras are being recorded at any give time". I am not quite sure to what you are
referring when you say "the remaining two monitors".


                                          135
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Perhaps, I could show you.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Are the two remaining monitors the same as
the two to which you are referring a little earlier: "The other two are connected to
special time-lapse video recorders"?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Then it is purely a grammatical
misunderstanding. I though that you are were talking, possible, about two further
monitors.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: No.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that we have a picture. I am looking at
photograph 48 of the photographs. As I understand it, these are linked to the number of
camera that is referred to.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: And then that one is one of the monitor ones, is
it?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, these eyes, obviously, are dedicated to cameras 1 to 5.
This monitor at the end and this one here, obviously, were put there, because there is no
space left in there, and are attached to the VCRs (video-cassette recorders). These
switches here, they operate whichever one of these five pictures will show which one is
being taped on these two monitors. These are the passive switches.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If you see something on camera 1 which you
want to record...
  MR HOULDSWORTH: You just press one of these.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You press one these and you will have the
same here as you will get on camera 1, but it is being recorded.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Do both of these have exactly the same
fac~ity?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Exactly the same facility. You could be recording
something from camera 1 on that one and something from camera 3 on that one, so you
would get duplicate pictures of whichever camera you were recording from.
         t~

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Also I understand that there is a system
whereby one of these will flick from one screen to another.

   MR HOULDSWORTH" Correct. By pressing one of these buttons here on the end
-- it is what is called an auto sequencer -- from those auto sequences, the switcher itself
will take every one of the five inputs and sequence it around at a preset interval.

                                           136
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can you, for example, just sequence cameras
1,2 and 3 and not 4 and 5?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: No.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So it would be all five of them?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that I have seen that happen on some of
the videos. Can you determine how long any particular camera will be recorded under
that means?
                                                                             ,4’
   MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, you can set it on those switches. You can set a preset
timing.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can you help me about another matter? If you
go back to page 2 of that statement, you are dealing here with the Club CCTV room.
About five lines up from the bottom, you say, "Within the CCTV room situated in the
south stand and the players’ entrance, there is a bank of 20 monitors, plus a monitor for
the computer system. This computer system records the number of spectators that come
through the turnstiles for each separate area of the ground. Of the 20 monitors within
the control room, 19 display the scenes as depicted in the Club static system". That I
understand. That is what we talked about earlier. "The remaining monitors are
connected to the police CCTV system".
  Am I right in thinking that what you can see on that monitor (the one connected to
the police CCTV system) is what would be being recorded on these two monitors about
which we have just spoken?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, sir. I could pick any of them up irrespective of whether
they are being recorded or not.
  LORD JUSTICE sTUART-SMITH: Were you doing that?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: The next thing is that I want to understand that
we are talking about the same numbers of camera. I have been provided with these
numbers by Mr Hicks. They are not actually in sequence, but number 1 was the one on
the west stand, which by and large was looking towards the Leppings Lane and the
turnstiles at that end. Number 2 is situated on top of the south stand, which has views all
around the ground. That is the colour one.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, that is the colour one.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Then there is another one here which is above
the tunnel, which is number 3. That is black and white. That is used primarily, as I
understand it, for the Spion Kop end.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is what the police primarily did use it for, but all the
cameras, in fact, had the facility of a 320 degree sweep, so they could use it wherever
they desired.

                                          137
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If they wanted to go around the ground, and
particularly if they wanted to go to this end (that is the west end), they would
presumable use camera 2 in preference to camera 3.

 MR HOULDSWORTH: I would thought so, but, again, I had no control over exactly
what they were looking at.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Camera 4 is the one that is overlooking
Penistone Road and that can go either north or south to see the whole range of
Penistone Road.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Finally, there is number 5, which is the one
nearest to the police control box, which is mounted at the south-east corner of the west
stand by the scoreboard.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: It is on the score board.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is camera 5.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: These are Mr Hicks’s numberings.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: But they are also, I think, yours, are they not?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: They are related to what I have come into now. When I first
developed the system, the numberings were not exactly the same. There is one part of
the submissions where he refers to camera 1 as being camera 5. That is wrong, it is
camera 1 that they are looking at: the one at the top of the west stand.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is what I thought.

 MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct. That is incorrect and I pointed that out to
Ann last night.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I am grateful to you for clearing that up. That is
to what I thought you were referring.
   Can we just go on a little bit more? On page 7 of the first statement you say, "By 2.45
the Kop and the south stand areas were full of Nottingham Forest Supporters, but the
north stand and the west stand areas were only about two thirds full at that time and it
was noticeable from the static camera covering the Leppings Lane turnstiles that there
was a build up of fans outside the turnstiles in that area." Are referring there to the Club
camera?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that that is made clear in the next
paragraph. "It was through the monitor showing the scene depicted by that camera that
it was possible to see the build up of supporters outside the turnstiles".
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct, yes.


                                          138
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Then on the next page you, first of all, talk
about the delay in the kick off. Then about half way down the page, you say, "The
police, of course, were monitoring the situation themselves from their own CCTV
system and, in particular, using the camera on the south west corner of the west stand.
We could, of course, see that that camera was trained on the Leppings Lane turnstiles,
because we were able to monitor the police pictures on one of the monitors within our
control room". That is camera 1?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, that is camera 1.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: At the bottom of page 9 you are referring to
the request to open the gates. This is the request by the police, "Open the gates,’. The
police control replied, "Yes, someone is going to die, open the gate, open the ga~e. And,
as appears from the video-tape recording, the gate was then opened, apparently by a
uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans flooded into the area". You are referring
there both to the Club...
  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, I am referring there to the static camera and the static
camera only. I believe that that is shown quite clearly in the compilation tape, the way
that that camera was situated--looking at turnstiles A to G--is that it overlooked gate C
and, again, because of the angle of the lens, it gave you a good view within the collecting
area behind the turnstiles, the turnstiles themselves and gate C and part of the outside
walkway.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You can see both from the Club tape and from
the police tape, camera 1, people coming in through gate C.
   MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. Here I was primarily referring to the static camera. At
that point when the gate was opened, I did switch the video monitor from the police
system to have a look at what was happening inside the ground, because the central pens
were very, very full. It was through experience and knowing the ground and what
usually did occur on this type of scenario--not when the gate was opened, obviously,
because that was the first time that that ever happened--but when the two central pens,
which were the main attraction point for fans, were full, normally what would happen
was that they had a removable barrier that went across the tunnel, where they used to
put stewards or possibly one or two policemen. It was when gate C was opened and
observing, primarily, from cameras 3 and 5 that those central pens were full. Then,
because I had no video tape to record those, I had no facility to record those, primarily
what I am referring to here is the static camera. When that gate was opened and from
the way that the crowd flooded in--from the angle of the camera I knew where they
were going, towards the tunnel--we began to get a bit alarmed, because we could see
from the top angle of the Leppings Lane camera that no barrier had been put across.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Are you saying then that at this time at 2.52
you switched the monitor in the control room to pick up what was being shown on the
police cameras 3 and 5?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, we were looking at those all the time.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH:You have not said that before have you?


                                          139
   MR HOULDSWORTH: No. I have not said it in a statement, but this statement, as I
say, was given to Sheffield Wednesday’s solicitor. I never gave a statement or was asked
to by the police concerning that part of the event. It was only through my observations.
It was what alarmed both myself and Harold Guest, the policeman who was in the
control room. That is what alerted us to the situation. Obviously, we did not think that
people were going to die, but it was going to be a very large influx of people that were
going to go down that tunnel to pens which you could obviously see from the monitors
were overcrowded.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: When you talk about the monitors, what are
you talking about?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: The police monitor.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Let us just go on a little. "At that point in time I
realised from the numbers already displayed on the monitor as having entered from
Leppings Lane turnstiles that a dangerous situation was being created". What you are
talking about there, as I understand it, is the facility that you have for checking the
numbers that are coming into the ground.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That seems to be the reason that you thought
that there was a danger.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, it was taking the collective view of everything that was
happening. If I had looked just purely at the computer system, the computer system
counted each individual turnstile to give you a figure of how many people had come
through each individual turnstile, and then at the bottom of that page, if you like, on the
VDU (video-display unit), it gave you a collective figure for people that had come into
that area. But that area was the whole of this.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I understand that.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: It did not designate how many people are going to pens
three, four, one or two.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: But you knew, as I understand it, from your
experience, that they tended to go into the central pens.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct. That is what was alarming, because, looking at the
computer, if my memory serves me correctly, there were still at least another 4,000
spaces in the collective area of Leppings Lane. If people had moved around to the wing
areas of the terraces, instead of going down the tunnel...

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That I follow, but what I am a little troubled
about at the moment is that that does not seem to be what you are saying in this
statement. It may be that there is no inconsistency, but you appear to be saying, as I see
it, on page 10, "It appears from the video tape recording of the scene, the gate was then
opened, apparently by a uniformed PC, and a huge number of fans flooded into the
area". You say that that is what you were seeing on the Club static video.

                                          140
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: "At that point in time I realised from the
numbers already displayed on the monitor as having entered from Leppings Lane
turnstiles that a dangerous situation was being created." Those appear to be the two
things that in your mind created the danger, what you had seen on the Club video and
the numbers that you knew had come into the ground.

   MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, knowing the numbers that had come int~ the ground,
but also, from looking at the police monitors at pens three and four, which they were
primarily concentrating on, knowing that the numbers that had come in had
accumulated in the central two pens. It was an overview of the whole situation. With all
due respect, sir, I was led by Sheffield Wednesday’s solicitor in making this stateanent,
not by a policeman or somebody who was totally impartial. It was an overall situation
and the cognisance that I took into effect knowing the layout of the ground, being able
to see how many people had gone into the central pens and knowing that from the
numbers displayed on the VDU that the majority of those people were in the central
pens, and that the wing areas were free. When the gate was opened, not by putting a
barrier across, those people were going to aim directly for that tunnel.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Yes, I follow that
  Then you say, "I left the room and went down the players’ tunnel to the pitch and, just
as I did so, the referee stopped the match, as I recall. I looked over the west stand area
and I saw fans climbing over the fence and my first thought was that there was a pitch
invasion and the match had been stopped for that reason". Is that correct?

 MR HOULDSWORTH: It is correct, but this does not take any cognisance of time. It
was not when the gate was opened that I immediately ran out.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I follow that.
   MR HOULDSWORTH: We both waited to see what was happening and where
things were going to go. We realised that the barrier had not been put across. Harold
tried to get through to the police control, both by land line and by his police radio. The
land line was engaged, the police radios were falling over, they were not working
properly, and Sheffield Wednesday’s own radio system was blocked up as well, because
I tried to get through to the police, who had a receiver in their police control box, to tell
them to get ~he barrier up, to try to get them to do something. Then that is when Harold
and I decided that I would go down the tunnel to see what was occurring in the area
itself.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Is the position then that you had not
appreciated from what you had seen and on the screens that there was overcrowding?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I had appreciated that there was overcrowding. That is what
concerned us both.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Why did you not go out at that stage?




                                           141
   MR HOULDSWORTH: Looking back -- and it is now a long time ago -- Harold
was trying to get through and I waited to see who was getting through. He could not
leave his position and that is when it was decided that I would go down. I said," I will go
down and see what is happening, see if we can get something to make a barrier to block
that off". By the time that I got down there, things had already started to occur. I will
freely admit that at first I thought that it was pitch invasion. The referee was just in the
process of stopping the game. I just sat down at the bottom of the tunnel and just looked
over to see what was happening. Then two minutes after that, and certainly no longer,
one of the lads ran back and the ground staff got us a couple of stretchers. He said,
"They are hurt" and we ran over.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I do not want to get on to that for a moment.
Mr Guest saw everything that you saw in the control room, did he?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can you tell me -- I do not know whether you
can remember -- when you saw the gate open, was it before or after that that you
switched over to look at what cameras 5 and 3 were doing?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: We were flicking between them all the time. The way in
which the system worked and how it was devised to work, with the police officer down
there, was that he was the liaison between the Club control and the police. Although the
Club control room was purely independent and was not meant there as a function for
crowd safety, it was primarily devised for anti-fraud. The policeman was put in there as a
sort of liaison. That was all. How it used to work was that the police had no VDU input,
no computer input in their control room, so, in an ordinary game, we would say when
the Kop was getting full, because, as it came up to two thirds full, it gave an indication
on the computer. What used to happen was that Harold used to inform the police
control box and ask them to turn the camera down Penistone Road one way or the
other, so that we could see the build up of the crowd, see if there was still a lot coming
down who would need entry or to see if it was relatively free. Say, we had about two and
a half thousand spaces, looking through the Penistone Road camera, it was obvious that
there were quite a number of people coming down still requiring entry into the Spion
Kop area, we would then advise that they start closing turnstiles and the police and
stewards, who were primarily outside (primarily the police) would start moving people
around to other areas of the ground which still had plenty of capacity to take them.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That I follow. When you are coming up to the
maximum number on your "numbers monitors", if I can refer to them as that, you then
want to see how many people are coming in at Penistone Road, if you are dealing with
the Kop end. That is right, is it not?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Similarly, you would want to see what the
position was at the Leppings Lane end if they were coming up there.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, if you were concerned about the other side.

 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: What I do not quite follow at the moment is
why you need to look inside the ground.
                                          142
   MR HOULDSWORTH: To look inside the ground gives you the indication, as I say,
because you take the accumulative effect of the area. The computer does not recognise
if they go into one section or the other. It just counts the people coming through the
turnstiles which had access to the whole of the Leppings Lane terraces. At a football
game, the primary objective of most fans is to try to get behind the goal, so we knew that
the central pens were the ones that always got full first. On matches before, when those
pens have been full, we have looked in, and the police themselves have done it, we did
not advise them to barrier the tunnel off, the police usually did it themselves. They
barriered the tunnel off and started moving people to the wings.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I do not want you to run on too much. Would
this be right? If one were to have a record of what camera 3 was doing in the ten minutes
before 3 o’clock, say, it would be focusing on the Leppings Lane terraces, would it?

   MR HOULDSWORTH: Whether it was focusing there all the time or not, I do not
know. It was just that, when we looked at it, they had swung the camera away and had
swung it around to Leppings Lane and one of the shots was at a fairly wide angle -- I
would say about half zoom -- which showed the central pens quite full. Number 5
camera was parked in an area that you could see the central pens at a fairly wide angle.
It was taking the two. They were not concentrating on one camera, because, as I say, I
had no control over the camera, it was a case of switching between the cameras.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So far as camera 5 was concerned, the views
that you saw from camera 5, where was that concentrated on?

   MR HOULDSWORTH: That was concentrated along the Leppings Lane area, at
right angles to it.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Do you mean the terraces?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, the terraces.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: What was it showing?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: It was showing the build up of the crowd. You could see
that the central pens were full, but there were spaces both this side of the pens and the
far side.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I see.
  Can we go to the record of the interview which you had with Yorkshire TV, "First
Tuesday"?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Can I just have a short break?

                             (Break from 2.37 to 2.41 pro)

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If we could pick up the interview with the
television company at page 3, where you say, "I’ve linked the video inputs down to here
so that the policeman, Harold Guest and Wednesday’s own security man can see what
the police are actually looking at. We put it on to camera one which is the west stand
camera which overlooks the Leppings Lane end." That you confirm is camera 1 and not
camera 5.
                                          143
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are dealing here with the period, I think,
just before the trouble starts. You could see that the crowd was building up. "This kept
continuing up to approximately two thirty, two thirty five, where we could see that from
that camera and also from the camera that is part of the Wednesday’s own system, it
overlooks turnstiles A to G and gate C, that it was a very, sort of abnormal build up."
   You are talking there about the Sheffield Wednesday camera which looks over gates
A to G and also camera 1.
   Then you go on at the bottom to say, "So it was just a case that we watched it
happening. At approximately twenty to three, somewhere around about that region, we
did notice that gate C was open and an influx of people came through the gate". Again,
you are talking about police camera 1 and your own camera at that stage. Is that right?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Primarily, I am talking about Wednesday’s own camera.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: "Eventually the police got that under control
by putting a police horse across gate C..." Then you are asked, "Can I just interrupt
you at that point and ask you, you say it was an abnormal build up, can you tell me what
made you think it was abnormal. What you saw on the monitors?" Then you reply,
"Well what we saw on the monitors was the mass of humanity that was outside the gates
and looking from the monitors themselves and from the inputs that were going through
on the computer system that there was no relationship between the two". The monitors
there, as I understand it, are the police camera 1 and the Club camera, but then you are
referring to the inputs, the numbers, and that is the numbers monitor, is that right?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: "There was, there seemed to be less people as
though they’d got only a small crowd outside coming through the turnstiles. So that led
us to believe, or led me to believe, that the crowds outside were forcing so much
pressure against the entrances to the turnstiles, instead of being like an orderly queue.
You don’t look for the type of problem that obviously did occur, but you could see that
there was a problem". Again, I think this must be a reference to what you are seeing
outside the turnstiles or around the turnstiles.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: "Now what the cause of that problem was I
honestly didn’t know but I had my own thoughts that too many people had come too
late~s opposed to last season’s game, which I was also in attendance in the same
position here, it was a more steady flow from an earlier hour". Is that correct?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes




                                         144
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is what you thought. Then you are asked.
     "Did you talk with the policeman who was in here with you and what was the
     conversation that you had with him? Was he aware of the problem?" You said, "The
     policeman was aware of the problem, but again I don’t think really either myself, the
     policeman or Mr Lock sort of took any cognisance of what was happening outside. You
     could hear the police radios and they were breaking down. For what reason that was I
     do not know. Because it seemed to be as if there was an awful amount of static on the
     police radio". So there was a problem with the radio, was there not?

       MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Then you are asked, "OK. So let me ask you
     then, Roger. Not talking about the very early part of the day but from when the~crowds
     really started to build up. If you can tell us what you saw on your screen when you saw
     the crowds building." Then you say, "Well what I saw on the screens from both the
     camera on A to G and from the police monitor that the others. A large build up of
     people outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles which sent very abnormal..." Again, you
     are looking at those two cameras, the police camera 1 and the Club one, is that right?

       MR HOULDSWORTH: That is right, yes.
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: "We came to the realisation that a lot of people
     had arrived late and they were all trying to get into the ground obviously before the kick
     off at three o’clock. The crowd outside bore no sort of relationship to the people who
     were actually going through the turnstiles as I saw which led me to believe that there
     was a build up which would not allow the normal flow through"
       Then you say, "At about twenty to three, somewhere in that region, gate C was
     opened, at the time we didn’t know why it was opened, just that it was opened. A large
     amount of people came into the ground." This is the first occasion when gate C was
     opened, when it was to eject a fan, I think.
       MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.

        LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: A little further down, "At about ten to, five to
     three when we heard that gate C was asked to be opened by the police, the command
     was given for gate C to be opened. It was opened and the flow of people came through.
     It came through fairly steadily. It built up to a surge, died off for a short while and then it
     built up again and it built up then and it was at that point then that I left the room to go
     down to the entrance, to the players’ entrance, just to see exactly what was happening in
     the central pens."
        You appear throughout that passage to be referring to what you are seeing both on
     the club camera controlling Lepping Lane end and also camera 1.
       MR HOULDSWORTH: Camera 1 and also flicking through the other cameras.
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You do not make any mention of that

       MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not.

       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Why was that?


                                                 145



1,
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Because all the time this interview, again, was led. Certain
questions were put to me which I was not allowed to answer.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are not being stopped answering here, are
you?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: This a transcript of it, sir. I was not on the "First Tuesday"
programme, because they did not use any of this, but I had DCI Tope (I think his name
was) from the West Midlands Police with me all the way through the interview. When
they asked me certain questions, there were certain questions that he would not let me
answer.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I follow that, because I think that there is an
interruption at the end. Just so that I understand what you are saying, this is an accurate
transcription, as far as you are aware, of what you said.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, but there are certain things that were asked me -- I
cannot remember specific questions, but you asked me if this is accurate as to what was
asked and what I said, and there were certain things that were asked me that I was not
allowed to answer.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I follow that. I do not want to get on to that at
the moment. This has been put before me, as I understand it, as an accurate record of
what you said at this interview. You confirm, as I understand it, that that is so.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. I have no doubt that I did say this. What I am saying is
that this seems to follow on in a complete order, but there were certain interjections
within the interview where I was not allowed to answer.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Where do we find that?

   MR HOULDSWORTH: It is not in here. They have probably edited those parts out
and then come down to a complete interview and then did not use it at all. I really
cannot say. All I am saying is that all the way through this interview, certain questions
were asked -- I cannot remember now the questions; I remember doing this, but I
cannot remember what was asked me in total -- and there were certain interjections
that were made by the policeman to say, "No, you can’t answer that". Then it followed
on from there. Whether this is a full transcript -- it obviously has not got the
interruptions in it, so I cannot honestly say that it is a full transcript, because certain
questions were asked me that I just presume the police thought were contentious and
woffld not allow me to answer in my own way, and it went on from there. Then,
eventually, as you say, it got to the end where he stopped the interview altogether.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: At the moment I am dealing with what appears
to be a fa~,rly unrestrained account given by you of the few minutes or half an hour or so
before you went out on to the pitch.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Were you stopped saying anything important
in relation to that period?

                                          146
   MR HOULDSWORTH: I cannot remember specifics now, sir, it is an awful long time
ago. All I can remember is that certain questions were asked that I was not allowed to
answer. He just said, "You can’t ask him that" and then they moved on to something
else.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: We have a record of a question of that sort
towards the end to which we will come in a moment. At the moment I am finding
difficulty in understanding why, when you appear to be giving a coherent account of
what you did and at what you were looking, there is no reference whatever ~o you
looking at these other screens.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, sir. I answered the questions that...
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can you account for it?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Not really, no.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Did you think what you had seen on these
other screens was important?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: At that particular point in time, no. It did not occur to me
that it was important then. It does now, yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Why does it occur to you to be important now?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I think it is now, especially with the evidence that was given
by the police, Bichard and Ryan, at the inquest that the cameras were faulty and then
not only the cameras being faulty, but, since I have been able to prove that the cameras
were not faulty, we have had that the videos were switched off, the videos were lost,
then the monitors were not working, then it was BBC interference on the monitors that
was causing the problem that they could not use camera 5. Yes, I do think that it is
important now. Because of things that have come to light which I knew absolutely
nothing about until the beginning of last year, I do feel that it is important now. When I
gave this interview, I was asked if I would do a TV interview as they were doing a
documentary on the "First Tuesday". I was not looking to lay blame or anything on
anybody, I was just giving what I thought was a general interview. As I say, through the
interview there are certain questions -- as I say, I cannot remember specifics -- but
there were questions that were asked me to which the police were saying, "You can’t
answer that".’
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that we can see that on the last page of
this interview, page 11, halfway down the page, "Can I ask you finally what you saw
when you went outside and looked at the pens for yourself" and then "MAN", who is
obviously the policeman, "Hang on is this in your statement? (A) No, this is not in my
statement. (Policeman) He can only talk about what is in his statement".
   Is this a reference to some statement that you had given to the television company?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No.




                                         147
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: What was it?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not know what statement it was. He just said that. I
presume that that is what was said. I cannot remember. As I say, it was a long time ago.
All I know is that the interview was stopped at a certain point. He had not lost his
temper, but it was as if he had lost his patience, and he said, "That’s it, he can’t say any
more". He referred to a statement, he asked if this was in my statement. The only
statement that I made at any time was to Sheffield Wednesday’s own solicitor. I never
made a statement to the South Yorkshire or the West Midlands police concerning the
actual disaster itself or what occurred in any detail to anyone, other than Sheffield
Wednesday’s solicitor. What statement he is referring to there, I really cannot say.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Just help me about his, Mr Houldsworth, Have
you discussed your evidence at all with anyone in the last few days?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, not at all.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Not in the last fortnight or so?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: But you have looked at the transcript of what
transpired between me and counsel on 30 September.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, I have not.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I thought that you said that you had.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I am sorry, I do not understand.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Because you corrected something. You said
that it was not correct that you were referring to...

 MR HOULDSWORTH: No, you asked me how the cameras were numbered and if it
was camera 1 or camera 5, as Trevor Hicks was referring to, the one on the top of the
west stand, and I said, "No, that is camera 1. Camera 5 is on the score board".
  LORD JUSTICE STUART.SMITH: That is all that you have been asked, is it?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, that is all that I have been asked.
  MS ADLINGTON: I did mean to start off the meeting with that point, to make that
concession. I discussed that with Mr Bone outside.
  MR BONE: She did, sir.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: When you got outside, as I think you said in
your earlier statement, you did not realise what was going on for a moment and you
thought it was a pitch invasion. Is that right?
  MR BONE: That is correct, yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Why did you think that?
                                           148
  MR HOULDSWORTH: People coming over the pitch, over the turnstiles, the police
mulling up at that end, I just did not think at all that people were dying, that there was
such a crush that people were literally getting hurt. It is just not something that... I
mean, I have been to hundreds and hundreds of football matches, I have never seen
anything like that before in my life.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So when you saw all these people coming in
through gate C, you saw that on the screens, and you realised that they were likely to go
to pens three and four, which you already appreciated were full, you did not think that
that was going to be a dangerous situation.

   MR HOULDSWORTH: I thought that it would be uncomfortable but not to the
extent that it was. I certainly did not think, even with people coming over on to the
ground at that initial time, that people were getting seriously injured. I just thought,
unfortunately, with all due respect, Ann, Liverpool did have a reputation, same as
virtually all teams. Quite a few teams in the UK had a reputation for, let us say, bad
behaviour and Liverpool was one of those teams. It was in the height of the hooligan
period in football and it was just something that you thought was happening: yes, it is a
pitch invasion. With the police going in there, I was in the same mind then as I suppose
all the policemen that went on the ground. I think that we all thought exactly the same.
All our thoughts were not trained on crowd safety at that time. Although I was a
consultant down at Sheffield Wednesday, I was only an electronics engineer and nothing
else. I used to help out, but you just never ever really thought about crowd safety.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can I just ask you something else? You are
fairly familiar with the police control box.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Quite, yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I have some pictures of it. It seems to me that
the police have a very good view from that control box through the windows.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I would say so, yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If they wanted to see what the position was in
pens three and four, they can see it out of the windows, can they not?

  MR HOUEDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: In what way do the CCTV cameras assist
them?
   MR HOULDSWORTH: CCTV cameras were primarily put in again for crowd
trouble, crowd control, not for safety. The CCTV system was designed purely for the
identification of culprits, so that they could see if any trouble was occurring and, if it
occurred, they could zoom in on to that person and, if necessary, persons, and pull them
out of the crowd.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Is it right that, if the police watching through
the windows of the control box thought that they saw trouble, they could zoom in the
camera on them?

                                          149
  MR HOULDSWORTH: How the police worked in the Wednesday control room was
that Ryan and Goddard were sat at the front. When you opened the door, there was a
desk on your left-hand side where the windows were. Ryan and Goddard were sat there
doing the radio control. There was a walkway and on the right-hand side was the desk
and a built-up step with the controller for the CCTV sat behind that desk. His primary
job was to look at the monitors which were placed...

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: This is Mr Bichard?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, or whoever the controller was.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It was Mr Bichard on this day.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, he was on that day. The monitors were placed above
the desk that overlooked the windows.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So that the police in the front row would not
really be looking at the monitors at all.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, the people in the front row could not see the monitors,
because, if they were sat there, they were directly above them. Unless, they leant back,
they would not be able to see them. As you can see, this is the desk part here, and that
police box used to get quite full.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Mr Murray, as I understand it, was also in the
front row, perhaps you do not know that.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not know.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: At any rate, anybody sitting in the front row is
dependent upon looking out of the window to see what was going on?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, unless they actually leant quite far back or stepped
back. It was not a very big control box at all. More that about four people in there meant
that they were sort of crawling all over each other.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that you have confirmed what seems to
me to be apparent from looking at these pictures that you would be able to see,
primarily, by looking out of the window, what the state of those west terraces were.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I would say so, yes. That is the best view that they had of the
ground.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Much better than anything that you get from a
camera?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. For an overall perspective, yes.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So far as camera 5 is concerned, that is, so far as
the terraces are concerned, at any rate, further down, it is looking slightly from behind,
is it not?


                                          150
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. The terraces are there, you are looking at about a 30
degree angle on to it.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You would not see anybody’s face who was
looking towards the pitch.

  MR HOULDSWORTH" No, you would get a profile view.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I can see that, if you are looking it~to a very
sparsely-populated pen and there are only a few people around that, you might get a
good profile or something of that sort...

  MR HOULDSWORTH" If they are looking out towards the pitch, yes.              i~

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If you have a pretty packed pen, certainly
anything like the situation that pertained from about quarter-to-three on the day in
question in pens three and four, you would not be able to identify anybody in that pen
from camera 5, would you?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: If you zoomed in, yes, you could get a very tight shot.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: With a massive crowd like that?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. You would pick out the ones that were nearest to you,
obviously, but you would not be able to get a head and shoulder shot unless they
actually turned round and physically faced the camera, if everyone turned round and
physically faced the camera, but what you could get is a profile shot, if you zoomed in,
and it was a really tight zoom on the camera.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: But you certainly would not need that to see
that the pens were overfull. That would not help at all.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: No. The way in which camera 5 was set was that it was
parked and it was only from my recollection about two-thirds zoom on the wide angle.
What it did give you was a very great depth of field.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It was parked, was it, at that time?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, it was at that time.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Where was it looking?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: It was looking down over the terraces.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: We ought to have some shots of that recorded.

  MR HOULDSWORTH" That I cannot say, sir, because, as I say, I had no control
over what they were taping and what they were not taping.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If it is flicking in and out, you would expect
that, would you not?


                                         151
  MR HOULDSWORTH: If it is on sequence, but whether it was on sequence at that
time, I really do not know.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Normally, as I understand it, they would
override the sequencer, as you call it, if there was something interesting at which they
wanted to look. Perhaps that is not a question for you.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: It is not really, sir, because I was not privy to how the police
operated the system.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is certainly what I would have expected. If
you are just flicking around the ground generally, then you would go on to sequence,
but, if you are interested in a particular part of the ground, then you override the
sequence and fix the camera on that particular thing and that is to what you are paying
attention.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: If you want to record it, yes, sir.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Just help me about this. As I understand it, the
Club control room is very near the players’ tunnel and it takes you, what half a minute
to get on to the pitch.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, 15-20 seconds.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You were out there very quickly.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It appears to me that the zoom facility was
demonstrated to the jury at some stage.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is correct.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Who did that?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: I did it.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Some time during the inquest they all went to
the ground. Is that right?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is right. I was requested to be in attendance to
demonstrate how the system worked.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: They went up into the control box.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: They would be able to see the view from the
control box.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.


                                           152
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: While they were up there, did you demonstrate
how the various cameras worked?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, I did.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: And the shots were coming up on the screens.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Did you demonstrate camera 1?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I demonstrated all the cameras.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So they would see quite clearly from that what
cameras 1, 2 and 5, which are the ones in which we are primarily interested, could show.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can I just ask you about some of the comments
that you made? This is in the bundle of documents. At page 2 (page 86), you say under
(1), "I was able to see what the police could see on their monitors and he specifically
remembers... I think that must be "I specifically remember", must it not?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Anyway, you "specially remember checking to
see the state of pens three and four when the order was given to open the gates. I could
see very clearly that the pens were full to the point of overcrowding". I think that that is
the first time that you have actually said that in writing.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. I was never asked before about it.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You were never asked to give your account
about it.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: I was never asked to give my account about it, no.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: There is this question of the blind spot, and
perhaps yoti can help me about this. I have only got the photograph, but the jury would
have seen it on the ground. The best view is photograph 51. What I think is being
referred to is that, because of the angle of the fence and the fact that you have these
wires going back, if you have someone right at the front, you would not actually see
them.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is the only thing that I can think that that means.

 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that that is to what the reference is. You
would not disagree with that, would you?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I would not disagree. I would not refer to it as a "blind
spot".

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Obviously, you can see what is going on.
                                          153
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, you can see what is going on. The blind spot that I
thought that it was referring to when I read that part was the spot directly below the
police box itself.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I do not think so, but, anyhow, I can check that.
  You say at page 89, "Bichard admits that there was a video going of the situation on
the west terrace from about 2.30". It would be going all the time, would it not? That
camera was recording or, rather, was taking pictures all the time from 12 o’clock in the
morning, as I understand it.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: It should have been, sir, yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Well, it was. I do not think that anyone has
ever suggested that it was not.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: I do not understand your question.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Perhaps, it is not a question so far. Do you see
under paragraph 7, "Bichard admits that there was a video going of the situation on the
west terrace from about 2.30, yet no pictures from this camera were ever made available
to the inquiry or the inquest". That depends whether or not they were recorded, does it
not?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That would depend on whether he had put that particular
camera on to be recorded, yes, and he would know, if he had put it on, because it would
show a duplicate picture.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: If we have the tapes which show that there is
not anything, then we know that he did not put it on.
 MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct. As I say, sir, I cannot say what was recorded or
what was not recorded, I just do not know.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: We know what was recorded and what was not
recorded, because we have got the tapes. Maybe you have not seen them.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: I have seen certain tapes. I have seen the compilation tapes
and I have seen the tapes that were found down at Yorkshire Television. I have not said
that I have seen all the tapes, no. As you must appreciate, sir, my primary concern when
I was looking at the tapes after the beginning of last year was camera 5, which they were
saying was not working.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: They did not quite say that. If you think that
that is what they said, they certainly did not say that it was not working.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: It was faulty.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: They said that it had been faulty and it was not
as good as it should have been.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: This is where I disagree.


                                          154
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You disagree with that?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I totally disagree with that.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I was not sure whether you were right, maybe
this is perhaps not a matter to deal with now. Under paragraph 9 at the top of page 91,
you make a reference to what was said at page 77 of the transcript. You say that that is a
reference to camera 3. I am not quite sure why you say that, because I thou~ght it was
camera 2, but I do not know that it is of any great significance. I think that ]~ perhaps
need not trouble you with that, because I think that, if one reads the transcript, I think
that it is fairly clear that it is camera 2.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I think that he does mean camera 3 there and not camera 2.
Camera 2 was the colour camera. Camera 3 is the black-and-white camera which is on
the south stand nearer towards the Kop. That had a very, very powerful lens on it.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Which one?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Camera 3, which I have noted there or someone has put
down there. The reason that it was black and white was that, because of the stand cover
over the Kop, colour would not get into there and give a good quality reproduction. It
was turned into black and white in order to cover that area. The area that that was
primarily sited to cover is the largest area of what was standing room at that time. It had
a very powerful lens on. Most of the problems that did occur in the Kop occurred at the
very back of the Kop, which was a very, very dark area. It had to be a really powerful
lens to get into the back of there.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: At any rate, you are referring to camera 3 as
having the very powerful lens.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Correct.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I do not think that we need, perhaps, waste
time about what Mr Bichard is talking about. I can check that myself.
   I am not quite sure what point you are making when you are talking about Chief
Inspector McRobbie.

 MR HOULDSWORTH: I did not write that, sir. This is the evidence that Mr
McRobbie give the Taylor inquiry. It is nothing to do with me.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So you are not making any comment on that?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: I am agreeing with him more than anything.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: The only comments are the ones which are
under "RH".

  MS ADLINGTON: The ones in italics, sir.




                                           155
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So far as the condition or the reproduction
from these cameras, I would like to show you some of the video stuff that we have and
ask for your comments on the quality of it.
  Can we show that bit from about 14.30 onwards?
  MR BONE: It is 14.28 onwards.

                                   (First Video shown)
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: These are the scenes at the Leppings Lane end.
When I say the Leppings Lane end, I mean Leppings Lane itself. (14.28.14) That is the
Kop, is it not?
  MR BONE: Yes.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: This is the colour camera. How many generation copy is this
one?
  MR BONE: We got this via Trevor Hicks from Yorkshire TV.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: The originals are far better than that.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You say that this is the colour one?

   MR HOULDSWORTH: That is the colour camera. On the original ones that I saw
from Yorkshire Television, you can quite clearly see that that is in colour, but the colour
has been lost in reproduction. This is the trouble when you are taping VHS to VHS on
domestic systems, you do lose quality in reproduction.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Can you move it on a bit then?
What camera is that? I thought that this was all camera 3, I must say.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: I think that it is all camera 3.

  MR BONE: Can I just try the other tapes, where we have this material from about
14.20 of pen three or what appears to be pen three?

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Yes.
                   (Second video shown - start of tape time at 14.18.25)
  MR BONE: This is the same source via Trevor Hicks and Yorkshire TV.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: This is camera 5.
  MR BONE: This is pen two looking into pen three, is it not?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes, it is pen two.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: (14.20.00) Would you be able to identify those
people?


                                            156
  MR HOULDSWORTH: On the original tape, yes, you can. You have a smearing
here which is a thing that occurs when you tape from tape to tape. I think that you are
somewhere around the fourth or fifth copy here. On the original tapes that I saw at
Yorkshire Television, they are quite identifiable.
  MR BONE: I think that they are pretty identifiable here.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: You see this smearing. That is what occurs when you tape
from tape to tape. It really should be done by a broadcast-level recorder, then you will
get far better quality. No doubt, one of the television companies could do it for you
quite easily.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: (14.20.50) You would expect the original police
tape to be of rather better quality?

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes. It is definitely better. I have seen the ones at Yorkshire
Television, which were given by South Yorkshire. I think that they are about second
generation. They are very, very clear. If you play it on what is called a pneumatic
recorder, which is a broadcast-level recorder, they will come out far, far better. That is
the same format as they are recorded on.

  MR BONE: There is not very much left on this particular tape.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: This goes on to the end of the tape. We will
stop it there.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It was some of the shots of Leppings Lane that
I wanted Mr Houldsworth’s view on. I think that it was the other tape at the beginning.
                               (First video shown again)
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: (14.33.19) That is the Kop again.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH- (14.35.30) That is the colour camera.

  MR HOULDSWORTH: Yes.
  MR BONE: This is outside Leppings Lane.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is right. That is off camera 1.
  MR BONE: (14.35.36) It has gone on to time lapse.
  (14.36.47) Is that camera 1 again?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is camera 1 again, yes.
  MR BONE: It is one shot per second. This is time-lapse mode.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: (14.37.42) How does this compare in your
opinion with the original?

                                         157
  MR HOULDSWORTH: Can I just explain how it works without getting too
technical? How time lapse works is that it takes a shot every part of a second like a still
photograph. When it is played back, if you play it back on the same type of recorder--in
other words, a time-lapse recorder--you can actually get that working in the time mode
so that you can see those shots as individuals. What has happened there is that it has
been shot and recorded in three-hour mode from 24-hour time mode. What you are
getting is that jerky movement, which, obviously, denigrates the picture somewhat, if
you could play the original tape back on a time-lapse video recorder, you would see it
reproduced exactly as it has been shot. That would give you a far clearer picture. The
idea of time lapse is to extend a three-hour tape, but, when you get to the section in
which you are particularly interested, you can put it back into its time-lapse mode and
replay it in exactly the same format as it was recorded. It is is taking a shot every point
25 of a second, you would play it back in every point 25 of a second.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It is really not a very good reProduction of the
time lapse.
  MR HOULDSWORTH: No, because you are doing it on a three-hour tape on a
three-hour video recorder. To be able to get it properly, you need to get hold of the
original tape and play that back in time-lapse mode.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Thank you. We have no more questions.
  MS ADLINGTON: There is something that I felt that I should bring to your attention
at this stage, whilst Mr Houldsworth is here. It is something that we will be submitting a
further submission on. It is Superintendent Murray’s evidence to Taylor on 31 May
1989.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Is this in connection with Mr Houldsworth’s
evidence?
   MS ADLINGTON: Yes, it is. It is Day 11, page 123. This is Mr Glasgow’s cross-
examination of Mr Murray. You can read it for yourself. Mr Glasgow is asking Mr
Murray, "Likewise there is not any way in which the Club screens in their room can see
what you are looking at, is there? (A) Well, my information is that one of the monitors
in the Club’s control room is continuously monitoring our recording camera. (Q) Yes,
absolutely right, Mr Murray. In other words, they can look at whatever it is that you
happen to be recording at that time? (A) That is correct, sir, yes. (Q) So, if the police
recording equipment happens to be switched on to one of the gate cameras, for
example, that is the picture that will show also in the Club room?" (A) Yes, sir".

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Mr Houldsworth says that that is not correct.
  MS ADLINGTON: That is the point that we wanted to bring to your attention,
because, clearly, Lord Justice Taylor to some extent has been misled by counsel for the
Club.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is wrong, is it?
  MR HOULDSWORTH: That is wrong, yes.


                                           158
  MS ADLINGTON: It may well be, sir, that one of the reasons why Mr Houldsworth
was not called as a witness was because, in effect, what is being said there is that what
Mr Houldsworth or anybody in the Club control room could see was only that which
was being recorded in the police control room. Therefore, they are only extra pairs of
eyes.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Yes, thank you.
  I do not think we need keep Mr Houldsworth any longer.
                      (Mr Houldsworth left the meeting at 3.35pm)

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: There is just one other matter that I wanted to
ask you about, Ms Adlington. That is in relation to your submission. What I am no3:
quite clear about -- and I should have asked Mr Jones about this -- is at paragraph 39 to
42 you deal with Chief Inspector McRobbie. I am not really clear what the point is that
is being made here. It is not suggested, is it, that this incident that Chief Inspector
McRobbie speaks about occurred shortly before 3 o’clock?

  MS ADLINGTON: No, it is not. Simply the point being made is that McRobbie
praised the system or said that the system worked very well. He was not called as a
witness to the inquest, so the only evidence that, basically, the inquest heard was about
the camera not working or not being up to scratch, whereas McRobbie’s evidence was
quite to the contrary at the Taylor Inquiry.

 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: McRobbie is referring, as I understand it, to
what we have seen today on...

  MS ADLINGTON: On the black-and-white camera 5, sir.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Yes. That is the incident at 14.18.
  MS ADLINGTON: This is the group of youngsters on the terrace with the
newspaper.

  MR BONE: Yes, that is timed at 14.18.
   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Is it your understanding that that is to what he
is referring?
  MS ADLINGTON: I thought that he was actually referring to someone who dropped
his pants or something underneath the police control box.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I do not know where you get that from.
 MS ADLINGTON: That is an extract from his evidence to Taylor, but he has also
made a statement, so it may actually be in his statement.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You have seen the statement, have you?
  MS ADLINGTON: Yes, I have. It should be included in the original bundles
submitted to the Home Office and the DPP’s office back in March. It was in the blue
binders.

                                          159
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I will check it. That is where the dropping of
the pants comes from?
  MS ADLINGTON: I think so, sir, yes. I think that it was at an earlier stage.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: I think that it is the incident that one sees on
the television.
   MS ADLINGTON: I think that it is a different incident, sir. If you look at his
statement, I am sure that he refers in his statement to someone dropping their trousers
right underneath the control box.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: It may be that they did not manage to record
that.
  MS ADLINGTON: Also I think that it has been pointed out in correspondence to
CPS, the fact that McRobbie is looking at the monitors. He is witnessing an incident and
he passes no comment at all about the monitor being faulty, which is one of the excuses
which South Yorkshire police came up with on i April this year, that there was a fault
on the monitor, as opposed to the camera.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You are going to let me have the details of
what the police said at one stage?

  MS ADLINGTON: Yes.
 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: How are we getting on with the material with
which you are going to provide us?

  MS ADLINGTON: I spoke to Alun Jones yesterday. He has a day in chambers on
Friday and he hopes then to finalise the further submissions for submission on Monday
of next week.

   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: All I want is the material that I have asked for
in the letter. I do not, actually, need further submissions about it, other than those that
have been called for. You think that we will get them on Monday?

  MS ADLINGTON: Yes, sir.
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Thank you very much.
                          (The meeting adjourned at 3.40pro)




                                          160
APPENDIX 4
ANALYSIS OF POLICE CCTV TAPES


                            TB1                                     TB2
  14.30:00   C1 shows Leppings Lane                 C3 shows corner of SPi~on Kop
             turnstiles (outside Gate C)
  14.30:32   C2 shows corner of Spion Kop
  14.30:35                                          C3 pans left and right and tilts
                                                    down                      ~,

  14.30:50                                          C3 tilts down

  14.30:54   C2 remains static                      C3 remains static
    to
  14.32.50
  14.32:51   C1 shows police horse outside
             Leppings Lane turnstiles. Camera
             pans and pulls back
  14.33:26   C1 tilts up and pans left then right

  14.33:47   C1 zooms in on area outside Gate
             A (man on top of gate)
  14.34:07   C1 tilts up
  14.34:17   C1 pans left

  14.34:23   C1 pulls back and pans left
  14.34:29   C1 tilts down and pulls back,
             showing area outside Gates B
             &C
  14.34:49                                          C3 switches to camera 2 on corner
                                                    of Spion Kop
  14.35:00   C1 zooms in on area outside
             Gate C
  14.35:16   C1 tilts up

  14.35:20   C1 switches to camera 2 (corner C2 switches to camera i (outside
             of Spion Kop)                   Gate C, Leppings Lane)
  14.35:29                                          C1 pans left and tilts up


                                       161
           TB1                         TB2
14.35:41               C1 pans left
14.35:45               C1 switches to 18 hr mode
14.35:56               C1 tilts up

14.36:05               C1 pans right
14.36:11               C1 pulls back (perimeter gates)
14.36:44               C1 tilts down (outside Gates B
                       & c)
14.36:48               C1 pulls back and pans right
                       (outside Gate B)
14.36:57               C1 tilts up

14.37:07               C1 zooms in outside Gate B
14.37:10               C1 pans right outside, Gate A
14.37:26               C1 pulls back and pans right
14.37:36               C1 pulls back and tilts down
                       (Gate C)
14.37:45               C1 pans left (between Gate C/
                       River)
14.37:53               C1 pans right
14.38:41               C1 zooms in on area outside
                       Gate C
14.38:47               C1 tilts down
14.39:04               C1 zooms in on police horse
                       outside Gate C
14.39:15               C1 pans to left and right
14.39:25               C1 tilts down
14.39:37               C1 pulls back and pans left
14.39:47               C1 tilts up
14.39:54               C1 pans left (outside Gate C)


                 162
           TB1                         TB2
14.40:37               C1 pulls back
14.40:56               C1 tilts up and pans right (view
                       along Leppings Lane towards
                       Vere Road)
14.41:02               C1 zooms in on shops

14.41:08               C1 pulls back
14.41:11               C1 pulls back and pans left ~
14.41:17               C1 tilts down (Gate C)
14.41:53               C1 tilts up

14.42:36               C1 pans right and zooms in
                       people on roof above Gate B

14.42:52               C1 zooms in on area inside
                       Gate B
14.42:57               C1 pans left
14.43:00               C1 pulls back and tilts up

14.43:41               C1 pans left and shows crowds
                       outside Gate B
14.43:48               C1 pans left

14.43:56               C1 tilts up--shows Leppings
                       Lane
14.44:05               C1 pulls back

14.44:16               C1 pans left and pulls back
                       (Gate C)
14.44:23               C1 pans left

14.44:25               C1 tilts down, pulls back and
                       pans right
14.45:01               C1 pans right
14.45:08               C1 zooms in on turnstiles A to G

14.45:16               C1 tilts up (Gate B)


                 163
                             TB1                                TB2
    14.45:43                                    C1 zooms in, pans right and pulls
                                                back (inside turnstiles)

    14.46:08                                    C1 pans left (Gate C)

    14.46:13                                    C1 tilts down

    14.46:25                                    C1 tilts up and pans left

    14.46:44                                    C1 pans right

    14.46:56                                    C1 tilts up, pans left and tilts
                                                down (Gate C)

    14.47:09                                    C1 zooms in (outside Gate C)

    14.47:20                                    C1 tilts up and down

    14.47:24                                    C1 pans right and pulls back

    14.47:31                                    C1 pans left and tilts down

    14.47:39                                    C1 pulls back

    14.47:45                                    C1 pulls back

    14.47:52                                    C1 tilts up

    14.48:21                                    C1 pans right, tilts down and
                                                pans left

    14.48:26                                    C1 zooms in on Gate C, and pans
                                                right and left

    14.48:43                                    C1 pulls back and pans right and
                                                left inside turnstiles A to G

     14.48:56                                   C1 settles on Gate C
2
     14.49:02                                    C1 pulls back and tilts up

     14.49:25   C2 pans left (corner of Spion
                Kop)

     14.49:31   C2 pans right

     14.49:38                                    C1 tilts up and pans left (over
                                                 river) and right

     14.49:48                                    C1 tilts down and up (Gate C)

                                        164
           TB1                       TB2
14.49:55               C1 pans right and tilts up
                       (Leppings Lane, towards Vere
                       Road)
14.50:00               C1 tilts down (turnstiles A to G)
14.50:11               C1 pulls back and tilts down
14.50:52               C1 pans left and right and tilts
                       down (Gate C)
14.51:09               C1 tilts up

14.51:20               C1 pans right and left
14.51:35               C1 pans left
14.51:46               C1 zooms in on crowds outside
                       Gate C
14.52:04               C1 pans right on crowds outside
                       turnstiles A to G

14.52:14               C1 pulls back

14.52:26               C1 settles on Gate C--crowds
                       entering through open
                       Gate--and tilts down
14.52:41               C1 pans left
14.52:46               C1 at normal speed

14.52:58               C1 tilts up and pans right
                       (turnstiles A to G)
14.53:35               C1 pans left and tilts down
                       (Gate C)
14.54:00               C1 pans right and tilts up
14.54:09               C1 zooms in on Gate A (inside)
14.54:15               C1 pans left--on crowds outside
                       Gate A
14.54:35               C1 pans right and zooms in
                       outside Gate A



                 165
                                                              "I




             TB1                         TB2
14.54:40                 C1 switches to 18 hr mode
                         Pans left to perimeter gates
                         outside Gate A

14.54:50                 C1 tilts up and pulls back (view
                         along Leppings Lane towards
                         Vere Road)

14.55:00                 C1 pans left (Gate C)

14.55:04                 C1 pans left and pulls back

14.55:10                 C1 pans right (turnstiles A to G)

14.55:55                 C1 zooms in (inside Gate B)

14.56:00                 C1 tilts up and pans right

14.56:04                 C1 pans left (Gate B)

14.56:10                 C1 pans left (turnstiles A to G)

14.56:15                 C1 pulls back and tilts up
                         (turnstiles A to G and Gate B)

14.56:22                 C1 pans right (Gate B and
                         crowds outside)

14.56:27                 C1 tilts down

14.56:30                 C1 pans left (Gate C)

 14.56:38                C1 pans right and tilts up
                         (Gate B)

 14.56:44                C1 pans right (turnstiles i to 16)

 14.56:53                 C1 pans left and pulls back
                          (Gate B)

 14.56:58                 C1 tilts down and up, and pans
                          left (all turnstiles and Gate B)

 14.571.24                C1 pans left (turnstiles A to G)

 14.57:28                 C1 pans left (Gate C)

 14.57:31                 C1 tilts down



                   166
                           TB1                               TB2
14.57:39                                      C1 pulls back and pans right
                                              (inside Gates B & C)
14.57:44                                      C1 pans right (inside Gates A
                                              & B)
14.57:51                                      C1 tilts up and pans left (Gates A
                                              & B and view along Leppings
                                              Lane)
14.58:00                                      C1 pans left (includes turnstit:es
                                              A to G)
14.58:06                                      C1 zooms in on Gate B

14.58:08                                      C1 pans right and zooms in on
                                              area inside Gate A--crowds
                                              entering through open gate

14.58:25                                      C1 pans left (crowds dispersing
                                              outside Gate A)

14.58:33                                      C1 pans left and pulls back (Gate
                                              B, and crowds inside and outside
                                              turnstiles)

14.58:42   C2 pans left from the corner of
           the Spion Kop, along the length
           of the North Stand to the West
           Stand terraces
14.58:51                                      Camera i tilts down

14.59:05   C2 settles on pen 6
14.59:18   C2 pans left along fence to
           junction of West and South
           stands

14.59:44   C2 pans right and zooms in on
           gate to pen i
15.00.01   C2 pulls back, tilts up and pans
           right (pens 1, 2 and edge of 3)
15.00:11   C2 pans right
15.00:12                                      C1 pulls back, pans left and tilts
                                              down (turnstiles A to G)

                                     167
                             TB1                                  TB2
   15.00:40     C2 zooms in and pans left to gate
                to pen 1
   15.01:33     C2 pans right and pulls back
   15.01:50                                         C1 zooms in on area inside
                                                    Gate B

   15.02:07                                         C1 pans left and right (area
                                                    outside Gate B)
   15.02:13                                         C1 pulls back (view of all
                                                    turnstiles and gates)

   15.02:29     C2 pans right to area behind goal
                and pulls back
   15.02:53                                         C1 changes to C5 showing front
                                                    of pen 4, and remains static

    15.03.15    C2 pans right and zooms in on
                the goalkeeper Grobbelaar

    15.03:46    C2 tilts up and pans left (pitch
                and area in front of pens 4, 5
                and 6)
    15.04:10    Tape ends

    15.25:42                                        C5 switches to C3 showing pens 3
                                                    & 4 (including ambulance) and
                                                    remains static

    15.34:51                                        Tape ends

Where fro camera movement is shown, the last scene mentioned remains static.




                                          168
APPENDIX 5
                                         West Midlands Police
PART 1
                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. ACt 1967, s.9; M.C. ACt 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r 70)



  Age . . . .~.~... . (yrs/ _               Oateof Birth . .
  Occupation.. ~..7-~, .....

  Home or business address
  and telephone number




  This statement, consisting of ~" page(s) each’ signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
  and belief and I make it knowing’’that, if it is tendered in evidence, t shal! be liable to prosecution if I
  have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.




                                                                      O,,,cer’~a,,,e
                                                                      ,,,nk ... "~’.~.. Af>l:>L.rr...
                                                                                             .o J~%     ... .....
                                                                                                      ~~P~
      :~ ~ ~.,.,.,,,,.,,M. ~ ~._.~...~..
                                                                                                                               .,1..




                                                                                                                            ......
   .~.~ ....                    ,.,<6.~....., ...... _. ...... ,+-., .....
                         b/_,, ~ .~_.. ~ ~~ ......
                ~"ii~iiiii~~..~...
   ~f ~ ~;.41 i ~...,,¢i..~.~.~ ............
                     <--<~.f.~ ......................
                                            iiii ~ ""
                                                                                                 ’a ......        :/’:." .t~ ~)’ " "


                   ....
   ~.T7.-,-:,~: ....          ).,~,’.-:,~r, ’F" ...................




               .... ~~.-..~ ..~ ...... ,,=,~.......~ .....
                          ~~..
   ~~i
    ~~ ~iiii~d--,..i ....
       ......~ ........ .z-.
                           ~~.........   ..... .,,,
                                 .....~:.~/<_.~,.
  " ’ ~/ ~’f                                                          -n turew nessed b, t .,.~. "’~(~-J~"~ ’~"




                                                                      169
                                                                                     r~




                                                                          WG ,~:3
                                                                    ~Amenaea 9 87)
               West Midlands Police
        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
(C,J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102: M.C. Rules 1981. ri70)




                                 170
                                        West Midlands Police

                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J Ac~ 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. I02; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of ................ ". , t ...................




                                                          171
              West Midlands Police
        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
(C J Ac~ 1967, s.9: M C. Act 1980, s. I02: M.C. Rules 1981, r 70)




                               172
                                            West Midlands Police
                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                            (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981. t 70)

Continuat,onof statementof..~g~.~’.’.~"?..~../~’~ .........




                                                              173
                                                                       West Midlands Police

                                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                        (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70’}


Continuation of statement of ............ .~. ~" ~". ~ C, L~,.~ ~/~.~..                                                             .~.~~" )




                                  ..... ~ ...... ;~....~ .... ~ ..... ~.. .......


                        .... J ~ .... ~ ~~’ " " " ~ ~/~ .... ~2 " -

. ...... ........                                                             ~ .... ..... /.,~ .....
                                                                                                       ~                     J_ _ l




............................. -- ..............................                                                                 L ....     ~"




                                                                                      Signaturewimessed bl,..Ji~C-~) .....




                                                                                         174
                                                                                    ~Am~n~ed 9 87
                              West Midlands Police
                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
               (C.J. Ac~ 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. I02; M.C, Rules 1981. r.70)




           f




SLgned .




                                                175
APPENDIX 5

PART 2

         THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

                          CONDUCTED BY

                  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


                              HELD AT
                         50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                          London SW1H 9AT


                                  on

                      Wednesday, 22 October 1997




               MR C F BONE (Secretary to the Scrutiny)




                                Also present:
                             Ms Ann Adlington
          (Solicitor for the Hillsborough Family Support Group)




                Transcribed from the shorthand notes of
                         Harry Counsell & Co.


              EVIDENCE OF DR. EDWARD WALKER



                                  177
       LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Dr. Walker, I have read your written, what you
     call your response. I expect you have got a copy of that?

       A. Yes, I have.
       Q. Is there anything more that you want to say to me in addition to what is in your
     written submission at this stage or would you like me to ask you--there are one or two
     things I want to clarify with you about it. Would that be the best way of doing it?

       A. Yes.
        Q. Just so that I understand about how you came to give the statement, you received
     a letter, as I understand it, of 15 June 1989. Have you got copies of these documents?
      A.       Yes.
       Q. This is your enclosure 2.
      A.       Yes.
       Q. I can’t read it but it looks like "colleague" has been crossed out and "Ed" has
     been put in instead.
       A.      Yes.

       Q. So it was a personal letter to you?
       A.      Yes.

       Q. And it tells you that you may be asked for a statement from the West Midlands
     Police.
       A.      Yes,
      Q. At some stage you wrote out the statement which I have got in your handwriting,
     which is on West Midlands Police witness form paper?
       A.      Yes.
       Q. How did you get hold of that?
4¸
       ~:      This is what I can’t remember. I must have approached somebody for that.
       Q. Or they approached you?
        A. No, I am sure I approached them. I seem to remember thinking that by this time
     it is rathe~’ strange, I haven’t been asked to make a statement. I felt I ought to make a
     statement. The only point of contact I would have had would have been Jim Wardrope,
     the Accident and Emergency consultant. I am fairly sure I approached him--as sure as I
     can be.



                                                178
 Q. At any rate, someone provided you with the witness statement paper?
 A.   Yes.
 Q. And you made out this statement in your own time, so to speak?
 A.   Yes.

 Q. It was witnessed by Mr. Dicks, is that right?                         ;~

 A.   Yes.
 Q. And then it appears to have been countersigned by Julie Appleton.
 A.   Yes.

 Q. You say she didn’t actually witness it?
 A.   No, I have never met Julie.
 Q. But it is quite obvious that it got to the West Midlands Police because she is a
West Midlands Police officer.
  A. Yes.

  Q. And we have, indeed, obtained it through the Police. So far as the rest of the
correspondence is concerned, there is a letter of yours dated 8 February 1997 to Mr.
Wardrope. Have you got that?
  A. No, I haven’t got that one.
   Q. You say "I was not contacted by West Midlands Police to provide an official
statement nor asked to appear at the inquest". So that really is what you are
saying--you don’t remember being approached by the West Midlands Police to make a
statement.
 A.    No.

 Q. But at ,ajny rate you made an official statement.
   A. Yes. At that time unfortunately I had completely forgotten having made the
statement at all. Obviously I kept a copy of my statement. I gave an account of my
actions just to Mr. Wardrope on a dictated form.

 Q. Yes, I have read that. That was more of an aide-memoir?
 A.    Yes. But I had completely forgotten having made the police statement.
  Q. As far as the police statement was concerned, you said in it everything that you
wanted to say, did you?
  A. Yes. I have no argument with the contents of the statement at all.

                                         179
  Q. And since you were free to say what you wanted because you were giving your
account of the matter, you did say everything you wanted to say, I imagine?

  A. Yes, I think so. I didn’t perhaps raise some of the more critical points that I had
raised in the hospital report.
  Q. They were more for the hospital’s convenience.
  A. For planning purposes. But I was obviously rather perturbed to find out that my
statement had been altered--I don’t know whether it is or not--perhaps to make it
appear as if Julie Appleton had been present when the statement was given, which she
certainly was not. I am not quite sure why she would have done that.

   Q. I don’t know either. But it has not altered the effect of the contents of the
statement in any way.
  A. No, the contents have not been altered. I just thought it was rather strange that
somebody should have done that to my statement. Mr. Dicks is a staff nurse at the
hospital, as you probably know. He just acted as a witness to my signature, at my
request. He happened to be the nearest person to hand. And then I, presumably,
returned the statement to somebody.
 Q. Well, presumably it got back to the West Midlands Police, and I imagine Miss
Appleton was dealing with it. I don’t think we need lose any sleep about that.
  A. I find it strange.
  Q. Was your letter to the BMJ of which I have been provided with a copy, of 13th
February, was that ever published in the BMJ?
  A.   Could I ask you which one that is?

  Q. It is this letter. (Letter shown to the witness)

  A.   No, it wasn’t.
  Q. So you never got any response to it?
   A. No. The whole thing started with me as a request to other doctors who were
similarly involved as I was but felt that they had never given any formal evidence, to
come forward and get in touch with the Family Support Group. That is how the whole
thing started off.
   In the meantime one of the other medical journals, more of a newspaper type journal,
more of a news journal, got hold of it and turned it into a news story. And that is when
the whole thing blew up in the press. I asked the editor of the BMJ not to publish that
letter even if he was considering to. I felt that things had gone far enough at that stage.
   Q. Can we get on to your statement to the police, what I am going to call your police
statement. I am not going to obviously read the whole thing out. I just want to clarify a
number of points with you if I may. Have you got a copy of this to hand?


                                           180
  MS. ADLINGTON: I haven’t, sir, because I was not told until late yesterday I wasn’t
going to be attending until today.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: You seem to have an enormous amount of stuff
there.

  MR. BONE: I can get it photocopied.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Well, I don’t think there is anything
particularly significant. Would you mind getting it photocopied.
  THE WITNESS: Everything but.

 LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: Perhaps I can ask you whilst that is being done,
why do you think that you ought to have been called at the inquest?
   A. Because I was the very first doctor attending casualties at the hospital, and I
attended several of them literally as they came through the doors. I do not have too
much of a problem of my not being actually asked to give evidence at the inquest
because there were lots of other doctors involved at the hospital who were not asked
directly to appear either. But I did find it very strange to find out that I had been
referred to in all the inquests as an unidentified doctor.
  Q. That is unfortunate that you weren’t given the credit for the very good work that
you did.

  A. It is more than that.
  Q. May I just say this. You are referred to as "unidentified doctor" in the Hammond
inquest in particular. I think one of the problems may be that as far as I can see there are
no hospital notes in relation to Hammond.
  A. No.

   Q. There are certainly none that identify you as having been involved. It is not for
me to make excuses for the hospital and so on--they were obviously working under
very difficult conditions. But it is quite plain that Mr. Wardrope knew perfectly well that
you had been involved, but when one comes to sorting out precisely who did what in a
situation like this it is not always particularly easy to identify the situation. I think that I
can understand why you were referred to as an "unidentified doctor" although
obviously not altogether satisfactory.
  A. No. I think it has happened in more than one case as well; and I am never
actually mentioned by name at all.
   Q. That may be so, I am not sure. I want to come to the cases that you were involved
in in a moment. Just tell me this. Have you ever given evidence at any other inquest?
  A. No.

  Q. Although presumably you have been involved with attempts to resuscitate
people who has subsequently died?

                                             181
  A. Yes. There usually tends to be a consultant involved and, as happened in
Hillsborough, it tends to be the consultant, the most senior person, that is asked to
attend.
  Q. That was Mr. Wardrope in this case.
  A. Yes. It is just that, given the unique circumstances of Hillsborough, I arrived
there before Mr. Wardrope.
 Q. You were the only person there for about a quarter of an hour or so?
 A.    Yes.
 Q. Something like that, was it?
 A.    Yes. Well, the only person with any anaesthetic training.
 Q. There were casualty officers?
  A. Yes, there were some casualty officers, one or two around, I think. But I was the
only person there with any anaesthetic training for about a quarter of an hour.

  Q. It seems that one of the problems, as I understand it, was that nobody anticipated
these kind of injuries being inflicted.
   A. That is right; it was very unique. As I pointed out in my submission, I think, most
major accident plans are geared up to surgical trauma, amputations and that sort of
thing.

                            (Statement handed to the witness)
  Q. Can we go through your statement. It has actually got "Continuation of
Statement 1" at the top, do you see?
  A. Yes.

   Q. But I am calling it page 2. You say at the bottom: "The first casualty arrived
within two or three minutes. I believe this patient to be a boy I know only as ’Lee’, who I
believe was declared ’brain dead’ on the Intensive Care Unit." That I think is Lee Nicol,
is it?
       Yes, I think so.

  Q. You think that?
  A.   Y~s.

  Q. This is the young man who died a day or so later.
  A.   Yes.

  Q. And there was quite an extensive medical record in relation to him?

                                           182
 A.    I think so, certainly by the time he got to Intensive Care.

 Q. You have seen that, I think.
 A.    I have not.
  Q. Well, I have seen it. I don’t, quite honestly, think that you will get much from it. I
can’t see any record of you being involved in it.

  A. Again, at early stages there was no documentation.
  Q. No. You say that he was in cardio-pulmonary arrest with fixed, dilated pupils. "I
intubated him, established venous access, and instigated routine resuscitative measures.
His heart had stopped beating but we managed to re-establish him in normal rhythm."
How did you do that?

 A. When I say "routine resuscitative measures", it means cardiac
massage--external cardiac massage.
  Q. Just what people do as first-aid, manual --
  A. Yes, compression. The idea is that the heart has stopped beating, the idea is that
you are literally squashing the heart between the breast bone and the back of the
thoracic spine.
  Q. I just wondered whether you were referring to anything different from that.

  A. No, intubating him obviously to get a tube into the airway to ventilate the lungs
and giving drugs.
  Q. Just clear my mind on this question of intubation. Sometimes you can do it
simply by putting a tube down the mouth, is that right, and sometimes you have to make
a hole in the throat?

   A. Yes. That is called a tracheotomy usually or a needle cricio-thyroidotomy or
various things. All the patients in this situation had oral intubations using a
laryngoscope which is a long blade that you pass over the back of the tongue to visualise
the vocal cords and then put a tube in.
               c

  Q. The next one, you go on to say "Whilst I and another doctor were Lee, the
second victim arrived. He was of similar age with blond hair. He was also in cardio-
pulmonary arrest. I intubated him, and noticed evidence of gross inhalation of stomach
contents. He also had marked gaseous abdominal distension, possibly indicating that he
had had mouth-to-mouth resuscitation at some time. I also established venous access".
Venous access means an injection of some sort, doesn’t it? Is this right?
  A.   Yes.

  Q. Because in your--well, first of all, are we talking about Philip Hammond here?
  A.   I am assuming so. Again, it is impossible for me to say with any certainty.


                                           183
  Q. That is what I thought. The reason why I ask that is because when you are
dealing with your criticism of Dr. Slater, page 4, you talk about--I think it is half-way
down the page, when you recite what he says--"It is not sound to assume that as no
injection had been performed no drugs had been given" and you go on to say that you
gave it down the tube.
  A. The point I am trying to make is that drugs can be--I mean there is obviously a
discrepancy--if this is Philip Hammond, case number 2, that we are talking about, and I
did establish venous access in him (and obviously I did that in that case) Dr. Slater is
saying, however, that he could not find any needle puncture marks in the boy that he did
a post-mortem on who he assumes is Philip Hammond.
  Q. Well, he knows it is Philip Hammond.
  A. Yes, sorry. So there is a discrepancy there. Either that means I am mistaken in
the boy that identifies Philip Hammond or I made a mistake in my recollection of the
actual details of the resuscitation. But the only point I was trying to make of what Dr.
Slater was saying is that, despite what I am saying about the identification of this
particular boy, it is not sound to assume that just because there are not any needle
marks--that is the conclusion that is drawn at the inquest--no resuscitation attempts
had been made, because there were no needle marks.
  Q. We will come to that, because I don’t think that is what Dr. Slater was saying.
 A.    That is impression I got.
   Q. I think that is a matter for me to decide what he was saying, but that is not the
impression that I had. I had the impression that he was saying that there were signs of
resuscitation because there were electrodes and so on, but there was no sign of a needle
having been used. He does not go on to say "That doesn’t mean to say that people didn’t
try and put drugs down his throat." He just does not mention that at all.

  A. No.
  Q. At any rate, you think you may be mistaken when you say in your statement that
you established venous access?
  A. I mean, there is obviously some kind of discrepancy. If Philip Hammond had
needle marks, either this particular patient was not Philip or I am mistaken about the
details.

  Q. Dr. Slater would be pretty certain to pick up a needle mark, wouldn’t he?
  A.   I don’t know, to be honest. I don’t know how---
  Q. A’pathologist would find it, wouldn’t he?

  A.   I honestly don’t know how visible they would be during the post-mortem.
  Q. Let us go on to the third patient. At any rate, so far as that patient is concerned,
he died quite shortly afterwards, I think?


                                          184
  A. Yes.
  Q. Then the third patient was aged around 20, "with fair hair, of slim build. He was
cerebrally irritable but not actually fitting. I was able to intubate him without any drugs,
and left him in the care of another doctor." As far as you are concerned, he was
somebody who survived, was he, or not? Do you know?

  A. As far as I know, yes. I believe this may have been the patient, there was
certainly one who came in in a state similar to this, who was intubated withdut any
drugs. Being intubated without any drugs means that they had a severely depressed
cerebral function because obviously the laryngeal reflex is a very strong one and to put a
tube through without any drugs means somebody is very ill indeed.
One boy--I think it may have been this one--recovered after the intubation when he
became more oxygenated and actually pulled his own tube out and then deteriorated
again. I think this may have been this one. But that one, so far as I know, did survive.

 Q. I see. But you have not been able to identify him?
 A.    No.
  Q. "I next saw another unconscious cerebrally irritable patient, with shoulder-
length brown hair, and aged around twenty. I judged his airway to be adequate and left
him in the care of a non-medical member of staff." Do you know what happened here?

 A.    I don’t I am afraid.

 Q. I wondered whether you knew anything about him?
 A.    I don’t.
  Q. And you have not been able to identify him?
 A.    I haven’t.
  Q. I don’t think anybody else has. "The next patient I dealt with was in cardio-
pulmonary arrest. He was aged around twenty, of stocky build, with ginger hair. I
intubated him, and gave appropriate drugs down the endotracheal tube, as he did not
have any venous access." Why didn’t he have any venous access?

  A. Just because we had not got round to doing that. It means a break from the
resuscitation process only of about 20 or 30 seconds if you are lucky, if you get a line. We
are actually talking about, it’s not a simple injection. You introduce a plastic tube into
the vein and with a needle, cannulating, it is called, and it takes about 20 or 30 seconds if
you hit the first time. That is a long break in terms of resuscitation, and you want to
avoid that. So in the early stages I was giving him drugs down the endotracheal tube.
  Q. I wondered, when you said "I was assisted by a doctor of approximately my own
age from the football ground", have you discovered who that was now?

  A. I think that is Peter Marsh.



                                           185
  Q. Yes, I thought so. Then you say that "he re-arrested on two distinct occasions,
and developed bizzare ECG complexes, with a very poor output. At this stage I took the
decision to abandon resuscitative measures on this patient." And he presumably died?

 A.   Yes.
 Q. And, again, you don’t know who that is?

  A. We haven’t been able to positively identify that one, no. It is strange because we
have had great trouble trying to find out a record of anybody with that description
having been brought to hospital. I just happened to see a photograph of Kevin Traynor
on the television, and I was convinced that that was him; he looked exactly like this
person. But Kevin is documented as having died on the pitch. So it is very confusing. We
have not been able to track that one down at all.

  Q. He had a number, presumably, but you were not able to recall what number he
was?
  A. The ones that I was seeing, even by this stage, had not had major accident
numbers allocated.
  Q. Then you say "I next saw a patient of around forty, with thinning hair and of
heavy build. He was having cardiopulmonary resuscitation from another doctor."
Again, this would be manual?

 A.   Yes.
 Q. "I intubated the patient to help with this."

  A. That was presumably a non-anaesthetically trained member of staff who would
have been dealing with the simple massage; and the alternative to intubating is just to
use a mask over the mouth and a bag to blow air down; but that is unsatisfactory
because it also tends to blow air into the stomach. And the idea of intubating is to have a
sealed route into the windpipe.

  Q. You need to be a trained anaesthetist, do you?

  A. You do. Basically, most doctors are encouraged to learn to intubate--especially
more so nowadays than they were at the time of the disaster--especially Accident &
Emergency staff. But certainly people with surgical training aren’t usually able to
intuJ~ate because they don’t do it on a regular basis.

  Q. What about ambulance staff?

  A. It depends, again, on their level of training. Ambulance technicians would not
intubate whereas paramedics would. And I don’t know at that time what the balance of
paramedics to technicians was in the service.

  Q. I am afraid I don’t know the difference.




                                         186
   A. It is all to do with level of training. Ambulance personnel, ambulance
technicians, are trained in very basic first-aid and drive the van. Paramedics are trained
to a much higher level--able to do a lot of the things that we do in the hospital in terms
of resuscitation.
 Q. You don’t know what happened to him, I suppose?
 A.    Idon’t, no.
 Q. Have you been able to identify him?
 A.    No, neither of us, I am afraid.
                                                                                i¢*
   Q. "I was then asked to see a boy of around fifteen with black hair, who had already
had resuscitative treatment. He was however fitting, and had a poor airway. I gave this
boy appropriate anaesthetic drugs to sedate and paralyse him, intubated him, and
transferred him to the ITU. I believe he as since made a good recovery." Do you know
who that was?
  A. Again, I don’t, although it may be possible to track him down. I saw him the
following day on Intensive Care in the morning sitting up in bed, chatting to his parents.
  Q. I think I know who that is. Is it McDermott?

  MS. ADLINGTON: No, sir. McDermott was taken to the Royal Hallamshire.

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: So you don’t know who that was?
 A.    I don’t.
 Q. But at any rate, he is somebody who appears to have made a good recovery?
 A.    Yes. And, again, he was extremely ill by the time he was asked to see me.
   Q. You then performed a virtually identical procedure on a boy of similar age with
light brown hair, transferred him to ITU also. "I do not know what happened to this
boy." That remains the position, does it?

  A. Yes.
  Q. "I was then briefly involved with a male of around thirty in the resuscitation
room. He had already had considerable effort put into his resuscitation but was still
asystolic", so that he had got no heart beat at all?
  A. No.

  Q. "I placed a central venous line on this patient. I believe resuscitative measures on
this patient were abandoned." Then you went up to Ward 60, where people were being
sent, as I understand it, who didn’t need intensive treatment?
  A. It is strange, because they obviously didn’t during the time they were transferred
from Accident & Emergency to the ward--by the time they had got to the ward two
patients had deteriorated to such an extent that they required to be ventilated.

                                          187
   Q. Anyhow, you helped up there. Is there anything of any importance about that
stage of the operation as far as you are concerned?

 A.    What--that is not mentioned here?

 Q. Yes.

  A. I don’t think so, no. It is very difficult looking back; it must be the same for
everybody involved.
   Q. Can I just go to some of the criticisms that you make. I think we have dealt
already with the question of what Dr. Slater said about Hammond at the inquest.

  A. Perhaps on the top of page 5, there is a statement from a PC Taylor that I have
seen, who says that he was involved with resuscitation attempts on Philip at the ground
and also for 20 minutes at the hospital. I have not got the full inquest transcript here, but
great lengths seem to have been gone to to suggest that Philip was dead by the time he
arrived at the hospital. And the coroner mentions to Dr. Slater that the police officer
may have been feeling his own pulse rather than Philip’s pulse, this sort of thing.

 Q. Dr. Slater was expressing an opinion here.

 A.    Yes.
  Q. I don’t know whether you have read all the documentation with this, but the
summary--have you got the inquest into the death of Philip Hammond, the documents
dealing with that?

  A. Yes.
 Q. The summary says that he died in hospital, at E. He died at the Northern
General Hospital.

  A. Yes.

   Q. So that was the view of the Police. Then at 598, this is Dr. Slater. At E he
describes the very serious internal injuries that he had, and then at F: "My autopsy
showed evidence of medical intervention in that three ECG electrodes were positioned
on the body. It was my opinion that the fracture to the rib was not a consequence of any
attempt at resuscitation" and so on. Then on the next page he says at D:
   "Qf the autopsies I dealt with at Hillsborough, this was an unusual cause of death, as
you will appreciate. The cause here was the accumulation of blood within the actual
lung substance. Now if we get fluid on our lungs this can be removed by various means.
There are medications that can remove this if you can get to people quickly enough but
when blood develops in the lung substance this cannot be removed at all and so, in fact
there is n6 known effective medical treatment for this." I take it you would agree with
that, would you?

  A. No, because if blood accumulates within--it is called a haemothorax--we deal
with them all the time at work--you just put a tube into the chest wall and drain the
blood out.


                                           188
  Q. I see. But you had not appreciated at this stage that that was the problem?

  A. No, it does not really affect the initial management. The initial management,
whatever the cause, is to get oxygen into the patient and try and get the heart beating.
And the finer points, if you like, come a bit later. And the accumulation of this amount
of blood in Philip’s chest would not really cause me concern during the initial stages.
You would not want to leave it there. But it certainly would not cause me concern in the
early stages of resuscitation.                                            Jr

  I am very confused by what Dr. Slater says at the end of paragraph E here: "Blood is
very heavy and accumulates in the lung and in fact there is no doubt that in this type of
death unconsciousness would have occurred extremely rapidly". If he is saying that
because Philip had blood in his chest he became rapidly unconscious, that is absolute
rubbish. I am sure that is not exactly what he is trying to say.
  Q. It is what he is saying.

  A. We see people all the time who have been car accidents and got fractured ribs
and come in with maybe two or three litres of blood in their chests and they may be sat
up talking to you. It is not the cause of unconsciousness.
  Q. No, but there were very serious injuries in this case as well, weren’t there?
   A. The only ones seem to be a lung laceration, one fractured rib and a haemothorax,
in other words, blood in the chest cavity. Those by themselves are most certainly not
fatal injuries. It was the hypoxia again in Philip that killed him.
  Q. Then at G he is asked "Can I just turn to the marks of medical intervention? I
think you mention three ECG electrodes, is that right?

  A. That is correct, sir." And then he explains what they are.
 Then on the next page it seems to be in answer to a leading question from Mr. Fraser
who was acting for the families, he is asked:
         "Q. Dr. Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I think by the time Philip had
       got to hospital he was dead?’

And the doc,tor says:
          "A. Yes, I shouldn’t be surprised in my profession. I was somewhat surprised
       that Philip was taken to the Northern General Hospital because my autopsy
       finding was such that I would have thought he would have died extremely
       quickly."
   And so on. So this is an expression of opinion from the doctor based on his autopsy
findings.




                                          189
   A. Yes. Again, that just doesn’t add up. If you are saying that Philip’s injuries that
he found at post-mortem--in other words, the lung laceration the fractured rib and the
haemothorax--were such that Philip would have been, and he says, sorry, "My autopsy
finding was such that I would have thought he would have died extremely quickly and
become unconscious instantaneously at Hillsborough." Again, that just does not add up
with my clinical experience which is that those by themselves, without the crush element
and the asphyxia, are perfectly survivable injuries. I don’t quite understand what point
he is making there.
  Q. But this boy was got to hospital pretty quickly, wasn’t he?
  A. He was one of the first to arrive. I can’t say how quickly after sustaining his
injuries he got to us, but he was certainly one of the first to arrive at the hospital.
 Q. You don’t remember what time he arrived?

 A.    The first one is 15.22. Philip was literally about two minutes later.
 Q. In terms of the response to the disaster, that is pretty early on?

 A.    Yes.
  Q. And once he got to the hospital he had the appropriate treatment as far as you
are concerned?
  A. Yes.
  Q. I mean you are not suggesting that there was any medical negligence or oversight
or anything of that sort?

   A. No, I don’t think so because blood in the chest, which Philip apparently had,
causes problems with ventilation of the lung. The lungs will still inflate, but there is
blood preventing the full inflation. As long as you can get some oxygen under pressure
into the lungs, it is not an immediate problem. And I don’t remember noticing anything
strange about the way Philip’s chest was moving at all.
   There are other things you look for obviously at the early stages of resuscitation, like
air in the chest cavity and air under pressure in the chest cavity called a tension
pneumothorax. So you do actually look for abnormalities in the chest wall. And there
was obviously nothing to suggest that in Philip, or I would have stuck something into his
chest to try and let air or blood out. But, as I say, blood in the chest cavity we do not
wor~:y about in the early stages.

  Q. But he in fact died fairly shortly after these resuscitative attempts, as I
understand it?
   A. Yes, if it is Philip that we are talking about, he came in in cardiac arrest and we
re-started his heart. It is a difficult concept because people think that somebody who is
arrested, has had a cardiac arrest, they are dead. I have tried to make the point in my
submission that death is not an event as far as we see it; it is more of a process, especially
in young people. Even by the time somebody heart has stopped, it is possible to re-start
a heart. So it is a difficult concept, to try to discuss the concept of death.

                                            190
 Q. This is the whole object of this heart massage, as I understand it.
 A.    Yes.
  Q. You find somebody in what appears to be in extremis, because there is no pulse,
you give them heart massage and sometimes you can start it again?
   A. Yes, the heart massage, it is not so much the heart you are trying to protect, it is
the brain, because obviously you need to get oxygenated blood to the brain?The idea of
massaging the heart is not so much to restart the heart. It is, hopefully, to try and get a
bit of oxygen into the blood up to the brain while you are doing something else that
might restart the heart, and that is usually injections of adrenaline and atropin and
various drugs and possibly electrical shock to the heart, that sort of thing. The heart
massage itself is not primarily aimed at restarting the heart.
  Q. I don’t know that I really need to ask you about this, but if you look on what is
page 603 in my bundle, at F--this is the police officer who is summarising the
evidence--
      "Attempted resuscitation was then carried out by Police Constable Taylor,
      Ambulance Officer Jane Moffatt and Ambulance Officer Alan Smith. The
      ambulance was then driven to the Northern General Hospital by Police Constable
      Shiel and during that journey the Police Constable and the ambulance crew
      continued attempted resuscitation.
        Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken into the Casualty Department
      where further treatment was carried out by a doctor who unfortunately has not
      been identified."

  That is you.

  A. Yes.
  Q. He goes on to say:
      "After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he could not detect any pulse or signs
      of life and Constable Taylor took Philip into the plaster room which was being
      used as a temporary mortuary at the hospital.
        Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards examined Philip in the plaster
      room and certified life extinct."

  Is that correct as far as you are concerned?

  A. Yes. "After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he could not detect any pulse
or signs of life." That is consistent with 20 minutes of resuscitation during which time
you may for a short while get the heart restarted, have electrical activity, in other words
have an ECG trace and possibly even an output with that, which means a pulse that you
can feel as well. But I think it was the case with Philip that at one stage we did restart the
heart and he re-deteriorated again and the heart stopped again. And obviously there is
only so long that you keep that up, particularly in a situation like this.

  Q. At all events, you were satisfied after 20 minutes that it was hopeless?


                                           191
 A.    Yes.

 Q. And he was transferred to a temporary mortuary.
  A.   Yes. But I would not have tried for 20 minutes if he had been dead when I saw
him.

 Q. No, I follow that. The only point on this is that Dr. Slater in answer to a leading
question expresses the opinion that he thinks he might have been dead when he arrived,
and it looks as though he was wrong about that.
  A. Yes.
  Q. I think that there is some elaboration on page 605 but I don’t think I need ask
you about that. Then he is asked whether the police officer might mistake the pulse.
Obviously he might.

 A.    There again he might not.

 Q. You don’t think he did on this occasion?
  A. No. As I understand it, he felt, I can’t remember whether it was a groin pulse or a
carotid pulse. What we are taught at medical school not to do is feel somebody’s pulse at
the wrist with your thumb because you will feel the pulsation of your thumb. Feeling
somebody’s pulse in the neck is usually done with three fingers, and the same in the
groin, and it is difficult even for a non-medically trained person to misinterpret a pulse.

 Q. Provided you don’t do it with your thumb?
 A.    Sorry?
 Q. Provided you don’t do it with your thumb?
  A. I suppose so, but when they for the neck most people I assume tend to go with
the fingers.
  Q. There it is. It looks to me as though Dr. Slater may have been mistaken about
that. You have looked at the hospital records, have you, and tried to identify the people
you dealt with and have not been able to do so?

  A. No, there is nothing useful in the records I have seen.
   Q. I have read what you say about the 3.15 cut-off. This was the decision of the
coroner which he came to on the basis that he had got to take a time limit at some stage;
and whether he is right or wrong is another matter. And I do not think that I really need
trouble you with what the coroner actually said about it.
   The position was this, was it not, that those who died had clearly sustained the injuries
from which they eventually died by certainly at the latest 3.15 and actually probably
earlier.

  A. Yes.


                                           192
  Q. That obviously not everybody who sustained injuries died because we know that
a number of people were resuscitated on the pitch, a number of people recovered in
hospital and so on and so forth.

  A. Yes.
  Q. So it does not follow that simply because you sustained injury and even became
unconscious, that you were going to die.

  A. No.

  Q. It is a factor, as I understand it, of how long the compression on the chest lasts for
so that you are unable to breathe for I think you say four minutes, don’t you? i,

  A. Yes.
  Q. I think it is common ground that in a situation like this if you can’t breathe for
about four minutes--the estimates vary a bit between three and six--then there is
precious little that can be done about it?

  A. Yes, I would agree with that, precious little, but not nothing. There is something
that can be done about it.

 Q. You can try to get the heart going again.
 A.    Yes.
 Q. By manual massage.
 A.    Yes.

  Q. That is what people were doing on the pitch. I don’t know whether you know
that.
 A.    Yes, and also by mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
 Q. Is there anything else that you can do at that stage?

  A. Not with the facilities that would have been available at the time. Ambulance
personnel would have been able to do more. The most important thing to get into those
people is oxygen, even if you had a bag and a mask with no oxygen supply, using
atmospheric air, which is about 21% oxygen. If you are doing mouth-to-mouth air you
are using expired air, blowing out, which is only about 15% oxygen, which is even worse.
Ambulances are equipped with 100% oxygen, which gives people the best chance,
because the damage is all being caused by hypoxia, lack of oxygen to the brain and the
heart.
  It is also an important factor that in a lot of cases I understand it was not just a fixed
crush, that was it, four minutes, and then unconsciousness. There was obviously swaying
and movement, during which time there would have been a pressure on the chest that
was then relieved, the patient would have been able to take a breath. It was just so
variable. It is the variability of all the cases that concerns me when they decide on a


                                         193
blanket, :ut-off time--to say that nothing made any difference in any of those cases. I
just do not understand that, because there was so much variability even with the patients
that we saw at hospital, some who were in cardiac arrest. All those that were in cardiac
arrest we think died, but the ones that were unconscious, fitting, what have you, some of
those survived.
 Q. But, as I understand it, the ones who were not dead were sent to hospital?

 A.    I don’t know. I cannot comment on that. One of the problems we have--
  Q. I have read the evidence that was given by Taylor, and we have the evidence of
what was happening and how the people were being selected to go in hospital. No doubt
mistakes were made in a situation like that. But basically that is what happened. People
who were thought to be capable of being resuscitated were being sent to hospital, and
those who were already dead, certified dead, were not.

   A. But only 14 of those who died ever made it as far as hospital. It makes me
wonder what happened to the other 82 what actual sort of state they were in at times
when non-medically trained people decided that nothing could be done for them. That
is probably my biggest concern. Perhaps there were people making decisions who were
not really qualified to make it. It is an impossible situation.
   Q. I think perhaps you maybe have not read the evidence about that. I mean there
was a good deal of evidence about who was making the decisions and who was deciding
who should be sent to hospital and who should not; and as far as I am aware they were
all medically trained people. They were either ambulance personnel, senior ambulance
personnel or doctors. But, again, it is possible that there may have been mistakes, I don’t
know.
   I follow what you say about the difference between traumatic asphyxia and crush
asphyxia but, as I understand it, traumatic asphyxia is really asphyxia caused by the
application of outside force.
  A.   Yes.

  Q. So, as a general statement, these people suffered from traumatic asphyxia.
  A. Yes. It comes down to semantics really. But you are correct to describe traumatic
asphyxia as the transmission of force to the chest wall. Traumatic asphyxia also tends to
be used as a diagnosis, as a term to encompass--I mean, the term "crush asphyxia" had
not, been coined before Hillsborough.
  Q. No. That is what I thought.

  A.   It was sort of invented to...

  Q. It rather came out of Dr. Wardrope’s article, didn’t it?
  A. Yes, I think so. He says "We have used the term "crush asphyxia" to
describe..."

  Q. So it would not be surprising if some of the pathologists used the term "traumatic
asphyxia"?
                                          194
       A. No. It is just that "traumatic asphyxia" gives the impression, certainly amongst
    medical people, that it is an irrecoverable situation, somebody is crushed to death
    basically--that is what traumatic asphyxia means. And you imagine that someone who
    is crushed to death has a ten-tonne weight fall on them or is run over by a lorry.
    Obviously we know the situation at Hillsborough was different. If someone had
    dropped a 100-tonne weight on top of 96 people then, yes, they all would have died
    immediately of traumatic asphyxia.

     Q. Well, I don’t think anybody was thinking in terms of that.
     A.   No, but obviously crush asphyxia is a separate entity.

     Q. It is a sub-division of traumatic asphyxia.
     A.   Yes.

      Q. And, in the light of Hillsborough, it is a helpful sub-division of traumatic
    asphyxia. Is that the proper way of looking at it?

      A. Yes. But it also implies that it is a more recoverable situation, as I have tried to
    point out. The injuries are different. There doesn’t tend to be so much damage to the
    organs inside the chest. It is more a picture of pure asphyxia, not being able to breath,
    without the other components that go along with being crushed to death, like a ruptured
    aorta or a torn pulmonary...

      Q. Yes. Those are other injuries which are not strictly necessary to the process of
    asphyxia.
      A. No, but they tend to go along with traumatic asphyxia. There also tends to be a
    lot more damage to the lungs themselves during traumatic asphyxia--bruising and
    bleeding into the lungs themselves.
      Q. In Hammond’s case...

      A. He had, I am sure what Dr. Slater was saying was that it was a haemothorax. But
    blood in the chest can either be actually within the lung substance--if you think of the
    lung as a sponge, and it is as if somebody has dipped it in blood and allowed it to fill up
    with blood. A haemothorax is blood in the chest cavity but in between the lung--the
    lung collapses down and there is blood in between the cavity, in the plural space.
      Q. But’the fractured rib had punctured the lung, hadn’t it?

       A. Yes, but blood does not just tend to seep into a lung like a sponge. That was not a
    very good analogy. Usually what happens when you get a spicule of rib that damages the
    lung, you get air leaks out of the lung which gives you a pneumothorax or air into the
    cavity, and you get fresh bleeding from the lung surface which drains down into the
    chest cavity, and you usually end up with a haemo-pneumothorax, in other words, blood
    and air in the chest cavity.
       But, again, it is not--traumatic asphyxia would tend to actually bash and bruise the
    lungs so much that they bleed within their own substance, and that is an irrecoverable
    situation: the lungs are so completely damaged.

                                               195



1
  Q. Interestingly, the coroner at one stage uses the expression "crush or traumatic
asphyxia", and it is quite plain that he is using them as alternative words in the context
of what everybody realised had happened in this case.

  A. Yes--whereas in the BMJ article that comes out in November 1991 after the
inquest, they go out of their way to draw a distinction between the two.
  Q. I take your point that it is a useful distinction between the two, but at the time I
think not a distinction that all pathologists were making.

  A. No. But I am sure that the medical staff at the hospital seem to have making it,
the non-pathological staff. They presumably didn’t just come to this conclusion after the
inquest finished. Perhaps if more medical evidence had been heard from non-
pathologists...
  Q. I don’t think I have got any other points that I wanted to ask you about. Is there
anything else you wanted to say to me?
   A. I think most of what I have to say is in here. There is nothing in my statement
itself that is going to be very useful. It is very mundane stuff about what I did on the day
and who I did it to.
   My biggest worry concerns the 3.15 ruling. I saw patients after that time that were
salvageable, and I cannot reconcile that fact with this idea that by 3.15 everybody was
irrecoverable. That is really my biggest problem.
   Q. I don’t think that that can have been what was had in mind because obviously
everybody knew that patients had gone to hospital with a view to being resuscitated, and
that some of them had in fact been resuscitated. I don’t know whether you have read the
evidence of Dr. Wardrope, but my recollection is that he talks about 87 people who
were taken to hospital. He says that 17 of them were unconscious and were taken to the
Intensive Care Unit. And we know that--I forget the precise figure--of them, only nine,
I think died. So obviously the remaining ones recovered. It is all a question of what
people knew and assumed and so on, isn’t it?
  A. Yes. But I understood that the impression was given at the inquest that it didn’t
make any difference to those that died what intervention they received after 3.15 and
therefore it was not necessary to hear evidence of anything after 3.15. Is that a fair...
  Q. I am not sure about that. No, I don’t think that that necessarily is so.
  A. If that is the case I think it is most likely to be incorrect; and perhaps evidence of
what happened to some of those who died, or what didn’t happen to them, after 3.15,
should have been heard.
  Q. I ~m not sure that this is the right moment to debate this, but one has to have in
mind what the purpose of an inquest is and its limitations, and that is really a question
for me and whether or not this 3.15 cut-off point is something which was appropriate in
the circumstances.




                                           196
  A. And it also comes down to some of the families who I have spoken to who,
because of the 3.15 ruling, didn’t find out what happened to their own deceased, which,
again, I understand is one of the functions...

  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: That is a matter which as far as I can I am
looking into. The fact is that at the mini-inquests what was known about tracing the
person from the time they were last seen to the certification of death at a post-mortem
was all given. I am not saying, of course, that there may not have been mistakes and
confusion in that, but that is what was attempted in the mini-inquests. I am simply telling
you this for your own peace of mind, if I can put it like that.
  THE WITNESS: But then before the generic Inquest the 3.15 rule was introduced--is
that correct?
  LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH: At the outset of the generic Inquest, yes. Thank
you very much. I am very grateful to you for coming.




                                          197
                                                                                                              ?
                                                                DOCU,MENT RE,ZORD PRINT

                                                                                 OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER
 APPENDIX 6

                          FROST

                          DAVID JOHN

                                                                      Date of L,~rth




)ccupation                POL PC2130

elephone

,umber of Pages

~ated                     090589                                                                                                   Signet


         I came on duty at 8.30 am at Heeley DHQ, along with other members of

        the Crime & Vandal Squad with which I work: Insp, Beresford, Sgt.

        Eddison, Bob Crookes, Russel Wilks, Andy Justice, Gary Oriffiths,

        John Trewick, Andy West and Martyn Smith. With us that day as a

        replacement-l-was ;!_~z:.~ t_~ :.~.~ r7 ~_?_~ f-,.’end Alan Hampshire.

                ...........                                                              v- -        * .....


                          Briefing from Inspector B,

        ~%~ ".~,n.-,in9 Up"~ travelied to the ground.=_~=~ .... _,c~ ~ee~ h._-~_._",

        ~rc~: _~!!. On arrival, parked our van in a prominent position.~--~e~e~



        Briefing in the stand by Ch. Supt. Duck enfield,~Z’-~- the .-:J~! :r~-:y

               ,      ~9rm           ""2_.                             "         , ~..~, ~r’~.,;3 ,?.?,T, ,         ,.,,.
                      i




        As Serial ~i we were standby in Leppings Lane pen. We took up our

        positions, l’_-e~_"" t:~’.er ~ro~: "_1! "~7 ’-’c’-’~-! ’te’:~e~-lerY’                                      "~

        ~r.~’-:3, 7. T~ --3 ~.
                            ....   .~r "._-~.*~"- *’-’-- .e~.~q.~ .,,s.. ~". ’.:’--7.+ .~ Z~’-. Z-
                                   ~, ...........                                                A --=’--".-,,,-    -’~’ ...~’~r

                                              ........... ~ S




        A call from the control box to be deployed at the ~urnstiles ""

        Penistone Road, I paired with~John Trewick at turnstiles allowing

                                                                199
                                                                                                               ;AGE
                                                                                                               ~375
 N0t~S. ForesL fans Into ~he ko~,. As In the past Cans are In the ~,aln

      ~en~ly and well behaved with the odd e:.:cept~on.

 A number of fans had cans of beer and were asked to finish ~ before




 ............... =-                                           -   - -.,: ;,:::;’--:;y :’-i~.~. ~.       Time
 1415 pm Crowds building now bul again apart from t~e odd drunk: all

 quiet and well behaved. I returned to John Trewick on the

 turnstiles¯ ~ Brougham, (E~) had duties at the Pelican ~rossing in

 ~ront o~ us. Dick arrested a very drunken Can I assisted him to the
                                                                                                    r
 Police roo., which now is thronged with ~nd~-i~.~~



 ~:~L:.’.; --..~ --~!:!’: --’----: ~..U. I returned to the turnstiles passing a

 number of my C ,~_. w ,.,e-k ~..e~_ee tarrying, ~ 2 or 3 prisoners who

 were throwing themselves about, shouting, swearing.



 I went outside the ground again.~y now very busy many people asking

 about tickets "~;here can we buy tickets" both Notts and                                                      ~ans.



                      ....... e~           must have been 2 55 pm (’1~5) we were called

~1ntO the ground and sent along %he perime%er track¯ I was at or near

 the ~ront o~ the unit. I remember looking down the ~ront o the

 North Stand it see.,ed like chaos. ~ line o bobbies were ~acing                                                the
                                                             I

 crow~ as we approached the Leppings Lane end or the stand people were

 all over the track¯ I saw a :7~---:-~ ~n~ ~ !:-~ ~D? ~7~5~ f~

                             ~, strugglxng with a Can. ~.~ ~o~i~                              I went to their

ill.istance and got the ~an in an arm lock and marched him bac~to lhe


                                                      200
                                                                                                               PAC~
                                                                                                               R37~_

¢~arge room rusne~ hzm through the o~f~ce are~ which was ull                                                   an~

s~a~ght into the cell.                      Th~s was also full o~ .~.run~ en/~loo~l covere ;

fans and about 5                            just to keep the peace. The atmosphere was
very volatlle. There were about 1E prisoners all But 2 or 3 were

screaming and shouting about they wanted to watch the game. -I-:.---




I remained in the charge room ~or a cou~,le o~ minutes because I

thought it was going to eru~,t any second. Th= :== =.-.= w-_: ;_!!~__~ ~_,_,t
                   ¯       ’   Absolute chaos. A ~an with a beard with cut lips
t

and blood all over his ~’ace was going berserk¯ I tried to calm him

and sit him down. He sprayed blood in my ?ace as he shouted and

swore. The match, the match.

M~- ~ir’_ ..............
            "~"=~ ........ ’-" **~i;-~’ ~’*~’~"
                         . .............                                           ^~~:         I decided to leave

the charge room and get back: ou’~side, there.~s enough ~zi~=~=~=e~ there,

On leaving I walked towards the main track gates .... : .’:--- ~-’=~- --

§.~:~_l~.~ ~..,d ,~,.,.~i~. I’saw & line o~ Police dogs and handlers ~’rom

near the gym door right round t’o the ground gates, where they were

intermingled with horses and bobbies. I began to run my mind working

~ast. I thought it’s really blown no~ the crowd was very noisy. I

am on the perimeter track now running towards the Leppings Lane

g, eople and some                        "ahead.               I’l t ..... ~-" ~-"- -:--~::~ ...........

                                                                                          ¯         -5
                                              ~r


C2==~= t ...............                                             _.-:-:-.’..
                                                                       .~        People every where outside

the ~ence at Leppings Lane end. ~Bget              1.. t. ......   t ~ . ~ : _.,,;..L,~ ....   On arrival at

the other end, very strange scene peo~,le sat down by the ~ence

watching the game whilst others ~rantic looking in towards the

~ence. I pushed through to the ~ence near to the gate f’ar right.

The holding area was still near ~ull ~ans pouring out. I look: inside



                                                               201
          and see a~ Justlce spread eagled a~a~nst the ?ence.


I         booby between hls le,;s giving mouth to mouth and card~ac massage.

         Both their ?aces are strained. ~ is being knocked all over by

         ?ans rushing past towards the open gate. I ?orced my way to the ga~

         and climbed above the escaping ?ans ?orcing my way through. I

         reached ~. We broke away the ?encing with other Police outside

         and ?ans inside. Everything was so ....... c :it i= _~i.~?~ul.~ to

         rL==~,= Th? ~e~lex ~e-ta! p£~.ur-e~), the ?ans just kept pulling at

         the ?ence even a?ter it was broken. I ?orced them o?? and we got th-

         body out.   T~-~,,~;, ~h~=:.: --=a~ -~== %h-~t’= =’’.. =’:=~            =’~ .,.~- ~i,,--~ ~



                     As ~ and I moved towards the centre o? the pen:~
    -~0~J another two bodies right down at the ?font under the ?encing. Blue,

         dead eyes open. Both o? us went to them and each started mouth to

         mouth and cardiac massage.




         The ?ence above is being ripped down ?leeks o? blue and white paint

         ?all around. Money on the ground everywhere, Hands picking up.

         Fence is wrecked people pouring out ~orce the two bodies out

              _-_=_ ic =v=:. Fans above shouting and swearing "You ?uc~:ing

         Bastards."

         A brie? state o? calm. 6:h~ n=:,~, ~i’.h A~ ~limb the ?ence into th.~

         centre pen,                   ry where now. Fans part) :=.".’t ~=_~!i:v: =:y :y~"

         a pile 4 or 5 deep o? bodies. S~::II

         dragging the bodies out passing them through the ?encing one a?ter

         another. Bobby ties back the ripped ?encing. Arm: =c,hi=5 kccp ;=in~

         9~% ......... ~ ,h~. = .... : th~- t; ~a                 All out. Move ?urther

         towards South Stand. I_;~ .... . .;.’i:.’: it ~.;;-: cu:.:i:=" ~ore bodies i,



                                                 202
                                                                                               PA
                                                                                               R3



                    Megaphone giving orders, it’: :~-.=ut t’--.:. ~e--;- ":m -’o~-

               :~. R:U~:-"       -.-.. -;~" i-
                         ..= ~ ....         . Z::-    _w ~_’-’-~
                                                     ..::;         ..-j,   v,,C’"        re being pas

 from behind, u .... ":~’ de~d? ~~wo chains of ta~,~.i~~

 passing bodies out now meeting at the gate.



--~all comes through this ones alive I shout repeatedly zn a

 choked voice, "This one alive." r~OM.,-] F.=.t ~ ....                              Broken bodie~

 being dragged apart trapping each other, n=,~ ~ ....

 All out onto the pitch, make shift -stretchers and away.


                                                                                                    ¯ .k




                                                                              y if ..... ~ ...... ,h



 .iT   ¯   #~,~1~


 All the bodies are out on the pitch now.~obbies ~,orking away on then,.

 Walking and lying wounded everywhere. Fit fans venting anger blaming

 us. "You’re all useless bastards." Y-=s th:y arc ri:;ht,. Loads more
 abuse. Form a chain across halfway line Notts fans chanting, they

 ~on’t k~now. ~ fans want someone to fight with tremendous

 feeling o¢ tension. ~:h~r: ~n:T J~;ti::.



..7.-~.,~I--~M.,~ went to rear of Leppings Lane. Fire engines everywhere.




  A lad called Colin barely conscious laid by the fence amongst the



                                               203
                                                                                                                           PAGE
                                                                                                                           R375
        dead. Nearby a son $1tS by the covered body of his dead father. T

        and keep Colin conscious. H.:~ ..........
                                           ~,: ~..~4~ ~a~.!:                                      ~’~’
                                                                                             ~c ......           Doctor

        examines.                   ^.i^,,=         ha ..**=t t-,= na~ _         Mw ,.,~-l.-t ~= .~..,       ~.=I I nnw ~n,~
                                 eL             1    e~*L
        P:-::-:’ ....                     : :,~-7 :-        ~ !" !~_ ^~,.,           ,,~                     _       Colin go÷
        in the Ambulance.                           I help lift him in.             l~l____ i ...... |l-          W~_



        Back into the                        ground. Onto    the pitch find other~ in the                         unit re-

        group.    [~uw ~ ~=, ~= ~o ....                      ,~,~.~,-.
       We return tO the                    qencing ¯~ ~lady comes round. We are jus~
                                                                                                         J

        standing staring. She holds our arms and says, thanks lads.                                                       I be.a~

       to cry.

       Sometime later we van up. _U_h_-r_" "_’’- "~^ ~-~--~’~" -~’~---." .....

       General patrol around Hillsborough,

       O830 Off Duty



       This account of my experiences on that day is garbled and blurred,

                                "~                                         .~c      .           How               you describL

        such an event. It is impossible, I feel to ;u.-.-:’-~.-.d -~ ,~--z-~:r ~i~-h

        ............................. ; ......                           ! -~4.(-~a. _. ~’        ’ ......




ND OF REPORT




                                                                  204
APPENDIX 7

COMMENTS ON AMENDED SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
STATEMENTS



Chief Inspector Creaser

Mr Creaser’s original statement contained the following passage:
      "At approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room and there spoke to
      Superintendent Murray. I asked him if he had any preference as to the manner in
      which the spectators should be allowed to fill the Leppings Lane terraces. I was
                                                                                              /
      informed that the filling of the fenced pens would be allowed to take place in a
      natural fashion and that no control would be exercised by the Police on the
      supporters regarding which particular pen would be filled. This instruction was
      exactly in line with the instruction given the previous year, when Liverpool
      supporters had occupied the same parts of the stadium. I only raised this question
      because I was aware that on previous occasions different methods had been used to
      accommodate spectators".


The solicitors advised--
      "I feel that the comment about packing the pens on page 4 should either be
      expanded to include detail of when (in his experience) this had been done, or the
      entire section dealing with this should be deleted".


In the event the passage was deleted from Mr Creaser’s statement. The whole question
of whether supporters should be allowed to find their own level or pens filled
sequentially was an important one and considered at length by Lord Taylor. He made
findings critical of the policy of allowing supporters to find their own level. In my
opinion this passage is factual--it may have called for some elaboration but it should
not have been omitted.

But PS Goddard’s statement also refers to this conversation. He says:
       "Inspector Creaser came into the Control Box and asked Superintendent Murray
       about the Leppings Lane terraces and it was stated by Superintendent Murray that
       the standing fans would find their own levels in the pens rather than trying to fill
       one pen at a time."


Although the solicitors suggested this might be reconsidered, it was left in.




                                             205
PC 446 Groome

Apart from Mr Frost’s statement, this statement was more extensively altered than any
other:
      Deleted--"An officer of Inspector Calvert’s experience of policing would have
      been far better placed at the Leppings Lane end of the ground"
      Deleted--"The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort of paralysis"
      Amended--"it was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the rank of
      Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and
      Superintendent Greenwood¯ Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous by
      their absence. It was utter chaos¯" This was changed to "On the pitch were Chief
      Inspectors Beal and Sumner and Superintendent Greenwood"¯ The words in
      italics were deleted¯
      Deleted--"Why, during the period 2. O0 and 2.45 pm when the Leppings Lane end
      and the West Stand were not very full, except for the centre pen, was the kick-off
      not put back and the delay broadcast to the supporters outside. You cannot pass
      30-40 thousand through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end in one hour. At 2
      pm I would estimate that only 12,000 were in the ground¯
      Why was there a lOper cent reduction in manpower from the previous semi-final in
      1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end could have made a
      difference, filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end. Approximately 980 officers
      were used for the semi-final in 1988, 1, O00 for the semi-final in 1987 and 1,200for
      the semi-final between Wolves and Spurs.
      The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure of a control room.
      The staff for control room duties should be from weekly leave staff or mornings, as
      they are used to making decisions under pressure.
      ¯.. The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least (sic) 2-3
      years
      ... various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that things
      were starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was taken¯ Manpower
      levels were steadily cut...
      The dec&ion to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final needs to
      come under some scrutiny¯ This man had many years experience of policing big
      matches at Hillsborough. ".


Although these criticisms are trenchantly expressed they are all matters of opinion and
comment (the underlying factual matters are not necessarily correct)¯ They were all
matters which were considered at length in Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, where findings
adverse to the police were made.




                                           206
PC 115 Huckstepp

Omitted was:
      "The crush outside the ground could have been better controlled with more police
      officers and a better regulation of the flow of fans . . . knowing the ground as I do
      and how the Leppings Lane end fills up it might possibly have been better to direct
      the fans coming in through the open gates into the flank areas."


This is a pure statement of opinion, but it might suggest that other methods of filtering
supporters had been used in the past. There seems to have been some confusion in this
case between the police and the solicitors. In a letter of 12 May 1989 the solicitors"
recommended removal of comment from a statement by a PC "Hickstep". There was no
such person, and the solicitors presumably meant PC Huckstepp (whose handwritten
statement was evidently processed in the South Yorkshire Police typing pool on 7 May).

The unamended version of PC Huckstepp’s statement went to the West Midlands Police
and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry--they saw the passage in italics above and PC Huckstepp was
cross-examined on the point (Day 15, page 113).

PC 1669 Walpole

The original statement contained this passage:
       "By 2.55pm the central pen for standing at the Leppings Lane end appeared to be
       absolutely packed solid whilst the pen towards the Police Control was about half
      full and the pen towards the North Stand was perhaps only one sixth full. For
       normal big games the standing fans at the Leppings Lane terrace have filled each
      pen slowly well before kick off. I did not hear any radio message for the entrance
       to the central pen to be closed off despite this being packed solid."


In the amended version the last sentence (which I have emphasised) is omitted. It can
probably be regarded as comment; but it does carry with it the implication that in the
past the centre’ pens had been closed off, though I doubt whether this adds much to the
preceding sentence.
A number of comments at the end of the statement were in my view properly excluded.




                                           207
Inspector White

A somewhat similar point can be made in the case of an omission from this officer’s
original statement:
      "During the briefing no mention was made about the tunnel gates being used to
      control ingress of the crowd. Although on rare occasions in the past I have used the
      gates nearest the concourses to control flow away from the tunnel around to the
      south pen. I did this only for a few moments merely as a psychological support to
      turn the fans round to the south pen. I would not use them for any length of time as
      when they are in the closed position they would be an obstruction in an emergency
      evacuation situation as they would have to be opened against the crowd and also
      because this is the only ingress/egress for fans in the central pens to get to the snack
      bar and toilets."


PC 1842 Brookes

A similar point arises here. The following passage was omitted:
      "Why were the sliding doors at the back of the tunnel not closed at 2.45 when those
      sections of the ground were full as at the Manchester United match this season."


This is comment, but contains factual material about what happened previously. But PC
Brookes’s reference to "sliding doors" is unclear--the doors at the back of the tunnel
were hinged, not sliding, and could not safely be used when spectators were in pens 3
and 4 because they might impede escape. But moveable barriers had previously been
used. It might have been better to seek clarification of this part of PC Brookes’s
statement rather than exclude it.

PC 2102 Eustis

Deleted is the following:
       "I remember that last year the crush behind the goal was immense and was
       appalled that people would stand being in amongst people so tightly packed.
       Whenever anything happened on the field for example the Liverpool goals last year
     "i the crowd in the pens below us at Leppings Lane just became a sea of waves the
       crowd from behind pushing forward time and again to create waves of people. I
       passed comment to fellow officers last year about how glad I was not to be in
       amongst the crowd."


This is a factual statement, although it seems to be at variance with other evidence,
including that of the supporters who had by the time PC Eustis" statement came to be
considered (5 June 1989) already given evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and made no
particular criticism of the condition in the pens in 1988. I think it might have been better
to invite PC Eustis to reconsider this passage rather than delete it.

                                             208
PS Crawford

The solicitors suggested review of part of Sergeant Crawford’s statement, with the result
that the following was omitted--
      "I personally thought we were very light on manpower at this end compared with
      previous years.
      I have worked this end of the ground either outside the turnstiles, inside’searching
      or in the West Stand for several years at Cup ties, FA Cup Semi-Finals and league
      matches with a lot more manpower. In fact I have seen more manpower at this end
      during league matches. Normally we have had a serial at the centre tunnel to direct
      fans to the North or South pens when the Centre pens had been filled. This was not
      the case at this match and several of my serial remarked on this."


His personal feelings are irrelevant, and the numbers of police on duty are a matter of
record. But his past experience relating to the shutting of the centre pens is a question of
fact. It may be that the solicitors saw some confusion in this part of his statement
between what happened at League games as opposed to FA Cup semi-finals. If so, it
would have been better to ask him to clarify the point.

PC 2302 Powell

Referring to the position in Leppings Lane at 2.45 pm, the following passage is omitted:
       "The first thing I said was, "Where are all the bobbies, there’s hardly anybody
      there". I saw numerous people climbing over the tops of the turnstiles and the few
      Police Officers that I saw appeared to be doing nothing about it. My main
      observation at this point was the lack of Police presence. I couldn’t understand how
      such a large crowd could have possibly gathered. I recall in previous games there
      was usually a large Police presence concentrated on this part of the ground usually
      forming some sort of cordon."


This passage contains material about PC Powell’s own feelings, which are irrelevant.
But the reference to the cordon is an assertion of fact, although the statement is
somewhat vague as to where it was. The question of a police cordon (on Leppings Lane)
was an important issue at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, over which he criticised the police.

PC 2547 Ramsden

The solicitors advised the deletion of the following:
       "I also felt in relation to the entrance outside Leppings Lane end that there should
       have been some sort of semi-sterile area. We, that b Rotherham officers, had this
       particular duty for the FA Cup Semi-Final in 1987 which was played between
       Leeds United and Coventry City.


                                             209
      On this occasion we kept the crowds back outside the metal railings and gates to
      allow myself and other officers to carry out searches etc. Also there seemed to be a
      general lack of information coming from within the ground from ground control
      via the radio or the public address system, either giving information to us, or
      information and requests etc., to the crowd."


This is another statement in which comment (the first sentence) and fact are
intertwined. In fact only the first two sentences were deleted.

The result was that the previous occasion was not identified, although the substance of
what happened was retained. The point is perhaps a minor one since anyone reading the
statement would ask--what omission is referred to? Comments at the end of the
statement were in my view properly excluded.




                                           210
APPENDIX 8

CORRESPONDENCE ABOUT AMENDMENTS TO STATEMENTS

                THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY- UP-DATE II

To: Officers of the South Yorkshire Police submitting evidence to the West]Vlidlands
    Police in connection with the Public Inquiry into the disaster at Hillsborough
    Stadium

Hammond Studdards, Solicitors, are acting on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police in
the preparation and presentation of evidence to be submitted to the Inquiry.

As part of this process the firm initially requested that all officers directly concerned
should, as soon as possible, prepare a note of their recollections, in the form of a
statement including matters of comment and impression, whether or not this amounted
to evidence.

These accounts are of immense value to our Counsel.

Subsequently, the South Yorkshire Police were advised by the West Midlands Police
that it would be appreciated if South Yorkshire Police officers, who were at
Hillsborough, could effectively prepare their own factual statements for submission to
the Inquiry. This was agreed and the obvious way of proceeding was to look at the
statements which had been initially prepared at our request, on the basis that if matters
of hearsay and comment could be removed, these would be suitable as the factual
statements requested by the West Midlands Police.

Some officers have expressed concern about alterations being made to their original
statements prior to submission to the West Midlands Police.

What must be kept in mind is that the statements for submission to our own Counsel
were intended to have an entirely different purpose to those submitted to the West
Midlands Police.

The initial reports submitted contained a mixture of fact, conjecture and opinion. In
editing them for use as a factual statement by the Inquiry it has been necessary for the
solicitors to remove conjecture and opinion and to leave only matters of fact.




                                          211
All statements which are submitted to the Inquiry may be taken into account in
reaching conclusions, whether or not the officer making the statement is called as a
witness. It follows that the statements must contain only direct factual observations, as
opposed to matters of impression.

No amended statement will be submitted to the West Midlands Police until it has been
seen, approved and signed by the officer making it.

Assistant Chief Constable
(Staff Services)

**Distribution:
      All Chief Superintendents
      Supt Parker        --HQ Communications & Computers
      PC Middup          --Secretary, Police Federation
      Mr Stothard        --Special Constabulary Commandant
      Mr Richardson      --Civilian Personnel Officer




                                           212
                                             Treasury Solicitor
                                             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
                                             Town Hall
                                             Sheffield $1 2HH

                                             Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                             Fax     0742-736900

                                             7 June, 1989
J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., Msc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Furnival House,
Furnival Gate,
Sheffield S1 4QN

                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS
  Thank you for your letter of today’s date, which we have already discussed.

  The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South Yorkshire
Police Officers’ statements is that any expressions of opinion were (as I understand it,
on the advice of Mr Woodward) removed from the final version. As I understand it,
Andrew Collins’ view is that there is absolutely no reason for excluding such
expressions of opinion when they touch on matters relevant to the Public Inquiry and
that, in the circumstances, there is no objection in principle to written statements
containing such opinions being submitted to the Inquiry.

   Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be appropriate
to use the original statement for the purposes of the Inquiry when this has been
superseded by a subsequent statement. However, what I understand may have
happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is that the original
unamended statement was circulated because of the need to circulate statements to all
parties as much in advance of the calling of the relevant witnesses as possible and
because at the time of circulation of the relevant batch of witness statements the revised,
final version of the statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in
total there are three cases where this has been necessary: PCs Best, Huckstepp and
Illingworth. However, in such cases only the final, revised version of the statement was
given to the press.

  I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

  I have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, but am
naturally happy for you to do so.

                                       D. Brummell



                                            213
APPENDIX 9



SOME INDIVIDUAL CASES



In his report as submitted to the Home Secretary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals in
Appendix 9 with a number of questions put to him by the families of particular victims
about the exact circumstances in which their relatives died and with difficulties which
they said existed with the police documentation,                                   i~
Given that the appendix deals with individual cases, the relevant passages have been
sent directly to those concerned rather than included in the published report.




                                         215
APPENDIX 10



TEN "UNRESOLVED" QUESTIONS?

1. At the time of the "Hillsborough" television programme in 1996 the programme
makers, Granada Television, identified in a letter to Mr David Maclean MP, then a
Minister at the Home Office, what they said were ten unresolved questions about the
disaster. Eight of these questions were addressed quite plainly by Lord Taylor. He
answered them in as far as answers are possible, and I think the answers he gave were
right.


2. Lord Taylor did not specifically cover the other two questions. But the answers to
them are again in my view quite evident.

3. I set all ten questions out below, together with some discussion of them which I have
mainly taken from Lord Taylor’s interim report. Collectively they point to the "failure
.of police control" which Lord Taylor concluded, and I agree, was the main cause of the
disaster (paragraph 278 of his interim report).

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final
only 21 days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced at policing matches?

4. Lord Taylor gives a clear account of this aspect of the disaster. He said in his interim
report
      "At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control of Chief
      Superintendent Mole, then Commander ofF Division within whose area
      Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 March 1989 when the FA broached the
      1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over command ofF Division on 27 March
      to Superintendent Duckenfield on the latter’s promotion to Chief Superintendent.
      Both were present at an initial meeting on 22 March, but on 27March Mr Mole
      bowed out and Mr Duckenfield took over... It might have been wiser to have left
      Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable
      that Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his
      Division from the date of his promotion" (paragraphs 47 and 275).




                                           217
Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build-up outside
the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


5. There is a conflict between the evidence of the police and that of supporters. The
fans say that in 1988 the police operated barriers and cordons along Leppings Lane to
filter out those without tickets and control the flow of pe. ople towards the ground. The
police say they did not. Both fans and police however agree that there were no such
barriers or cordons in 1989. Lord Taylor examined this question. He concluded
        "As to 1988, there was a very large and consistent body of evidence that, on the day,
        the police in Leppings Lane conducted an efficient filtering exercise... I do not
        believe that so many witnesses without either opportunity or reason to put their
        heads together could be mistaken about what they experienced on that occasion.
        Yet the police maintain that no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was
        carried out in 1988 and that their policy and practice then were no different from
        those of 1989. The answer.., must.., be that whilst the policy was no different, in
        practice the policing in 1988 was more efficient and was not put to the same test and
        strain as a year later..." (interim report, paragraphs 214 and 215).

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have been,
when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely
into the ground before the 3 pm kick-of~


6. Lord Taylor examined this issue also. He gives his answer at paragraphs 226 and 227
of his interim report.
       "At various stages in his evidence (at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry) Mr Duckenfield gave
       three accounts of why he thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that
       one of the teams had already come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of
       photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the teams were
       coming out. Finally, he did not know why he thought the teams were coming out.
       They did not in fact come onto the pitch unti12.54 pm, two minutes after Gate C
       was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked for a postponement of the kick-
       off before Gate C was opened. It should not, however, have needed a Police
       Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of like mind) to think of
       postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the control room.
       The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
      ,with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be delayed unless there were some major
       cause for delayed arrivals, eg a jam on the motorway or fog... Faced with a
       situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd safety should have been the first
       consideration. Kick-off should have been delayed".




                                             218
 Why didn’t the police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
 witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of theproblems
fifteen minutes before kick-of~


7. This again is a question which Lord Taylor discusses in his interim report. He has a
chapter about it (Chapter 13). He concludes
       "As the stream from Gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in Ihe control
       room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
       view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had
       no field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera.., pens 3 and 4
       became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans were showing and
       signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the control room ~. .
       ... the combination of no instructions (to police) as to overcrowding and a strong
       prohibition on opening the gates (from the pens onto the perimeter track) was
       likely to make police recognition of crushing slow and their response reluctant.
       Small wonder that the growing pressure between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went
       unheeded or certainly unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a
       problem, the rule required the consent of a senior officer before a gate could be
       opened...
       Naturally, one would hope that common sense and humanity would make some
       officers cut through the rules and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress...
       This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even then
       not immediately.., there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
       problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost "(interim
       report paragraphs 244 to 248).


     Elsewhere in his interim report Lord Taylor says (paragraph 78)
 .

       "In the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3
       and 4 until the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter track just before kick-off. Then,
       the officers in command assumed that there was an attempted pitch invasion... ".


Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s semi-final?

9. Lord Taylor’s interim report says (paragraph 230)
        "Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50pro the tunnel should have been closed off
        whether Gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had
       been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few officers to act as a
       cordon to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately the 1988 closure
       seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not
       figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for
       1989".




                                              219
Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling him
that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew he had given the order for it to be
opened?

10.   Lord Taylor says of this (paragraphs 283 and 284 of his interim report) that
        "Most surprisingly (Mr Duckenfield) gave Mr Kelly and others to think that there
       had been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing open a gate. This was not only
       untruthful It set off a widely reported allegation against the supporters which
       caused grave offence and distress... I can only assume Mr Duckenfield’s lack of
       candour on this occasion was out of character. He said his reason for not telling the
       truth was that if the crowd became aware of it there might be a very hostile reaction
       and this might impede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened
        until he had spoken to a senior officer. However, reluctance to tell Mr Kelly the
        truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover, although Assistant
        Chief Constable Jackson was at hand, Mr Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to
       him until much later.
        The likeliest explanation of Mr Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply could not
       face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom.
        That would explain what he said to Mr Kelly, what he did not say to Mr Jackson,
        his aversion to addressing the crowd, and his failure to take effective control of the
        disaster situation. He froze".

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the l O foot spiked
fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch too small to
be effective in an emergency evacuation?


11.   The sequence of events is clear from Lord Taylor’s interim report. He says that
       "At about 3.10pro a request came from the perimeter fence for bolt croppers to cut
       the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage close by without
       success. At 3.13 pro, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to
       bring hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.., fire
       appliances arrived at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road at 3.22 pro. At both
       entrances their arrival surprised police who were uninformed as to why they had
       been called or where they should go...
       At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
       Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
       tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unable
       to proceed further... . Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand
       carrying cutting equipment and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the
       cutting equipment was not required as by then the last of the dead and injured were
       being, removed from the pens . . . " (interim report, paragraphs 101-104).
       "The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were intended to
       afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or an emergency. The
       kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for example, the
       collapse or illness of an individual... The need to provide for speedy and large
       scale evacuation from the front of the pens to the pitch was not anticipated"
       (interim report, paragraphs 258-9).
                                             220
Why was no public address announcement made--either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to help,
until 3.30?


12.   Lord Taylor’s interim report says
       "Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
       assistance about 3.30 pro, no information or advice was broadcast on.the public
       address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might
       all attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
       given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
       close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
       the crowd were left in ignorance" (interim report, paragraph 97).

13. Lord Taylor had more to say about Mr Duckenfield’s reluctance to address the
crowd at paragraph 284 of his interim report. I have quoted that above.

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where the
dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?


14. As I mentioned when discussing the rescue operation in Chapter 3 of this report,
Lord Taylor made it quite clear that "no valid criticism can be made of the response by
the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS (the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
Ambulance Service) or the fire brigade... I find that all three.., services.., responded
promptly when alerted, that they brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel
operated efficiently" (interim report, paragraphs 296/7).

15. The video evidence is that three ambulances went onto the pitch, one St John
Ambulance and two SYMAS. They drove very slowly because of the large crowds of
people moving about. It would have been impracticable for substantially larger numbers
of ambulances to have come onto the playing area. There was only one route for them
on and off, which was also being used by fans and police carrying the dead and injured
off the pitch towards the gymnasium and would have formed a bottleneck.

16. It would have been extremely difficult for triaging to take place on the pitch given
the chaotic conditions there. The gymnasium, which was used instead, was the only
practicable alternative for those victims who had been brought out from the front of the
Leppings Lane pens. In the circumstances it was quicker for victims to be taken there in
the way that they were, on stretchers and improvised stretchers, that it would have been
to use fleets of ambulances. As it was the ambulances were mainly used to take injured
people from the gymnasium to hospital. I think that this was in the circumstances the
most effective way of using them.




                                              221
Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


17. Part of the gymnasium at the ground was used as a temporary mortuary and the
bodies remained there for some hours until they were removed to the Medico-Legal
Centre at Watery Lane, Sheffield, where the post-mortems were carried out. I have
dealt in Chapter 5 of this report with suggestions that people were confirmed as being
dead on the basis of insufficient examination. It is clear that this was not the case. The
bleak but simple truth---one of many bleak truths about that terrible day--is that the
ambulances were better used to take the injured to hospital rather than the dead.




 d*"




                Printed in the UK for The Stationery Office Limited on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
                                                 Dd5067927 2/98 65536 Job No. 39322 06/41407


                                                                          222
                                                                      y



         Y~




J




       Published by The Stationery Office Limited
       and available from:
       The Publications Centre
       (Mail, telephone and fax orders only)
       PO Box 276, London SW~8 5DT
       General enquiries 0171 873 0011
       Order through the Parliamentary Hotline Lo-cal10345 02 34 74
       Fax orders 0171 Viaduct,
                       873 8200London EC1A 2FD
       59-60 Holborn                             ’
       The Stationery Office Bookshops

       (temporary location Until mid-1998)
       Fax 0171 831 1326
       68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
       0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
       33 Wine Street, BristolBS1 2BQ
       0117 9264306 Fax’0117 9294515
       9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
       0161 834 7201 Fax,0161 833 0634
       16 Arthur Street. Belfast BT1 4GD
       01232 238451 Fax 01232 235401
       The Stationery Office Oriel Bookshop,
       The Friary, Cardiff CF1 4AA
       01222 395548 Fax 01222 384347
       71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
       0131 228 4181 Fax 0131 622 7017                                    ISBN 0-I0-138782-2
        (counter service only)
       Customers in Scotland may mail,
       telephone or fax their orders to:
       Scottish Publication Sales,
       South Gyle Crescent, Edinburgh EH12 9EB
       0131 622 7050 Fax 0131 622 7017
        Accredited Agents
        (see Yellow Pages)
        and through good booksellers


~J J
