                                                                          \Z

                                                  H   ome   O   ff ic e
                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                 LONDON SWIH9AT



                                                01-273 2746




Your ref: POLET43/SW/MR
Our ref: POL/89 850/4/30




R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
Clerk and Financial Officer to the
  South Yorkshire Police Authority
PO Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ                                            31 August 1989




HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

Thank you for your letters of 21 and 23 August to Mr Addison
informing us that South Yorkshire Police Authority is now
prepared to agree that it will reimburse West Midlands Police
Authority the additional costs of the investigation by the West
Midlands Police subject to clarification of some matters.

It is a matter of long-standing Government policy that Central
Government grant should not be paid on interest costs. We cannot
therefore consider paying special grant or indeed ordinary police
grant on any interest charged by the West Midlands Police
Authority. For your information we are not aware of any instance
where one police authority has agreed to pay another interest on
the costs of an investigation.

With regard to whether the special payment will cover the cost of
the criminal investigation announced recently, together with
related costs of cases taken to court, this was not included in
the original offer of a special payment. Moreover, investigation
of criminal offences is part of the force's normal function.
However, as Mr Addison's letter of 9 August indicated, we
anticipate that much of the work already completed by the West
Midlands police as part of their original investigation should
prove helpful to the new criminal investigation and will still
qualify for the special payment.
If South Yorkshire Police Authority wish to pursue special
payment for new work related to the criminal investigation we
will need to consider this separately with details of costs and
reasons why your authority considers these costs should qualifyj
for special payment.
Your letter of 23 August and Mr Walker in his recent telephone
conversation with us, asked for clarification of the penultimate
paragraph of Mr Addison's letter of 9 August and whether the
special payment will also apply to the costs of work undertaken
by West Midlands Police connected with the Coroner's inquest,
discipline and complaints investigation. As Mr Addison stated in
his letter much of the work already undertaken will be relevant
to these areas with some presentational adjustment. However, I
can confirm that the additional costs of such further work
carried out on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police by the West
Midlands Police in these areas will qualify for special payment.
As Mr Addison's letter made clear, any work which is being
undertaken by forces other than West Midlands in relation to
disciplinary investigations would not qualify for special payment
and as stated above we Will require more information about the
major criminal investigation costs before making a decision on
whether to include these in the special payment arrangements.
With regard to the Second paragraph of your letter of 23 August
we have been advised that the product of a penny rate is
£1,026,750 rather than the estimated figure of £975,000 quoted
previously.
In conclusion, we suggest that your authority should make
arrangements for paying the outstanding amounts to avoid further
delay. We are in contact with HM Treasury to organise the method
of making special payments to you to assist with meeting the
costs and our Finance Division will be in contact with your
Finance Department as soon as possible to discuss and arrange the
mechanism for reimbursement*




                                             S     lYS SMITH
                             'if   *




Hidden cc:   Ms Adams
             Mr Yates
             Mr Chilcot
             HMCIG
             Mr Malone-Lee
             Mr Nagler
             Mr sandiford
             Mr Whalley
             Mr Archer
             Mr Durbin
             Ms Ransford               ^
