               With the Compliments
               of the Private Secretary




                       ^                   4
-£>   it * -         A '£ r       ^

        — «—    A:       '(o      "fCx_


                                          /^ z rc ro -o L


'T/I'
 l_ C \                         'VO^
{P     ^
     L-*
           A          U




               v -U ^ -sv ^ "
From: Peter Edmundson                               cc    Mr O’Brien
      Room 527                                            Mr Howarth
      Operational Policing Policy Unit                    Permanent Secretary
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                   Ms Wheldon
      0171 273 2621                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                          Mr Granatt
         4 June 1997                                      Mr Pugh
                                                          Mr Middleton LAB
                                                          Miss Loudon PPD, PTU
                                                          Mr R Evans ABCU
                                                          Mr Warner
Mr Michael             )                                  Mr Owen
                       ) simultaneously
Home Secretary         )



HILLSBOROUGH



Tssue


To seek colleagues agreement to the terms of reference for the independent
examination of the “new” evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster.


Timing


2.       Urgent.



Recommendation


3.       That you write as in the attached draft.



Consideration


4.     The proposed terms of reference for an independent examination of the “new”
evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster has been revised following your
meeting with officials this morning and you are invited to write to the Attomey-


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA-D0c
General as in the attached letter. We have kept officials in other departments with a
main interest in Hillsborough informed, and the Lord Chancellor, Attorney-General
and the DPP should be able to respond quickly to your letter.


5.     The draft letter leaves open the question of whether an announcement in the
House should be by an oral statement or by reply to an arranged PQ.



Handling


6.     The draft letter will require amendment if the Lord Chancellor’s office replies
to Mr Harnett’s letter of 29 May about who might undertake the exercise before your
(Home Secretary’s) letter issues.




                                              PETER EDMUNDSON




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA-D0c
DRAFT LETTER TO THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR SIGNATURE BY THE
HOME SECRETARY



THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been made
about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster was of course
fully investigated by the late Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor, but concern has been
raised about a number of features of the case and material considered by some to
represent new evidence has been brought to our attention. These and related matters
were raised in the Granada Television documentary drama “Hillsborough” last
December.

My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the allegations
made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that there are no
grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has also been considered
by the Attorney General’s Office and the DPP’s Office. None of those who have
examined the material consider that there is evidence to justify a new public enquiry,
 a re-opening of the inquest, or the prosecution of individuals. But I am certain that
continuing public concern will not be allayed with a reassurance from the Home
 Office that there is no new evidence. I therefore propose that there should be an
independent examination of the alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a
respected judge (serving or recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be
important to ensure that whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and
respected to command public confidence. My personal preference would be for a
judge. The proposed terms of reference are:

“To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new evidence
relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which provides
sufficient grounds for:

       i.      the Secretary o f State for the Home Department to establish a further
               public inquiry;

       ii.     the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
               Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

       iii.    The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
               charges against any person;

       iv.     The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary action
               against any police officer.

Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.”


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA.DOC
There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the independent
examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the announcement
will have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure that the ground is
properly prepared before the announcement is made with those outside Government
with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster including the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor’s advice on a suitable figure to lead the
independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy recipients on the
proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the Secretary
of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\LONGSUB\PE0007MA.DOC
                                  From : T h e P r i v a t e S e c r e t a r y

                            CONFIDENTIAI . APPOINTMENTS

                                                    K/ M           £aJ            H ome O ffice
                                                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE

                                                    if-V                         LONDON SW1H9AT


                                                    P^-Av £&4-                      2 9 MAY   mi
Ms Liz Hutchinson                                   tW     K c ^ - * o to b
PS/The Lord Chancellor
House of Lords                                     f-JU’u 0 r&~>
LONDON                                              (kV fnAjJrr^
S W 1A OPW
                                                    ^     U ^do*"
                                                    |Ar


                                                          M^/XdU<
                                                     J^Ar (jtJ

                        U                           (JUj [ysfa s^X s




The Home Secretary is currently considering proposals to have some form of
judicial examination of representations received over the past six months into the
disaster at the Hillsborough Football Stadium in 1 9 8 9 . The terms of reference of
such an examination could be on these lines:

          "To carry out an independent examination of whether there is new
          evidence relating to the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1 9 8 9
          which provides sufficient grounds for:

                (i)     The Attorney General to apply to the High Court under
                        section 13 of the Coroners' Act 1 9 8 8 for another inquest;

                (ii)    The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing
                        criminal charges against any person;

                (iii)   The relevant Chief Police Officer to take disciplinary action
                        against any police officer.

          or which means that it would be in the public interest for the
          Home Secretary to establish a public inquiry."

I should emphasise that the Home Secretary is still considering w hether to go
down this track. Nevertheless in looking at these issues, it has been suggested
that Mr Justice Collins who was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry into Hillsborough
and is now a High Court Judge would be a suitable person to undertake this
exercise. The Home Secretary considers that as Mr Collins has prior knowledge
of the issue, this would be advantageous. By the same token, however, it could
be disadvantageous because he would not be seen as being a fresh face.


12259CH


                           CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS
JL
                       CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS




Before taking this any further, the Home Secretary would be grateful to have the
Lord Chancellor's personal advice, both in terms of Mr Collins' performance in
the Taylor Inquiry and his general standing in the judiciary.

A response to Ken Sutton by close on 3 June would be much appreciated.




                               COLIN HARNETT




12259CH


                      CONFIDENTIAL - APPOINTMENTS
