 From: M JP yne                                                 cc Mr Michael
       Operational Policing                                        Mr Howarth
       Policy Unit                                                 Permanent Secretary
       Room 528, QAG                                               Mr Boys Smith
       S 273 - 2433                                                MrPugh
       5 March, 1998                                               Mr Clifford
                                                                   Mr Granatt
                                                                   Mr Warner
                                                                   Mr Owen
Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH CORRESPONDENCE


Issue

To approve a standard line in answer to correspondence about the outcome of the
Hillsborough scrutiny.

Timing

2.      An early decision would be helpful.

Recommendation

3.      A draft letter is attached behind for your consideration.

Consideration

4.     You made a statement in the Commons on 18 February announcing the
outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny. We are now receiving letters from
members of the public and MPs about the decision not to take further action. It would
be helpful in dealing with this correspondence to have an agreed standard line.

5.    Correspondence from parties closely related to the scrutiny would still be dealt
with on an individual basis.

Presentation/handling considerations

6.      No further issues.



                                               Matthew Pyne




G:\HILLS\LETTER.DOC
 DRAFT HILLSBOROUGH LETTER


I (the Home Secretary) am very conscious of the strength of feeling surrounding the
Hillsborough Disaster, and I understand that my decision not to hold a fresh inquiry
will be a disappointment to the families of those who died and for many who have
supported the families’ campaign.


As I explained in the House of Commons, one of my first concerns on taking office
last year was to ensure that there should be a thorough and independent investigation
of any material which cast doubt on earlier findings about the disaster. I, therefore,
announced on 30 June 1997 that I had asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a
scrutiny of the evidence and to report his conclusions.


I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough scrutiny of the
evidence and considered its significance carefully. His report is comprehensive and
sets out clearly the matters he has considered and the reasons for his conclusions. He
has considered all the material allegations about missing or concealed videotape
evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness statements and concerns
about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest.


It is inevitable with a disaster of this magnitude that evidence will emerge from time
to time which has not been heard publicly before. What the Scrutiny had to consider
was not only whether the evidence put forward was new, but also whether it was of
such significance that it would justify a new inquiry, or further consideration by the
Attorney General (with regard to the inquest) or the criminal or disciplinary
authorities.


I have considered the Judge’s report carefully and I accept the conclusion which he
has reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add anything significant to
the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests.




G:\HILLS\LETTER.DOC
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has made it clear that he entirely accepts Lord Justice
Taylor’s conclusion that the principal cause of the disaster was the failure of police
control. This has been accepted by South Yorkshire Police who have apologised on
many occasions.


I do, however, share the sentiments expressed by the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in
Chapter 7 of his Report when he says:


“I understand the dismay that they (the families) have that no individual has
personally been held to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings,
or even to the extent o f losing theirjob


There are profound shortcomings in the present police discipline system which I
intend to address. The Home Affairs Select Committee recently made some important
recommendations about the police complaints and discipline procedures. I have been
considering their comments closely and I will be responding shortly / 1 have recently
announced my response to the HAC recommendations including my intention to
reduce the standard of proof to the civil standard in discipline procedures and to
remove the existing double jeopardy provision which restricts criminal and
disciplinary action on the same facts. I have also endorsed the Committee’s
recommendation that forces should show greater commitment to their powers to
verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a request
to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.


I also support Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s endorsement of the findings of a Home
Office Working Party, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after a
public inquiry should be limited. The main change proposed by the Working Party
was to relieve coroners of the need to resume their inquest after an inquiry has been
completed. If this had been in place at the time of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would
have spared the families of those who died unnecessary distress when the Taylor
Inquiry had covered substantially the same ground as the Inquest.




G:\HILLS\LETTER.DOC
For the families of those who died at Hillsborough the grief will never end, and I
recognise that it will be difficult and painful for them to accept my decision. The
original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main causes of the disaster, and I hope that the families will accept that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny was equally rigorous.




G:\HBL,LS\LETTER.DOC
