                          THE JUDICIAL SCRUTINY INTO THE
                          HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



                                           NOTE



1.    This Note addresses two issues raised by Lord Justice Stuart - Smith in his meeting
      with those representing the Hillsborough Family Support Group on 30th September
       1997.

2.    Judicial review/section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 It is apparent that judicial
       review is now the primary remedy for those wishing to challenge an inquisition.
       Although this section empowers the Court to quash a verdict only where it considers
       it ’necessary or desirable’ for another inquest to be held, the powers of the Court on
       an application for judicial review are not so limited: R. v. Inner South Lon&m
       ro ro n e, ex parte Kendall [1988] 1 W .L.R. 1186, 1188A. In particular, the
       Divisional Court can quash an inquisition without ordering a fresh inquest. JL__.—
       Panr.ras Coroner ex parte Higgins 152 J.P. 637.'             Accordingly, it has been
       recognised by the Divisional Court that the striking down of a verdict may, by itsell,
       constitute appropriate relief in certain cases. The effect is the same as if the jury had
        returned an open verdict: Higgins at 640.

3      In Re Rapier [1988] 1 Q.B. 26, Woolf U considered (at pp28G - 30D) the inter -
        relationship between section 13 of Coroners Act and judicial review.

4      TnHicial Inquiry Lord Justice Stuart - Smith asked for assistance on the statutory
       framework which would govern a re - opened judicial inquiry (see Transcript, p i ,
        lines 15 - 24).

 5     The Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor was an informal Tribunal of Inquiry_outwith
       the statutory framework of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921. There is
        therefore, no specific statutory framework to govern any Inquiry which might be se
        up as a result of the Scrutiny. The Home Secretary would be free to set the terms
        of reference of the re - opened Inquiry, and the Inquiry would be free to regulate i s
        own procedure, as Lord Taylor did (see para. 8).

 6     th a AviHpncpi of S ervan t Murray and DCS Duckenfield L o r d Justice S tu a rt-
        Smith has asked for the passages in the officers’ evidence where they say that they


      'In P V Inner North Tendon C-oroner ex parte Linnane (No,,^) 155 J.P. 343 (referred
 to in the meeting) the Divisional Court held that there had been an ’insufficiency of inquiry
 and that particulars in the inquisition were incorrect, but amended, rather than quashed, the
 inquisition.
     2See generally, ECS Wade and AW Bradley, Constitutional and administrative law (11
 Edn.), pp659 - 661.
could not see the pens because of the faulty camera to be pointed out (see Transcript,
p22, lines 4 - 20) .

(a)     Mr Duc.kenfield was not asked by the Coroner specifically about the ^ e g e d ly
        faulty monitor/camera. However his evidence gave the impression that he did
        not have a clear view of the terraces. At the Inquest, 12th March 1988, p59,
        he said:

        Q       From where you were standing how much of the Leppings Lane
        terraces were you able to see ? ... A. In general terms you have a view of the
        terrace from the side on, as it were. I suppose it may be restricted because
        of me standing up at the back and the roof coming into play or the
        window, TV cameras, if my memory serves me correctly but I could see the
        terracing.

        On 13th March at p3 he said, referring to a particular photograph, that his
        view standing at the back of the Control Box was not as good because he was
        standing at the back of the control box.

         At p8B he said that the risk to the people on the terraces was not obvious to
        him.

         At p23 he was asked

         Q.        You had the vision from the Control Box, which we have all been to,
                   through the window ? A. Yes

         Q.        You also were able to see the video cameras the cameras which were
                   showing the terraces ? A. Yes

         He went on to say that he did not notice anything from where he was
         standing.

 tt>)    Mr Murray told the inquest jury specifically that he could not see what
         was happening on the terraces because of the allegedly faulty cameras.

         At p79G of his evidence there was the following exchange:

          O.           [Ylou had the ability to look along [the terraces] as we ve already
                   described ? A. I think you have to look at the individual cameras,
                   think the colour camera was unfortunately focussed on the problem
                   area in the Kop and that is where it stayed until about three o clock.
                   The camera on the gantry next to the Control Box was
                   unfortunately not working up to its potential. I do not know how
                   that affected it but I can see from the angle that that photograph
                   is taken, 326A, yes, there is a lot of room on the front of pen 6 but
                   I didn’t have that view and if I had had that view it might have
                    affected my decisions.
