           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
      k    Room 1106
      ra   50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0 1 7 1 2 732 512 Fax 2007



Michael J C Burgess                                           Your reference:
Coroners Society for England & Wales
                                                              Our reference:

                                                              Date:       IS’    October 1997




i hank you for your letter of 4 October.

2.     As you know, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been appointed by the Home Secretary to
conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I
am acting as Secretary to the scrutiny.

3.      It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny is to establish whether there is any significant new evidence which was not
previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police
disciplinary authorities. If there is significant new evidence, he will aim to see if it might
have affected the outcome of the Inquests or any of the other proceedings which took place.
I attach a copy of his terms of reference.

4.       I have shown your letter to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. He has asked me to thank you
for it and to say that he expects that it will be helpful for him to see Dr Popper, who
conducted the inquests on the (then) 95 victims of the disaster, to discuss various questions
which have arisen in the course of the scrutiny. Dr Popper has I understand retired, but he
has already written to us and I am sending him a copy of this letter.

5.      We will of course offer Dr Popper the opportunity to respond to any criticisms made
of him in the course of the Scrutiny. If he wishes, we will also ask for your Society’s views
on the questions which are involved.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\CORONERS. 112
 Terms of reference



 To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


       (*)   to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       (b)   to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
             Generalfo r the purpose o f discharging their respective
             statutory responsibilities; or


      (c)    to the Chief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation
             to police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
available is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the
Secretary o f State for the Home Department o f a further public
nquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest.
