The Police Superintendents’ Association of England and Wales
Secretary                                                                  67a Reading Road,
  C hief S u p e r i n t e n d e n t T. G. Hewitt                                Pangbourne,
                                                                                   Berkshire,
Assistant Secretary                                                                 RG8 7JD
  C hief Superintendent   M M H I   P. G. Wall


Telephone
  (07357) 4005
Fax
  (07357) 5642



      May 25, 1989




      R. M. Whalley, Esq
      Secretary to the Inquiry
      Inquiry Into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
      50 Queen Anne's Gate
      London.   SW1H 9AT




      Dear Mr Whalley,

      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

      Thank you for your letter of the 23rd            May   concerning    the
      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

      This Association obviously has a keen interest in the safe
      management of sporting events and we would no doubt wish to
      respond to your invitation.               Such matters as the control of
      ticket touts; effective stewardship; the most modern surveillance
      e q u i p m e n t to give, in the police control r o o m , accurate
      indication of numbers in and entering not just specific terraces,
      b u t s p e c i f i c p e n s w i t h i n t h ose terraces; communication
      facilities, come immediately to mind.

      We have a meeting of the District concerned on the 7th and 8th
      June when we could trawl amongst a wider audience of experienced
      Superintendents and Chief Superintendents and would expect to be
      able to respond to you shortly after that date.   Your requested
      date of response of the 12th June will therefore be too soon for
      us to collate the response as you ask.

      I will write to you again before the 12th June.

      Yours sincerely,




      P. G. Wall
      Chief Superintendent
      Assistant Secretary
The Police Superintendents’ Association of England and Wales
Secretary                                                                            67a Reading Road,
  C hief Superintendent KXXXXJfflSK    T .G . Hewi 11                                      Pangbourne,
                                                                                             Berkshire,
Assistant Secretary                                                                           RG8 7JD
  Chief Superintendent 'KxSCSfeSPftt   P .G . Wa 11


Telephone
  (07357) 4005
Fax
  (07357) 5642


      14th June 1989


      Mr R.M. Whalley
      Secretary to the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
       Stadium Disaster
      50 Queen Anne's Gate
      London
      SW1H 9AT


      Dear Mr Whalley,


      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


      I am sorry that the need to consult our membership has delayed this response
      but I can now tell you that this Association is not able to give any
      evidence in respect of the first stage of your inquiry, that is in respect
      of the events that took place at Hillsborough on the 15th April last.
      However, we do feel we can comment on matters effecting the second stage of
      the inquiry.

      1.   We consider there is a clear need for the establishment of a centrally
      funded National Football Intelligence Unit.  Information should be collated
      and recorded, so that profiles of activity, behaviour pattern of fans and
      changes in activity and behaviour are available to all affected forces for
      planning purposes.

      2.   We are firmly of the opinion that stricter controls are necessary over
      the sale and purchase of tickets, to overccsne the effect that ticket touts
      have in encouraging supporters to travel to grounds on the day of the match,
      on the chance of obtaining a ticket. We believe there should be a designated
      area, clearly signed, near the precincts of a football ground, where the
      purchase and sale of tickets on the day of the match is prohibited and a
      power of arrest should be created for this offence. Consideration should
      also be given to make drunkenness within the same designated area an
      aggravated offence, also with a power of arrest. We consider further control
      should be exercised over public transport operators, who organise transport
      for supporters.   In the case of all ticket matches, they should not be
      allowed to convey passengers who cannot produce a ticket of admission to the
      ground.  Police should be empowered to stop and turn back vehicles infringing
      these rules at any point         betw een d e p a r t u r e and destination.
3.   We are of the opinion that the present local authorised safety
certificate, should follow a standard pattern - although local factors will
of course need to be included.

4.   Communications are absolutely essential to effective policing and crowd
control. Yet, after many large scale incidents, it is often established
that communications proved inadequate. We therefore recommend that research
be carried out to improve present systems and that in particular each
football ground has the following: (i) a dedicated ground radio channel
(ii) a seperate command channel for key personnel (iii) listening devices
only for police and stewards (other than key personnel) (iv) strategic
telephone posts or points (v) loud hailer provisions and a police override
to the tannoy system.

5. We believe that each stadium should have installed, electronic equipment
to register numbers entering pens and terraces. Where possible there should
be outer and inner turnstiles to filter crowds into the ground according to
pressure. Closed circuit television should be strategically sited for
overall and close-up surveillance.

6. The provision of greenfield sites, car parking facilities and seating
only stadia must be the ultimate aim for the future.

7. We believe football contingency plans should be regularly reviewed
and updated in the light of intelligence reports. All emergency services
and club officials should be involved in the preparation of plans. Plans
should ensure that emergency access routes are available and kept clear.

8.  Stewards and club officials should undergo regular training in emergency
and evacuation procedures in conjunction with police, fire and ambulance.
St. John's Ambulance and Red Cross posts should be properly equipped and
clearly identified.

9. The immediate removal of barriers to prevent pitch invasions needs
careful evaluation.  Some form of barrier may still be an essential safety
factor to prevent widescale disorder, whilst obviously, a release mechanism
to allow crowds a quick exit would be of value.

10. Wherever possible the same local officers and stewards should be used
for football matches. They should then become familar with all the factors
that need to be addressed at a particular ground. Where outside officers
are used as assistance, they should be supervised and under the command of
local police officers.

The above points are a collated precis of the views of a number of
Superintendents and Chief Superintendents with experience in command in
the football match situation.  I hope you will find than of assistance.


Yours sincerely.




P.G. Wall
Assistant Secretary
