                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                            Ref:
    From:                                                   Station/Dept:
    To:         Chief Constable                             Date:




 m          SUBJECT:    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989


                I have to report that on Tuesday,                       having been
                cancelled from a                                    at
                                 I was deputed to work a duty or y.GG am to 5•00 pm
                          3 black Staff,                        My initial duty was
                to atFend at the Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and to be at the
                disposal of Lord Justice Taylor and the officers from West Midlands
                who were coming up to conduct enquiries into the Hillsborough
                Disaster.

                Together with the other Staff car, I attended at the Midland Train
                Station to collect Lord Justice Taylor, and conveyed him to the
                Police Headquarters for a meeting with the Chief Constable. Later
                that date, I again transported Lord Justice Taylor to Hillsborough
                Football Ground in the black Staff Granada.   I waited outside the
                stadium for his return, together with the other Staff cars and
                after he had received a conducted tour of the Leppings Lane end at
                Hillsborough Football Ground, he returned to the vehicle, briefly
                speaking to the press that were gathered outside, prior to again
                sitting in the rear of the car.

                At this time he was joined by Mr Dear, the then Chief Constable of
                West Midlands Police, both men being seated in the rear of the
                Staff car.  Prior to the vehicle setting off back to Headquarters,
                Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear started a conversation, which I
                clearly heard, Lord Justice Taylor saying to Mr Dear, "I SUPPOSE
                YOU REALISE THAT TO GIVE THIS INQUIRY ANY CREDIBILITY WE HAVE TO
                 APPORTION THE MAJORITY OF THE BLAME ON THE POLICE?"       Mr Dear
                acknowledged this by saying, "I SUPPOSE WE DO." I then drove them
                around to Leppings Lane where Lord Justice Taylor alighted from the
                vehicle for a short time to look at the turnstiles, before
                returning to the vehicle - after which both gentlemen were returned
                to Headquarters.   The general conversation throughout this journey
                revolving around the logistics of setting up the Inquiry and where
                they were going to site their offices to run the Inquiry from.

                During the course of my duties that day, I also transported the A
                of West Midlands, Mr Jones, to Hammerton Road Police Station, whecfe
                the Incident Room was.

                On concluding duty at 6.00 pm that night, I returned home
                discussed the conversation I had overheard with my wife,
                _______________ and although angry at the time about the comment
                that was said, I decided there was little point in submitting a
                report about this matter for what good is it - a mere           word
                against an eminent Judge and a Chief Constable - and I believe that
                little   good   would   have  come out from me disclosing this
                conversation prior to any Inquiry that was being made.        I was
                however so annoyed that to left off steam I did mention it to my
                close   workcolleagues for although I realised an official report
                would   haveno ultimate benefit, what I needed was close friends to
                realise what an injustice was likely to be done.
Gen/2

                                                                      Continued.
Subject - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989




However, having discussed this matter recently with Superintendent
Bettison, I feel it only right that the record be put straight.  I
still believe that no one will take my word against the other two
gentlemen but pass the information for your consideration.

I have been asked to treat this matter in the strictest confidence and
I will do so.
