Mr Whalley



             HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - POWER TO ADMINISTER OATHS

     You told me that    Sir Peter Taylor was still considering

whether or not it would be-appropriate for him to require witnesses

before his Inquiry to take the oath (or to affirm) and whether he

had, in any event, power to do so.    I understand that he has

indicated that he would welcome my views on the point.

     It is, of course, for Sir Peter Taylor, assisted by counsel to

the Inquiry, to decide this issue.    However, I have attached a note

which attempts to analyse the issue, drawing upon such statutory

and other authorities as I have been able to discover, which he may

find helpful.   My reluctant conclusion is that he probably does not

have the power to administer an oath and, in any event, the issue

of whether it would be appropriate to do so seems to me to be a

finely balanced one.




                                                 (A H HAMMOND)
                                                  8th   May 1989
            HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - POWER TO ADMINISTER OATHS


1.   The question at issue is, I think, a relatively straight­

forward one, which is whether a Judge or other person conducting

a non-statutory inquiry set up by a Government Minister has the

power to administer an oath when, ex hypothesi, he has no express

power to do so.

2.   There are two statutory provisions, which I have been able to

discover, which have a bearing on this issue.    The first is

section 16 of the Evidence Act 1851, which provides "Every court,

judge, justice, officer, commissioner, arbitrator, or other person,

now or hereafter having by law or by consent of parties authority

to hear, receive, and examine evidence, is hereby empowered to

administer an oath to all such witnesses as are legally called before

them respectively.".    I doubt if it could be said that a person

conducting an extra-statutory inquiry of this kind has the

authority "by law" to hear, receive, and examine evidence.      That

implies, to my mind, some formal authority such as is conferred by,

for example, section 1 of the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act

1921 and section 250(2) of the Local Government Act 1972 which is,

incidentally, applied by section 32(3) of the Police Act 1964.         It

is interesting that the Inns of Court, acting in their disciplinary

capacity, do not have the power to administer an oath, although they

do act in a quasi-judicial character and their jurisdiction derives

originally from the judges a see Lincoln v Daniels [1961] 3 All E.R.

740, at p.745.    Even where there is power to summon witnesses and
hear evidence, it does not necessarily follow that there is power

to administer an oath - see Curry v Chief Constable [1982]         1 All E.R.

89, at p.94.

3.   More promising, perhaps, is the argument that section 16 of the

1851 Act applies by virtue of the words "or by consent of partie

It might plausibly be argued that witnesses who attend before an :

extra-statutory inquiry of this kind do so voluntarily and therefore

have consented to be examined by the inquiry.        I think that that is

a possible interpretation but I would be inclined to the view that

the context of section 16 suggests rather that these words should

be taken as referring to the case where parties to a dispute have

agreed to submit their dispute to arbitration.        To argue that

section 16 does confer the power to administer an oath on an inquiry

of this sort brings one up against section 13 of the Statutory

Declarations Act 1835, a copy of which I attach.        Read literally,

that provision appears to require some statutory authority before

a "justice of the peace or other person" can administer an oath.

The proviso to section 13, which contains exceptions to this

proposition, does not   have any application here.

4.   There may be other authorities which,        with more time, might

illuminate this question but it seems to me that it is at least

doubtful whether there is power to administer an oath in these

circumstances.   There is also a case for considering whether it is

worthwhile taking the   risk.   If there were a challenge to Sir Peter

Taylor’s jurisdiction   in requiring an oath to be taken he might find

himself in a difficult position.        There is even the remote



                                   -   2-
X




    possibility that there might be legal challenge by way of judicial

    review.   Furthermore, there is a delicate question whether requiring

    an oath would set the right tone for the inquiry.     This is, of course,

    a matter entirely for Sir Peter Taylor.   On the one hand, to require

    an oath would add solemnity to the occasion and emphasise its

    importance.   On the other hand, Sir Peter has emphasised that the

    primary purpose of the inquiry is not to allocate        blame but to

    find out the truth of what happened at the disaster.       To import the

    panoply of administering the oath might encourage the appearance of

    an adversarial and confrontational atmosphere, which could be counter­

    productive.   But this is a difficult question of judgment, on which

    it would not be appropriate for me to pronounce.




                                                       (A H HAMMOND)
                                                       8th   May 1989




                                    -   3-
13 Justices, etc, not to adm inister oaths, etc, touching m atters w hereof they
have no jurisdiction by statute— Proviso as to certain oaths
 . . . It shall not be lawful for any justice o f the peace or other person to administer or
cause to allow to be administered, or to receive or cause or allow to be received, any
oath, affidavit, or solemn affirmation touching any matter or thing whereof such justice
or other person hath not jurisdiction or cognizance by some statute in force at the time
being: Provided always, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to extend to
any oath, affidavit, or solemn affirmation before any justice in any matter or thing
touching the preservation o f the peace, or the prosecution, trial, or punishment of
offences, or touching any proceedings before either o f the Houses o f Parliament or any
committee thereof respectively, nor to any oath, affidavit, or affirmation which may be
required by the laws o f any foreign country to give validity to instruments in writing
designed to be used in such foreign countries respectively.
